VOL. LXII.
No. 950.
The Sarawak Gazette
Price
KUCHING, Tuesday, November 1st, 1932.
20 CENTS.
Contents.
The Sarawak Gazette
TUESDAY, NOVEMBER 1st, 1932.
Death.
Chang Jee Koo. -At his residence, Reservoir Road, Kuching, Chang Jee Koo, aged sixty, on Saturday, 1st October. 1932. Deeply mourned by widow and family. (S.S. and F.M.S. papers please copy).
Acknowledgement.
Mrs. Chang Jee Koo and family thank all relatives and friends who sent wreaths and letter, of condolence and all those who were present at the interment of the late Mr. Chang Jee Koo.
Local and Personal.
October.
His Highness the Rajah, accompanied by Her Highness Dayang Leonora, arrived in Kuching by m.v. Marudu on Monday 31st. His Highness the Tuan Muda met His Highness at Pending, where His Highness boarded H.H.M.Y. Maimuna. As the Maimuna passed Fort Margherita a salute of twenty-one guns was fired and the Fort and Pengkalan guards turned out. As the Maimuna dropped anchor the Government Secretary, Mr. C. F. C. Macaskie, the Resident, First Division, Mr. J. C. Swayne, and the Acting Treasurer, Mr. K. H. Gillan, went on board to meet His Highness who then proceeded to the Astana landing steps in the state barge. A guard of honour of the Sarawak Constabulary were drawn up on the Astana lawn under the command of Mr. P. Murray-Scott. The drum and fife band of the Constabulary was in attendance. After taking the salute His Highness proceeded to the Astana where he was received by Her Highness Dayang Anne. Government Officers were assembled in the Astana, with a number of ladies, and representatives of the various communities. Their Highnesses’ health having been drunk the proceedings terminated. We take this opportunity of welcoming Their Highnesses back to Sarawak and hope their stay will be a long one.
On Tuesday, the 27th September, Their Highnesses the Rajah and Ranee gave a party at the Savoy Hotel to some thirty, past and present, members of the Sarawak Service. The Rajah’s health was drunk and he was wished many happy returns of his birthday. Dayang Leonora’s health was also drunk on the occasion of her engagement, to which she suitably replied. We are informed it was a very jolly evening.
Those present were: - Their Highnesses the Rajah and Ranee and Dayangs Leonora, Elizabeth and Valerie, Mr. and Mrs. H. A. Adams and daughter, Mr. H. C. P. Adams, Mr. and Mrs. H. D. Aplin, Mr. R. D. Binnie, Mr. C. F. Birt, Mr. and Mrs. F. F. Boult, Mr. Peter Brooke, Mr. E. O. Bruce, Mr. W. Buck, Mr. R. L. Daubeny. Mr. and Mrs. P. H. Flood-Page, Miss Sybil Hope (Mr. Buck’s fiancee), Professor and Mrs. W. E. Le Gros Clark. Mr. and Mrs. N. A. Middlemas, Mr. and Mrs. F. A. W. Page-Turner, Mr. and Mrs. L. N. Reynolds.
The Treasurer of Sarawak, Mr. A. A. Rennie, arrived in Singapore by s.s Comorin on 28th and is expected to arrive in Kuching on 4th November. Mr. D. E. Calver of the Forest Department and Mrs. C. P. Lowe arrived by the same vessel. Captain C. P. Lowe proceeded to Singapore to meet Mrs. Lowe by m.v. Marudu on the 22nd.
We congratulate the Acting Commissioner of the Sarawak Constabulary, Mr. D. V. Murphy, and the ex-Bandmaster the Sarawak Rangers, Mr. P. Solosa, on the very efficient private band they have organized and which consists of native officers and men of the Constabulary. We have attended several most enjoyable performances in the Municipal gardens, when a large representative audience of the various communities was present. We understand this band will be maintained entirely on private subscriptions. We wish all those concerned every success which they most certainly deserve.
In our next issue we hope to publish an advance programme of the current month’s performances.
A most enjoyable evening was spent at the Sarawak Club on Saturday the 29th, when the private band of the Sarawak Constabulary played from 6.30 p.m. to 8 p.m. Its excellent performance, of a very popular programme was met with the hearty applause it deserved.
At the general meeting of St Michael’s Catholic Club. Kuching, held on Sunday, 2nd October, the following were elected office-bearers for the ensuing year: -The Rev. Father A. Hopfgartner, President, Augustine Chong, Vice President, L. K. L. Chan, Honorary Secretary, Tan Soon Thye, Honorary Treasurer, the Rev. Father L. G. Barry, Honorary Librarian, A. P. Merrells, Honorary Auditor; Committee members, Mathew Chong, Joseph Lim, William Tan, Robert Khoo and Tan Eng Chong.
The Legal Adviser. Mr. F. O. Blagg, accompanied by Mrs. Blagg and children, returned from home leave by m.v. Marudu arriving on 10th October.
Mr. R. L. Moir, of the Borneo Company, Limited, arrived by the same vessel.
In case any of our readers propose to visit Russia it may be of interest to them to learn that, in accordance with existing regulations, every foreign subject arriving in the territory of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics must register in the Foreign Department of the local Executive Committee within twenty-four hours of his arrival at the place of his residence.
We draw the attention of our readers to the new Mining Regulations published in the Government Gazette. In any area in which gold has been found, no Exclusive Prospecting Licence or Mining Lease shall be granted to cover an area greater than 200 acres or less than 50 acres, if 50 acres be available.
Prudence.
A friend of mine, a bank manager, sent me the other day a letter which he said he had recently received from one of those fortunates who still seem to be able to think of their bank balances without a nightmare: -
“To the Agent, Manager, Chief Banker, or High Financier. This in the hope that prolixity may produce, if not a congruence, at least an approximation to the true.
SIR,
This brief note is to express my deep regret that my bank balance, should have fallen thus deeply from its whilom respectability to its present state of ungrace.
Yet patience, brother, patience. Life’s golden glow is dimmed lint not extinguished. There is a distinct glimmer of hope on the dark horizon. Strange though it may seem. I am this month directing that an allotment, solid though not princely, be added monthly to your hoard of shekels.
I trust that the early divulgence of this news will not encourage you to reckless extravagance, to risky deals on the Stock Exchange, but that you will continue a productive progress, steady and without flashiness.
Yours to the last overdraft,
SIANU.”
Company Reports.
LONDON, Oct. 1.
The Borneo Company reports a loss of £31,015 during the year ended March 31, 1932. This loss is reported after bringing in £64,948 and transferring £30,000 from the reserve for contingencies. £23,352 has been paid out by way of preference dividends and £24,763 remains to be carried forward.
Snipe in Sarawak.
When friends at home ask you whether there is much shooting in Sarawak, you answer easily- “Oh yes, plenty of snipe, you know,” and leave them with the impression that, in the season, twenty couple a day is your normal bag. This, we all know, is not the case, but no one can accuse you of deliberate lying or even of exaggeration, since it is a fact that there are plenty of snipe in Sarawak; the number that find their way to the sportsman’s breakfast-table, though, is another matter.
Those with experience of other tropical countries will, I think, agree with me when I state that snipe, like so many other things, are different in Sarawak. In India and Malaya, for instance, snipe are not
possessed of the cunning of Machiavelli coupled with the speed of a Schneider Trophy winner, nor can they carry away several ounces of No. 8 shot and be none the worse for it. In Malaya, if you hit a snipe at twenty yards, it drops; this is not so in Sarawak. A local snipe, having felt the full effect of the choke barrel at close range, flits with a sneering chirrup into the nearest patch of babas and proceeds to pick the pellets out with its beak, which, as any naturalist will tell you, is specially formed for this purpose.
Then again, in most other lands if there are snipe in a certain piece of ground, they will rise as you approach them and fly away, thereby presenting reasonably easy marks. But in Sarawak they only
offer themselves as targets in certain definite circumstances. These are, briefly, the following: -
1. When you are crossing a particularly nasty stretch of ground and all your faculties are concentrated on maintaining your balance.
2. When you are engaged in relating an absorbingly interesting anecdote to your companion, and when you turn towards him to describe in detail exactly what Smith did say to Jones on the famous occasion, etc., etc.
3. When, having traversed every inch of ground without starting a single bird, you lean your gun against a fence, sit down, and light a cigarette. At this precise moment eight or nine couple will rise from within a few feet of you and skim away with a whirring of wings that sounds suspiciously like laughter. If you wait until they settle and then pursue them, the same thing will occur, only this time at the other end of the field, -the one farthest from home, that is. After two or three futile efforts yon will realize that the laugh is with the snipe, and if you are, sensible, you will give up the unequal struggle.
But all the same there is one way of getting even with Sarawak snipe, and since it is the only way. I shall describe it for the benefit of those novices who still suffer from the fond delusion that our snipe are ordinary birds which can be shot by ordinary methods.
In the first place, throw away your No. 8’s and load with No. 4’s. or if you prefer it, with buckshot. Then, if a snipe so far forgets itself as to rise in front of you (they do this sometimes, when contempt for you has rendered them careless end over-confident), do not attempt to shoot it on the wing but mark carefully the spot where it comes to earth. Advance with caution until you are well within range, then, aiming at the tussock behind which you know the bird is hiding, discharge both barrels simultaneously. This method has the disadvantage of being a trifle expensive and of being apt to bruise your shoulder-blade, but it usually gets your snipe. Also, it has some of the fascination of uncertainty, -the writer, for instance, once found that he had shot, in addition to the snipe, a field-mouse and a small fish, one of the kind that skips about among crab-heaps. On another occasion his bag included a valuable Government stud bull, but that, of course, a another story.
There is, however, an even simpler way to make sure of obtaining a few snipe, and that is to drop a casual hint to the Court Writer that you are fond of them just about the time that he is due for his annual increment. He will then, without any fuss, proceed to net you as many as you can eat.
Coconuts: New Economic Outlets.
The economic value of the coconut is very considerable, but. as with other primary produce, prices have fallen of late, causing serious, in some cases disastrous, shrinkage of revenue. Seeing how widely spread is the cocus nucifera in tropical and sub- tropical lands, and how largely its products bulk in the exports of such lands, any possible avenue for the enhancement of values through finding fresh outlets for these products is of great im-portance, both in the Colonies and at home.
It is, therefore, of interest to know what American enterprise has been doing in this direction in the Philippines, An idea of this can be gathered from a report recently prepared by Janet M. Walker, and issued by the Tropic Products Company, Manila.
It appears that this organization is marketing on a fairly large scale, both locally and in the United States, three specialties obtained from the coconut; -(1) Cocolait, (2) Mandalay coconut syrup, and (3) Coconut honey. It should be observed that the local nut does not exceed the average 70 per cent, of fat or the usual percentage of sugar.
For the preparation of Cocolait, the fresh nuts are split open and the water carefully preserved. The meat is cut out and the brown pellicle removed. It is next shredded and placed in the curve of a hydraulic press and subjected to a pressure of 3,000 lbs., some of the water from the nuts being added to increase the flow of the emulsion. This emulsion is further diluted with the nut water, passed through a homogenizer, pasteurized at 150’ Fahr., passed over a regulation milk cooler and at once bottled.
It is used precisely in the same way as cow’s milk, having an equal nutrient value. In a sufficiently prolonged test, three groups of seventy children each were given respectively cow’s milk, cocolait and no milk of any kind.
After the test there was practically no difference in the condition of the two first groups, which showed together an advantage of 28 per cent, in growth over the children who had no milk.
The coconut syrup is merely undiluted emulsion mixed with invert sugar, cooked in steam-jacketed pans, run direct into tins and sealed. It is used as a sweetening for the manufacture of fruit and other drinks, in confectionery replacing golden syrup.
Coconut honey is a dense, golden-brown, slow-running paste of a distinctly nutty flavour. It is an emulsion, prepared just as the syrup, but from the whole meat, the brown pellicle being left on, white the emulsion is further condensed by prolonging the cooking process. It is used as a substitute for honey, but more generally as a cake filling and in the confection of sweets and ices.
The residue, after extraction of moisture, fat and sugar, can be utilized in the manufacture of cattle food and fertilizers. -Y.N.Y. in “Crown Colonist.”
Wanted.
In these days of wireless and talkies so grand, There seems little scope for invention. But in looking around at our life in this land, There are one or two fields I would mention.
At breakfast a man never feels at bis best. There’s that rheumatic twinge in his leg!!
But it deepens his gloom, as he curses the pest, Who makes eggcups that won’t fit an egg.
When taking a boat up the Coast anywhere, With a seasick cook boy and the “pip”
How many a man has sent out a short prayer, For a meat tin just fastened by “Zip.”
Our Medical man seem to know how to cure, Every ill from flat-feet to lumbago,
But more wonderful far, could they only inure, Our noses to smelling wet sago.
And people with babies I’m sure would unite, To give the inventor a medal,
Of a phone that from say, half-past six every night, Had a hell that could use the soft pedal.
The scientists say that in time yet to come, We’ll have synthetic babes, but I’d life,
That they’d cut all that out, and concentrate some, On a chicken that tasted like beef.
In walking through jungle your feet get so bad, Its quite obvious nature demands. That each mother should train all the children she had. To turn up and walk on their hands.
In conclusion I’ll add. before Mr. Anom,
Writes a letter to put in the “Times.” That what’s really needed to help the world on,
Is a sentence for writing daft rhymes.
PENDEK.
Crossing the Bar.
There is a rumour that since the standard of whiskey supplied at the Club has been lowered at the request of certain members, strange noises have been heard in the Bar.
The Clubman’s head was spinning and his speech was slurred and slow,
And he burbled to his neighbour.. Bo, I sp’pose itsh’ time to go,
Though I’ve had a brace of stengahs and a pahait or two so far,
There’s something like an earthquake a rocking this old bar.
And he said I think its wunnerful, this cheaper price of booze.
For now I’m Blotto on three drinks, and I only want to snooze,
I don’t want any dinner, but I’d like to be in bed,
With a bottle or two of aspirin to soothe my aching head.
And so O’ Club Committee, be warned while there is time.
And chew the little moral cud that is in this feeble rhyme,
If poor fish will drink cheap whiskey and haggle at the price,
Well give them pukka arrack and they won’t be saving twice.
The Tallyho.
Whenever I sail an Eastern Sea,
The Tallyho is the line for me! For nowhere else with an equal grace Are passengers taught to keep their place.
It mattereth not to the Captain bold,
If passengers cabins are hot or cold;
For passengers come and passengers go, But there’s never a change in the Tallyho.
With fatherly care this splendid line Dilutes the whisky and beer and wine, Then swells the price of the watery stuff, That all may know when they’ve had enough.
It mattereth not to the Captain bold
If the whisky’s good, so long as it’s sold; For passengers come and passengers go, But there’s never a change in the Tallyho.
At ports where passengers young and rash Might go ashore and waste their cash, We call at night in the Tallyho, And sail when the cocks begin to crow.
It mattereth not to the Captain bold, What passengers hoped or what things were told; For passengers come and passengers go, But there’s never a change in the Tallyho.
Then here’s to the twelve Directors, The passengers kind protectors!
Let’s hope it never again may be There province to “Father” you and me!
H.
OLD SARAWAK.
From the Sarawak Gazette 46 Years Ago.
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE
1886.] THURSDAY. 1ST APRIL, 1886. [Price 10 cents.
On the 16th ultimo. H.M.’s ships Audacious, Sapphire. and Merlin, anchored off the lighthouse at Tanjong Poe H.E. Vice-Admiral Hamilon. C.B., proceeded upriver the next day in the Merlin, and was conducted in the State barge manned by Police under the Superintendent to the Astana landing place, were His Excellency was received by the Acting Resident and Heads of Departments, in the absence of H. H. the Rajah. On landing a salute of fifteen guns was fired from the Fort, and a guard of honor under Capt. Peck was drawn up at the Astana. The Admiral during his stay was entertained at the Astana, and inspected the Public buildings. Fort, etc., being much pleased with the proficiency of the Rangers at gun drill. H.M.S. Merlin made two trips to and back with Officers of the Audacious and Sapphire finally leaving with His Excellency on the 18th. The next day a visit was paid to the Audacious in the Lorna Doone, by most of the Europeans, the Datus, and native gentlemen, who were very kindly entertained by the Admiral and Captain Harris, and the Officers of the Audacious. Considerable interest was evinced by the Datus and natives in the size of the Audacious and her armament, and some rounds fired from the Hotchkiss, Nordenfelt, and Gatling guns astonished all, and startled a few. The squadron sailed for Labuan in the evening. His Excellency made himself exceedingly popular both with Europeans and natives, and we trust he was pleased with his visit, and that we may again have the pleasure of welcoming him in Sarawak.
Sarawak Library.
September, 1932.
The following books have been purchased by the Committee: -
October, 1932.
The following books have been kindly presented by His Highness the Rajah: -
Purchased by the Committee: -
First Division News.
RESIDENT’S OFFICE.
September, 1932.
Extracts from the Divisional Reports by Mr. J. C. Swayne, Resident, First Division: -
General. -The 26th, His Highness the Rajah’s birthday, was observed as a public holiday and the offices closed. Long Service Decorations were presented by His Highness the Tuan Muda at a Constabulary Parade held in front of the Government office.
I handed over the duties of the Secretariat to Mr. C. F. C. Macaskie, Government Secretary, on his arrival on the 10th September.
The usual advance of twenty minutes to “Summer time” was made to all Government clocks in the Division at midnight 12th September
I visited Bau from 19th-21st and paid a visit to the Krokong area where several applications have been made for exclusive licences to prospect for gold. It was interesting to note that the old roadways, constructed by the Borneo Company and abandoned many years ago. are still serviceable.
The Autumn meeting of the Sarawak Turf Club took place 24th-26th and was attended by a good number of outstation officers.
The markets were visited in company with the Director of Public Works, the Municipal Commissioner and the Assistant Health Officer. Steps are being taken to submit plans for a new vegetable market.
DISTRICT OFFICE.
September, 1932.
The District Officer, Mr. R. E. Le Sueur, reports: -
Coroner’s Court. -An inquest into the death of Chai Kam (f.) (Kheh) on 20/9/32. Verdict: -Deceased met her death by drowning.
General. -It is with regret I have to report the death of Choong Ah Joo, of the Public Works Department, who died suddenly on 25th September, 1932.
A number of Outstation Officers visited Kuching during the month to attend the Sarawak Turf Club meeting.
UPPER SARAWAK, BAU.
September, 1932.
The Assistant District Officer, Mr. R. G. Aikman, reports: -
Rainfall. -Highest recorded in 24 hours was .85 of an inch; the daily average was .09 of an inch and the total rainfall for the month was 2.67 inches.
General. -I left for Tondong on the 24th and, accompanied by Mr. J. B. Simpson, we walked from there to Gunong Singghi, where the night was spent in the kampong.
The next day we walked from Gunong Singghi to the Sungei Tengah Rubber Estate, and on the following day proceeded to Kuching. I returned to Bau on the 27th.
His Highness The Rajah’s birthday, the 26th, was observed as public holiday and the Government offices. were closed.
Visitors to the station during the month included the Resident, First Division, Mr. J. C. Swayne, the Chief Assistant Medical Officer, Dr. W. Hutchison, the Government Auditor, Mr. A. L. McLaine, Mr. and Mrs. F. H. Pollard and Mr. S. G. Hansom.
Land. -Mr. A. K. Brown, Land Officer, left on the 12th after having carried out an exhaustive investigation into gold mining conditions in the district.
Health. -The old boiler house near the Government Store was converted into an incinerator during August and was put into service on the 2nd of the month with highly successful results.
Gold Mining. -Five General Prospecting Licences were issued during the month.
One application for an Exclusive Prospecting Licence was received and one issued.
Actual gold obtained by the following mining companies for the month of August, 1932, was: -
LUNDU.
September, 1932.
The Acting Assistant District Officer, Mr. E. H. Elam, reports: -
On the 3rd Pengarah Awang of Rasan died and on the 9th I proceeded up river, when Sinjan, pa Miah, was elected Pengarah. On the 5th I went to Simatan. On 17th the Superintendent of Lands and Mr. Harding of the Posts & Telegraphs Department arrived by the La Follette and next day the latter and myself paid a visit to Simatan in connection with the proposed telephone line between Lundu and Simatan.
The Post Office was transferred to the Wireless Station.
Monday 26th, being His Highness the Rajah’s birthday, the Government offices were closed.
Rainfall. -The total rainfall for the month was 4.13 inches and the greatest in any one day being 1.64 inch.
Trade. -The total returns for the month and for comparison with those for the corresponding month of last year were as follows: -
SADONG DISTRICT.
September, 1932,
The Acting Assistant District Officer, Mr. S. G. Hansom, reports: -
Agriculture. -Mr. G. St. F. Dare, Divisional Agricultural Field Officer, visited the district from the 13th to 16th instant, during my absence up river.
Numbers of Malays and Dyaks are still awaiting a favourable opportunity for burning off their padi lands, which has so far been rendered impossible by the incessant bad weather. It is imped that a prolonged interval without rain will ensue, otherwise there is likely to be a serious shortage of local padi next season. Conditions up river are reported to have been more favourable, and the bulk of upriver padi has already been planted.
A number of applications have been received from local Chinese to plant tobacco in the vicinity of the Mine Area outside the Government Reserve. Supplies of tobacco seed have been obtained from the Agricultural Department for sale to these persons.
Travelling. -I was away from headquarters, visiting the substations from the 12th to 17th instant, during which time nights were, spent at Gedong, Serian and Tebekang.
A large number of Civil suits were heard at Gedong, mainly in connection with advances obtained by local Malays against their padi crops. It would appear that owing to general shortage of money many of these people have been tempted to dispose of their surplus padi in other directions, in order to obtain “ready money.”
General. -Mr. J. C. Swayne, Resident, First Division, returned to Kuching on the 2nd instant, from his monthly visit to the district.
During the month the three regular Constables at Serian were withdrawn and returned to Kuching, being replaced by two Village Constables recruited at Sadong. The Constable at Gedong is to be similarly replaced at the first opportunity.
Trade and Customs. -Comparative trade returns for September are as follows: -
Shipping. -Five vessels entered and cleared the port.
Rainfall. -Rain fell on 16 days, when a total of 11.54 inches was recorded.
Second Division News.
September, 1932.
Extracts from the Second Divisional Reports by Mr. J. B. Archer, Resident: -
I made a flying visit to Engkilili on the 2nd, when I arranged with the Assistant District Officer, Mr. Macpherson, various details in connection with the bazaar there.
On the 19th I left for Kabong where I met Mr. L. K. Morse, Acting Assistant District Officer, Kalaka. We went on to Rohan the next day where we spent the night. We left for Saratok on the 11th, and I returned to Simanggang on the 13th.
Ulu Ai affairs are much the same and arrangements have been made to start operations in November.
Mr. W. H. C. C. Morice arrived in Simanggang on the 3rd to do temporary duty in this Division.
Captain Le Gros Clark, Secretary for Chinese Affairs, I and Mr. T. A. Reid, P. W. D., returned to Kuching on the 2nd after doing duty in the Division.
The m.s. Chin Ho Guan went ashore near the sawmill at Simanggang on the 8th, but was refloated the next morning.
In Kuching His Highness the Tuan Muda presented a Long Service Medal to Corporal Sumbang of the Betong Constabulary contingent and a Long Service Decoration to myself.
SIMANGGANG DISTRICT.
September, 1932.
The Acting Assistant District Officer, Mr. J. C. H. Barcroft, reports: -
Two coroner’s inquests were heard during the month on two Chinese (males). A verdict of suicide while of unsound mind was returned in one case, and in the other death from misadventure.
Rainfall for September during thirty days totalled 7.67 inches.
On the 3rd Mr. W. H. C. C. Morice arrived for temporary duty in the Division and was employed in the District Office.
On the 10th I left for Engkilili and walked overland following the telephone rentis; I covered about 15 miles the first day, most of which was through swamp, and spent the night at rumah Penghulu Kalong. The remaining 6 miles was on an excellent Chinese path to Engkilili, and I arrived at the Station at 9 a.m., and after spending one night there returned to Simanggang.
I considered the rentis on the whole was satisfactory, and had it not been for a shortage of materials, telephonic communication would have been established with Engkilili before the end of the month.
The cessation of the rain early in the mouth was appreciated by all farmers, and a slightly more optimistic view may be taken of the coming crops. However, a good harvest cannot be anticipated.
At Lingga and Sebuyow little of interest occurred during the month.
ENGKILILI DISTRICT.
September, 1932.
The Assistant District Officer, Mr. A. Macpherson, reports: -
The telephone rentis from Engkilili to Simanggang was completed at the end of the month.
A party arrived on 3rd to survey the proposed Engkilili-Simanggang road. I left for Lubok Antu on 6th returning to Engkilili on 16th. I have reported separately on this trip. I visited Simanggang from 17th to 19th instant.
The Resident visited the Station on 2nd, returning the same day. Mr. Summers, who had arrived on 31st September, returned with him. Mr. Barcroft spent the night of 11th here.
Rain fell on 14 days when a total of 5.58 inches was recorded.
SARIBAS DISTRICT.
September, 1932.
The Acting Assistant District Officer, Mr. J. R. Combe, reports: -
The new clerk’s quarters at Betong were completed during the month and appear to be a satisfactory piece of work.
It has been very quiet in the district throughout the whole month, as everybody was busy burning off their farms. A shooting affray was reported from the Ulu Spak but only a slight wound was inflicted and the suspected man fled and up to date no news has been received of him.
I proceeded to Sungei Melibu at Kuala Saribas on the 18th in order to make inquiries about some fifteen doors of Sebuyow Dyaks who are farming that area. The Dyaks in question have been farming that locality for the last twenty-five years, and as no cause for disturbance has been experienced there seems to be no reason why they should not carry on Erosion at Tanjong Melibu is rapidly increasing, and the above Dyaks stated they would have to move further inland if they continue farming there in the future. The land near Kuala Saribas is very good padi land but unfortunately rather too far away to relieve the congestion experienced near Betong and up river.
Mr. J. C. B. Fisher, Cadet, paid a visit to the station from the 9th to the 12th.
I left the station on the 17th, meeting Mr. L. K. Morse, Acting Assistant District Officer, Kalaka. at Pusa on the 19th, and from there proceeded to Kuchiug via Sebuyow for Race Week, returning here on the 29th.
The health of the district has not been very good during the month there being a great deal of influenza experienced and also several cases of measles.
KALAKA DISTRICT.
September, 1932.
The Acting Assistant District Officer, Mr. L. K. Morse, reports: -
Two prisoners who escaped from Sarikei in August were captured at Kabong in the early hours of the 3rd instant. Their capture, which was effected before news of their escape reached Kabong, reflects great credit on the Native Officer there.
It is pleasing to note that the old attap bazaar at Rohan has been removed, and substantial belian buildings put up in their stead, the work should be completed within the next month.
Kabong Station was also visited and all outstanding work cleared up. Here arrangements were made for the repair of the jail, police barracks, and cowman’s quarters.
The Resident, Second Division, visited all stations in the district during the month. With the exception of requests for exemption from paying tax, nothing of interest was brought before him.
Abang Bujang, Native Officer. Kabong, paid a visit to Nyabor during the month. He reports having met most of the inhabitants of the river and states that the padi there is doing well. He mentions the fact that there is a Chinese shop at Pasir Hukum of which nothing appears to be known at Kabong, licences, etc., being issued in the Third Division. This matter will be investigated when the Acting Assistant District Officer
again visits Kabong. Nine doors of Sarikei Dyaks are reported to be farming in the Nyabor without permission. This matter also awaits investigation.
All the Penghulus in the district were interviewed during the month, and they report all quiet in their respective districts.
Trade: -
LAND OFFICE.
September, 1932.
The Land Officer, Mr. B. Summers, reports: -
New Occupation Tickets issued 59.
New Occupation Tickets made ready for issue 64.
New Occupation Tickets ready but not yet issued 213.
At this time of year much difficulty is experienced by the clerks at Engkilili in carrying out land work together with their other duties.
All three inspectors in Simanggang were both in office plotting and inspecting local gardens the first half of the month.
Throughout the Division revenue for August showed a large increase over that of the previous month; it is expected that a decrease will show again during September owing to everyone being busy farming, now that the weather has changed for the better.
SURVEY DEPARTMENT.
September, 1932.
The Assistant Superintendent of Surveys, Mr. N. Mace, reports: -
Demarcation of gardens was completed in the lower Sebuyow and the lower Sanjau, and is continuing in the Ulu Sebuyow. A start was made in clearing up the odd groups of gardens along the banks of the Batang Lupar, and up the small side streams.
Demarcation in the Sanjau has now been stopped owing to the river being nearly dry, making transport slow and expensive.
Demarcation will be commenced on the block of Stirau gardens in October. The Ulu Sebuyow and Batang Lupar work will be continued. This will leave only the Strap Ulu Sanjau, lower Klauh, Banting, Lingga. And P. Seduku to be done, in the Simanggang, Lingga and Sebuyow Districts.
Theodolite controls have been completed in the Sungei Sebemban, Sungei Besai. and Sungei Kli. and considerable progress has been made on the controls in the Ulu Tatai, Strap. Controls have been done at Jeragam and Ulu Tebelu along the path from Sebuyow to Simunjan.
Next month, controls will be done at Batu Lintang, near Sebuyow, and in the Strap River. There will be only two parties working, as one surveyor has gone on annual leave.
Jottings from Simanggang.
Modern China (or at least the peaceable part of it) was well illustrated on the nights of the 10th, 11th and 12th October, when the Pui Khiaw School, Simanggang, staged three performances of a variety show in a specially built temporary theatre in Simanggang Bazaar.
Those who have seen orthodox Chinese plays will take back with them a remembrance of apparently unorganized orchestral noise, falsetto performers, peripatetic scone shifters, brilliant costumes and profound chaos.
This view, however, is merely an occidental one; and it must be remembered that Chinese were producing these plays many generations before most of the present European races took an intelligent interest in much else except filling their own stomachs, capturing wives with which to satisfy their hearts and avoiding being killed by the next- door neighbour and keeping their wives intact from the ravages of stronger men then themselves.
The Pui Khiaw School, however, paid us the compliment of adopting Western ideas and a programme of twenty-four items, beginning with an
Overture and ending with the Curtain, included such turns as “Little While Rabbit,” “Busy Bee, The wind over the sea,” “Silvery moon, the sun has I set!” “The Lillie Parrot” and “Picking the saw.” To most winds, however, the most popular turn was “Help me a while” a little farce acted by a small company of talented amateurs. Ignorance of the language, it is true, made it difficult to follow exactly the very complicated plot, but it seemed to us that it was our old friend “Box and Cox” again.
Throughout the whole programme all the performers were pupils of the School and in this respect it was noticeable that the little girls were very much more self possessed than the little boys. We have known this in England for many years.
To add to the enjoyment two excellent orchestras hail been engaged; one in the celestial manner and the other the occidental. Some like one thing and some like another, but we preferred the former.
We cannot help mentioning the scenery which was of the orthodox European variety, and it is certainly more realistic to most of us than the regular Chinese type.
In conclusion we must congratulate Mr. Chia Yang, the principal, who was Stage Manager, and his two assistants Miss May Kee Kiat and Miss Pei Yue Ying. These charming ladies were responsible for incidental music behind the scenes, whilst the former very successfully gathered in subscriptions at the end of each performance, in aid of the School funds.
There have been high junketings in the Simanggang Recreation Club lately when the quarterly competitions were played off.
Mr. Fisher, the energetic Honorary Secretary (this is in the best journalese), had procured such a galaxy of shining cups that even the too-old-to-play, the frankly-too-damned-lazy and the absolute- blooming-awful-rabbits were persuaded, or persuaded themselves, to compete; and as such proved a source of innocent merriment. if we believe that Gilbert was right in supposing that innocence has really anything funny about it at all.
What was said to be the most important contest (the size of the cup, however, might load one to think otherwise) was the tennis, where N. Mace in a State of complete perspiration beat the runner-up Ah Nyau who, let it be admitted, was giving his opponent at least three strokes a hole, and to his own Head of Department too.
The Pastoral Pair, Ah Tat and Kee Chiu, won almost everything else. In fact Ah Tat won what Kee Chin didn’t: and Kee Chin did if Ah Tai didn’t-and if neither didn’t someone else did; but as I forget who did, and what competition it was somebody must have won something which Ah Tat and Kee Chin didn’t.
At one time it was thought that the Resident was going to pull off the billiards; but what with playing with four balls and Kee Chin’s spot-to-plain-to-green-pot-the-red-and-back-again tactics much may be forgiven.
The competitors and their friends assembled in the Clubhouse in the evening when Mrs. O’Hara kindly gave away the prizes.
They say that the “movies,” the “talkies,” the “flickers” or whatever the. abhorrent things are called, have completely changed the methods of local kissing. At least I can quote the Singapore Free Press of about the 17th September, and several persons in Kuching who should know have told me the same thing.
It seems, therefore, that the cinema as a means of education, must be realized, and certainly many of the Kuching golf caddies have a knowledge of movie stars which might be envied by the Bright Young People whom I am told are the backbone of Sarawak Society.
All this leads me up to the amazing letter which was received the other day from an applicant for the position of tukang aycr. “Sir,” wrote the youth, “I have long desired to work for you.” or words to that effect, “and if you will allow me. I shall give you every satisfaction in your kitchenette.”
Now, what do you think of that? Shall we receive letters from a good house-boy, able, to run a bijou semi-detached villa, h. & c., usual offes, comps wtr, nr tube and kmpg, 5 minutes to Padugu?
I was in Lingga the, other day when an indignant Dyak brought his young daughter to see me. Apart from the rather spotty face, which is the natural result of the recently adolescent it was obvious that something was wrong. The wench’s lips were blistered and there were some particularly repulsive looking pimples under her little snub nose.
With much vehemence her parent demanded a summons against a Dyak lad for having caused grievous hurt to his virgin daughter, spoiling her beauty and removing all chances of a really successful ngyap.
We sent for the culprit, who turned out to be a diminutive schoolboy who, I am pained to say, attends the good St. Paul’s School at Banting.
The story is this.
Meeting the girl one day the young gallant invited her to have a drink saying that he knew where father kept the bottle. Like her more civilized sisters she was all for having a tuak cocktail on the sly. Going to the room the lad abstracts the bottle and in the privacy of the woods or the great open spaces or wherever these sort of people do indulge in naughtiness the girl swigs off a good throat swill.
Alas! like the U.S.A., all that titillates is not tuak, and the acetic acid which the maiden drank was the cause of her discomfiture.
In spite of an irate father I refused to send the case up to the Chief Justice for trial. Instead, with judgment of Solomon, I asked the Padree to use his cane and see that the lad has not stuffed the seat of his sirat with copies of the Sarawak Gazette or the Constabulary Standing Orders beforehand.
That’ll teach the young scaramouch to know where father keeps the bottle again!!!
Many people exclaim that statistics are all something nonsense; yet I suppose they are of some use. Whitaker’s Almanack would have to close down, whilst quite a number of Civil Servants in the world would be hunting a job.
We all die of something; at least the doctors have a variety of names which are the cause, they say, of that shortness of breath which is the end of us in this durned dull world.
In former days people were more likely to call a spade a spade; and in a copy of an old English newspaper we noticed amongst the local death returns sch items as “twisting of the guts” “griping of the guts” and “belly ache.”
In these days, however, we are more genteel (except amongst a certain smart set to which I have not been admitted). All the same, a local death return showed that in 55 deaths that alarming disease “stomach ache” had carried off no less than 31 persons; whilst that annoying epidemic “old age” accounted for 14.
Apparently, too, stomach ache does not kill until the age of 80 years is reached-neither more or less. At eighty, then, 56% of us must expect that ache to carry us off; and even if we escape this, 27% of us must look forward to immediate death from old age.
There is some consolation, for amongst the remaining 17% must be counted those who peter out from twisting of the gut!!
THE OPTIMISTIC FIDDLER.
Third Division News.
Extracts from the Third Divisional Reports by Mr. C. D. Adams, Resident: -
General. -The Public Works Department was taken over by the Administration during the month and the Divisional Engineer, Mr. Whiteside, left for Kuching on the 29th instant on transfer.
Revenue and Expenditure to end of August was $406,843.33 and $406,630.83 respectively.
SIBU.
September, 1932.
The District Officer, Mr. H. E. Cutfield, reports: -
General. -Exceptionally high water was registered on the 9th, when all roads were either partially or wholly submerged.
Five rebels from the Sugai arrived on the 7th instant and surrendered themselves, on the 20th a further 13 rebels surrendered.
Public Works Department and Municipal work was taken over by Mr. Cutfield on behalf of the Resident on the 12th and 13th, owing to the transfer of Mr. J. W. Whiteside to Kuching.
The Resident and Mrs. C. D. Adams, and Mr. Cutfield left on the 15th instant by m.s. Sri Mukah for Kuching, and Mr. D. C. Hudden arrived at Sibu on the same day to do temporary duty in this office.
On the 26th, H. H. the Rajah’s birthday, a parade was held and medals for long service presented. Also two medals for conspicuous bravery, one being presented to Pte. Mamba for his bravery during the last expedition.
On the 28th instant a report was received that a Dyak by name Jangga had been found dead in the jungle with four gunshot wounds. Jangga had been missing for 13 days. Inspector Abang Adeng was sent with a dresser to inquire into the matter.
Mr. and Mrs. Dick returned from home leave on the 28th instant. Mr. J. W. Whiteside of the P.W.D. left on 29th on transfer to Kuching.
The Resident and Mrs. C. D. Adams, Travelling District Officer, Mr. H. E. Cutfield, the Government Auditor, Mr. A. L. McLaine, arrived by H.H.M.Y. Maimuna on 30th instant.
During the month Wan Bujang, Assistant Sub-Inspector, paid a visit to the patrols in the Kanowit and Ulu Entabai. proceeding via Sarikei and returning via Kanowit, bringing back a considerable amount of Dyak rice which had been accepted in lieu of payment of door tax.
MUKAH AND OYA.
September, 1932.
The Acting District Officer, Mr. J. J. Hill, reports: -
General. -The 26th instant, being the anniversary of His Highness the Rajah’s birthday, the offices were closed and the flagstaff dressed.
The Rev. Father De Vos and the Acting Assistant District Officer Oya and Dalat, Mr. N. E. Hughes, visited the station during the month.
An inquiry was held into the disappearance of Yeo Tin Lee schoolboy, on board m.s. Kim Chin Soon when at sea. Very little evidence was forthcoming, but from a letter written by deceased prior to his departure, the Court brought in a verdict of suicide. The body has not yet been recovered.
P.W.D. -Tenders have been asked for the making of groynes to stop the erosion of the river bank between Kuala Telian and the bazaar.
Tenders have also been asked for the repairing of the bridges along the Oya-Mukah road and for the cleaning of the roads to these bridges.
The carpenter was employed during the month on repairs to bungalows and bridges.
Land. -Two applications have been received for sites in the Mukah bazaar area for the purpose of building cinemas. As the present time seams inopportune for the side of sites in the bazaar area, the matter has been referred to the Officer-in-Charge of Lands, Sibu. Numerous land disputes were settled during the month.
Survey. -The Assistant Superintendent of Surveys, Third Division, Mr. J. L. Noakes, proceeded to Sikat on the 12th to take astronomical observations, and returned on the 15th instant.
During the month the survey of gardens was carried on in the Jebungan, Penakuh and Sisok districts. Approximately 609 gardens were surveyed during the month, making a total of about 3,650 gardens as on the 30th September.
Dyaks. -Native Officer Abang Mustapha left on a visit to Dyak kampong in the Ulu Mukah on the 5th, and returned on the 19th instant. He reports that the Dyaks have been unable to burn their padi farms and predicts a rice shortage in the district after the next harvest.
Trade and Shipping. -On the 17th instant the channel marks, on the Mukah bar were renewed, the old channel marks having been burnt, through the placing on them of flares made of rope, etc., by members of the crews of vessels steering and entering the port at night. A notice has been issued warning persons responsible that they will be prosecuted if flares are again placed on the lulongs.
During the month 24 vessels entered and 19 cleared the port.
Trade figures for the month are as follows: -
Two hundred and fifty koyans of raw sago and 120 piculs of jelutong were exported during the month.
OYA AND DALAT.
September, 1932.
The Acting Assistant District Officer, Mr. N. E. Hughes, reports: -
Court. -There has been a steady succession of jewel robberies this year up and down the Oya river, and since none of the jewellery taken has come to light locally, it seems probable that it is being disposed of in Kuching through a receiver.
Native Affairs. -Wan Hussein, Native Officer, visited Sungei Kut and Kampong Bungau from September 12th to 16th. Nothing of importance was brought before him.
Reports from up river indicate that Dyaks are busy farming. Owing to the bad weather in July and August burns are everywhere unsatisfactory and prospects for next year’s padi crop are poor.
General. -The beginning of the month was marked by heavy rain and severe storms, which apparently heralded the advent of the landas. M.V. Kim Chin Seng arrived at Kuala Oya on September 11th, but owing to storms and rough seas was unable to enter for four days.
The weather calmed down about the 17th and remained calm until the end of the month.
Visitors to the station included the Rev. Father J. Vos, Acting Procurator Fiscal of the R.C. Mission, who visited Dalat Mission on September 20th and left on the 22nd.
Trade. -178 koyans of raw sago and 20 piculs of para rubber were shipped to Kuching and Binatang during the month.
KAPIT.
September, 1932.
The Acting Assistant District Officer, Mr. D. C. Hudden, reports: -Constabulary. -The patrol of one Lance-Corporal and ten men under Native Officer Abang Sleh remained in the Katibas. I understand that a relief is due from Kuching early next month.
Native Affairs. -Penghulus Ugak, Atan, Ansi. Jugah, and Manok Manchal, were in the station during the month. Ugak and Atan went down to Kuching for the races and returned on the 30th.
T. R. Bedimbab of the Tekalit, Katibas. was appointed a probationary Penghulu with effect from the beginning of next month.
Considerable anxiety is being felt concerning next year’s crops since owing to the heavy rains many people, have been unable to burn. Apparently, the recent spells of dry weather have not been universal, and in many places it has been too wet even to commence burning.
General. -I proceeded to Sibu on the 16th on temporary duty and was still absent from the station at the end of the month.
On the night of the 8th the river rose to within eighteen inches of the record high water murk, flooding the downstairs part of the fort, the wireless station, and most of the bazaar.
Messrs. Cobbold and Gifford visited the station during the month.
Rainfall. -The rainfall was 17.59 inches.
SARIKEI, BINATANG AND REJANG.
September, 1932.
The Acting Assistant District Officer. Mr. F. L. Crossley, reports: -Coroner. -Inquests were held on the 10th and 12th on the bodies of two Foochows who were drowned on the 5th while foolishly attempting to pass between the Government wharf and the s.s. Kuranda, while the ship was closing to the wharf. It appears that the men in a small prau, lost their heads and were overturned as they tried to pass the ship’s heaving line, which was already lying in the water. Verdicts of death by misadventure were returned.
Native Affairs. -Sanction was obtained for the appointment of two new penghulus in the Sarikei, Nyelong district. Aums were held for nomination of suitable candidates, Seli and Andin being appointed with the approval of the Resident, Third Division.
P.W.D. -It was found necessary to close the Sarikei road for two short periods in order to effect extensive repairs in the swamp area. It was evident that the rules against overloading had been ignored. The police were instructed to enforce these regulations with the utmost strictness ill future.
Mr. Whiteside visited Sarikei on the 3rd, to discuss P.W.D. affairs. It was decided to commence the construction of land inspectors’ quarters on the banks of the Nyelong, and a contract for filling the site was put out to tender and signed on the 20th.
Prisons. -Umut and Rajak, who escaped from Sarikei gaol on August 31st, were recaptured at Kabong on the 4th September.
General. -Visitors to the district included Messrs. Gifford. Cobbold, Chaplin, Whiteside, Daly, Corson, Spurway, and Dr. Hutchison.
Trade and Customs. -The unprecedented amount of 8,800 piculs of black and white pepper was exported from Sarikei during the month.
Figures for Sarikei and Binatang are appended below: -
Fourth Division News.
September, 1932.
Extracts from the Fourth Divisional Reports by Mr. F. G. Carpenter, Acting Resident: -
Tuai Rumah Andam and Manggoi arrived from Niah early in the month in connection with certain differences of opinion they have had. They were again spoken to very severely and warned that they must work together. The trouble arises from the fact that their house are composed of Dyaks from four different rivers; but they were clearly informed, before moving to the Niah, that they would have to live together in one house under Andam.
A rice milling and polishing machine owned by Chop Kim Guan started operations during the month. I understand that this is proving a boon to townspeople who can now obtain cheaper supplies.
Mr. J. G. Anderson, Assistant District Officer, Bintulu arrived on the 14th on a visit. He returned to his station on the 23rd.
Messrs. McLeod and Hammond arrived from Mt. Dulit, where they had been co-operating with the Oxford University expedition, on the 14th. Mr. Hammond proceeded to Kuching on the 22nd.
MIRI.
September, 1932.
The Acting Assistant District Officer, Mr. E. M. Selous, reports: -
Immigration and Emigration. -New arrivals and arrivals on old passports numbered 168, while emigrants totalled 205.
Land. -One application to plant 2 1/2 acres of land with tobacco was received.
Thirty-nine acres of land were demarcated and 9 occupation tickets were issued. 4 of these (14 1/4 A) were for pepper, 3 (18 1/2 A) for coconut and 2 (5 1/2 A) for vegetable gardens.
Meteorological: -
Municipal. -A fire broke out on the evening of the 3rd at No. 49 Cross Road; fortunately this was soon got under and little damage was done. Inquiry into the matter revealed the fuel that the kitchens in the neighbourhood of the fire have excessively low roofs. Steps are being taken to remove this source of danger.
P.W.D. -The new buildings mentioned in last month’s report are now nearing completion. In addition a Sikh syce’s quarter is being erected on Tanjong Lobang-the material used being second-hand timber from the old Government marine quarters.
A contract was signed with Yong Khow for asphalting River and Cross Roads.
The installation of electric light in the clerks’ quarters was completed during the month by the Sarawak Oilfields, Limited.
General. -The Acting Resident, Mr. F. G. Carpenter, proceeded to Kuching on the 22nd and had not returned at the end of the month. Mr. Field was absent on a visit to Bintulu from the 10th to the 14th.
The 26th, being the anniversary of the birthday of His Highness the Rajah, was observed as a public holiday. A parade of the Constabulary was held at 6.30 am. In the absence of the Resident, I took the salute and presented long service medals to Bandar, Corporal No. 77, Baram, and Jin, Ex-Bugler Lance-Corporal, Miri. and long service decorations to Mohamad Zin Galau, Native Officer, Baram, and Abang Sarkawi bin Abang Shat, Overseer, P.W.D. Miri. It must be added that the Officer Superintending the Division, Mr.
W. L. P. Sochon. is to be congratulated on the high standard of efficiency attained by all ranks on this occasion.
On the same day a most successful regatta was held in the Miri river.
Visitors to the station included Mr. and Mrs. Pollard and Messrs. Hammond and White.
BARAM.
September, 1932.
The Acting District Officer, Mr. F. H. Pollard, reports: -
Travelling. -I returned from the Ulu Tinjar and Tru on 9th with Mr. I. S. Hammond of the Survey Department who had been visiting the Oxford Expedition, and the party surveying the Tinjar. Mr. McLeod. D.F.O., reached Baram on 3rd on his way back to Miri Mr. Hammond and Mr. McLeod returned to Kuching and Miri respectively on 13th. Mr. Ford of the Oxford Expedition, came down sick with Mr. McLeod and left for Miri the same day. I left for Miri on 18th en route for Kuching. Mr. White was in Miri from 22nd to 29th attending the Regatta.
Obituary. -I regret to report the deaths of Penghulu Aban Tinging Saong of L. Mewa, Tinjar, on August 23rd and of Ex. Police Sergt. Haji Seman on September 18th.
Rainfall. -Severe floods were experienced at the beginning of the month, the bazaar and kampong roads being under water. 8.81 inches of rain fell on 13 days.
Shipping. -The s.s. Gladys made two trips during the month.
Trade. -Trade returns are as follows: -
BINTULU.
September, 1932.
The Assistant District Officer, Mr. J. G. Anderson, reports: -
Land. -There is a considerable amount of work to be done demarcating land applied for, and in most cases, already planted up. The Land Inspector is much hindered by failure of applicants to clear their rentises when called upon to do so.
Agriculture. -Eight bags of we: padi seed were received and issued to Foochows at Sebauh Concession, with a request for a report on results later.
Several Sebauh Foochow Headmen complained that large quantities of Dyak rice are being exported from this district for hulling in Miri and Mukah, etc. They say they fear a shortage as last year’s harvest was by no means plentiful and asked Government to check such exports.
I advised the Dyaks through their Headmen to keep enough padi for food until next harvest.
Visitors. -Mr. G. A C. Field, Superintendent of Customs, Fourth Division, visited the station from the 11th to the 14th, and on the 24th the Very Rev. Monseigneur Dunn and Father Jansen arrived from Miri and visited their mission station at Sebauh. They were still in the district at the end of the month.
General. -His Highness the Rajah’s birthday, the 26th, was observed as a Public Holiday and a sports meeting was held on the Padang.
Dyak tax is coming in a little quicker and I have given them time until end of October, in view of the bad harvest last year.
Trade and Customs. -The trade statistics for the month as under: -
The principle exports during the month were: -
Shipping. -Arrivals 14 and departures 16.
Fifth Division News.
LIMBANG.
August, 1932.
Extracts from the Fifth Divisional Reports by Mr. F. H. Kortright, Resident: -
Court. -There were very few cases brought before the Courts and none of any importance.
General. -The 8th, His Highness the Tuan Muda’s birthday, was observed as a general holiday.
The Assistant District Officer, Lawas, Mr. J. O. Gilbert, returned from a visit to the Bah Country and called at several houses in the Limbang on his way down river.
The Assistant District Officer reports that very heavy crops of padi were being harvested in the Bah, the fields resembling corn-fields, the grain being so heavy.
By kind invitation of the Resident of Brunei I attended a party given to mark the retirement of Pengiran Shahbandar, who had held the position of Malay Magistrate, Belait and Muara, for the past 25 years. A presentation of a gold watch was made by the subordinate staff.
Cadet, Mr. W. P. N. L. Ditmas, visited the Panderuan River and walked across into the Tubai, he reported everything was well and the Dyaks all busy on their new farms.
The British Resident of Brunei, Mr. T. F. Carey, accompanied by the Acting Principal Civil Medical Officer, Singapore. Dr. Fitzgerald, came over for a short visit on the 27th.
An unfortunate boating accident was reported at Kuala Labu when a prahu containing nine people from Kampong Sebukang capsized in a squall and four were drowned. The previous day a similar disaster overtook a boat from Kampong Tuna when one man was drowned.
The weather throughout the month has been very uncertain and very heavy rainstorms have been prevalent.
Trade: -
Foreign exports include: -
Coasting exports: -
September, 1932.
General. -The 26th, His Highness the Rajah’s birthday, was observed as a general holiday. A salute was fired and the flagstaff dressed
A python measuring 23 feet and weighing 2 piculs 8 catties was brought in alive by some Dyaks from the Dubai. The snake, a very fine specimen, was ultimately sent to Brunei where it was placed on exhibition.
Two crocodiles measuring 9’3’’ and 10’1’’ were captured and destroyed
P.W.D. -Very good work is also being done on the Lawas-Trusan road, and it is now possible to take a car as far as the 7th mile.
Rainfall amounted to 15.01 inches.
Trade and Shipping: -
Foreign exports include: -
Coasting exports: -
Shipping arrivals: -
LAWAS.
August, 1932.
The Acting Assistant District Officer, Mr. J. O. Gilbert, reports: -
General. -On the 10th instant the Acting Assistant District Officer returned from a visit to Ulu Trusan and Bah districts, via Limbang. The last year’s padi harvest was very good, although a very high percentage of the rice is being made into Borak. Most houses had enough padi to last two years.
The slow increase of the price of rubber, towards the end of the month, has caused the owners of Chinese and Native gardens to start tapping again, so at the moment there is practically no unemployment.
Messrs. Vameo Timber Company have now started the manufacture of Sarawak ply-wood; during the month Mr. Colins of the same Company proceeded to Singapore to put this wood on the market; we hear that orders are coming in very satisfactorily.
Mr. Morgan, Geologist of Sarawak Oilfields, Miri, has been working in the Lawas and Trusan Districts during the month, returning to Miri at the end of the month.
Rainfall. -The following rainfall was recorded during the month: -
September, 1932.
General. -On the 13th the Resident and Acting Assistant District Officer visited Siang Siang, and it was settled that a temporary suspension bridge should be constructed, as at present this unbridged river is the main obstacle for any sort of transport between Trusan and Lawas.
On the 24th instant the Acting Assistant District Officer and Mr. C. J. Cook proceeded to Limbang where celebrations of His Highness the Rajah’s birthday took place, returning on the 27th via Trusan.
Land Department. -A few applications for land along the Trusan road were received during the month, mostly for a mixed crop of tobacco, coffee and pepper.
Agriculture. -The Lawas (Sarawak) Rubber Estates, Limited, exported 39,654 lbs. of dry rubber during the month.
Rainfall. -The following rainfall was recorded during the month: -
Trade and Customs. -Trade returns for September, 1932.
