VOL. LXIII.
No. 952.
The Sarawak Gazette
Price
KUCHING, Tuesday, January 3rd, 1933.
20 CENTS.
Contents.
The Sarawak Gazette	TUESDAY, JANUARY 3rd, 1933.
Birth.
ABANG OPENG. -At Kampong No. 2 Datus' Road, Kuching, 31st October, 1932, Dayang Masniah, wife of Native Officer Abang Openg, Sarikei, Sarawak, a daughter.
Local and Personal.
December.
His Highness the Rajah, accompanied by Dayang Leonora, left for Sibu on 3rd December by s.s. Auby. His Highness visited a number of Substations during his stay, including Kanowit, Kapit, Daro, Palo, Sarikei and Binatang. His Highness returned to Kuching on 20th.
Mr. J. C. Swayne, Resident, First Division, left for England, via Singapore, by s.s. Vyner Brooke on Monday 19th on retirement. We take this opportunity of wishing Mr. J. C. Swayne long life and prosperity.
Mr. E. O. Bruce returned from leave by s.s. Vyner Brooke on the 5th and took over the duties of Acting Resident, First Division. We congratulate Mr. Bruce on being the first officer of the Service to fly from London to Singapore via Java.
We welcome to Kuching Mr. and Mrs. M. M. Millar, who arrived from Singapore on the 12th by m.v. Marudu. Mr. Millar is joining the Sarawak Steamship Company. By this same vessel arrived Mr. D. R. Lascelles, who has joined the Sarawak Service and is now doing duty in the Registrar’s Office.
Mr. C. D. Adams, Resident, Third Division, accompanied by Mrs. Adams, arrived in Kuching on 24th. Mr. J. B. Archer, Resident, Second Division, and Mr. A. Macpherson, arrived on Tuesday 27th bringing down the rebel Asun, who surrendered to Government during the month. The Residents of the Third and Second Divisions were the guests of His Highness the Rajah at Astana.
The usual Christmas festivities took place in Kuching. On Christmas night a dance was held at the Residency. The liquid and other refreshments, to say nothing of false noses, hats and balloons all went to make a very enjoyable evening. We have yet to identify the voluble gentleman behind a large nose and fiery moustache who so eminently resembled Cyrano de Bergerac in word and deed.
On New Year’s Eve His Highness the Rajah and Dayang Leonora gave a most enjoyable dance at Astana. Over one hundred guests were present. The New Year was “seen in” with the singing of Auld Lang Syne and many a rousing cheer.
Mr. and Mrs. V. L. O. Sheppard arrived in Kuching on 19th by s.s Kudat.
We much regret an error which occurred in our last issue under “Armistice Day.” We are informed that Mr. Ah Bee is not a manager of the Globe Picture Theatre, but kindly gave his assistance in connection with the Poppy Day Performance referred to.
We wish our readers a very happy and prosperous New Year.
Preferences.
The Secretary of State for the Colonies has caused to be circulated the following table of the principal products of the Colonial Empire showing the new or increased preferences granted in the United Kingdom, the Dominious, India, and Southern Rhodesia since October, 1931, or to be granted in accordance with the Ottawa Agreements.
FOODSTUFFS.
Tea per lb. -United Kingdom 2d.; Newfoundland 4c.; India 2a.; Southern Rhodesia 2d.
Coffee per lb. -United Kingdom 1d. (increased from 1/4 d.); New Zealand 1d.; South Africa 1d.; Newfoundland 2c.; India 1a.; South Rhodesia 1d.
Cocoa per lb. -Australia 1/2 d.; New Zealand 1/2 d.; Southern Rhodesia 1d.
Rum per gallon or proof gallon (according to the method of assessment employed). -Australia 5s.; New Zealand 4s.; India Rs. 3.12; Southern Rhodesia 3s.
Wine per gallon. -United Kingdom 2s. (increased from 1s.) on Empire wine not exceeding 27’ of proof spirit, over foreign wine not exceeding 25’ of proof spirit.
Sugar per cwt. of 96’ sugar. -United Kingdom 4s. 8.8d. (increased from 3s. 8.8d.) with an additional preference of 1s. per cwt. on a limited quantity, fixed for 1932-33 at 275,000 tons, of Colonial sugar.
Molasses. -United Kingdom, a consequential increase of preference.
Sago and tapioca ad valorem. -United Kingdom 10%; Australia 15%; India 10%.
Sago flour. -United Kingdom 10% ad valorem; Canada 1/2 c. per lb. (increased from 1/4 c.); Australia 15%.
Bananas. -United Kingdom 2s. 6d. per cwt.; Newfoundland 10% ad valorem; India 10%; Australia will admit 40,000 centals of Fiji bananas annually at a preference of 5s. 10d. per cental.
Grapefruit. -United Kingdom 5s. per cwt.; Newfoundland 10% ad valorem; India 10%.
Oranges. -United Kingdom 3s. 6d. per cwt from 1st April to 30th November. 10% for remainder of year; Newfoundland 10%; India 10%.
Tomatoes. -United Kingdom 2d. per lb. from 1st June to 31st July, 1d. per lb. from 1st August to 31st October, 10% ad valorem for the rest of the year; Canada 2c. per lb. (increased from 27 1/2 % ad valorem); Newfoundland 20% ad valorem; India 10%.
Potatoes. -United Kingdom £1 per ton, with a higher rate (4s. 8d. per cwt.) for new potatoes from 1st November to 30th June; India 10% ad valorem.
Rice. cleaned, husked, etc. -United Kingdom 1d. per lb.
Unground spices (including betel-nuts). -United Kingdom 10% ad valorem; Australia 15%; New Zealand 10%; India 7 1/2 %.
Canned fruit. -United Kingdom 15% ad valorem; Canada (canned pineapples) 3c. per lb. (increased from 1c.); Australia, specific preferences varying with the size of the container; India 10%.
Honey. -United Kingdom 7s. per cwt.
Fruit juices. -United Kingdom 10% ad valorem; Australia 3d. per gallon; India 10%.
Fish, dry salted and unsalted. -United Kingdom 10% ad valorem; India 10%.
Canned fish. -United Kingdom 10% ad valorem; India 10%.
OTHER AGRICULTURAL AND MISCELLANEOUS PRODUCTS.
Maize, flat white. -United Kingdom 10% ad valorem.
Copra. -United Kingdom 10% ad valorem; India 10%.
Palm oil. -United Kingdom 10% ad valorem; Canada (as defined) 10%; India 10%.
Ground nuts. -United Kingdom 10% ad valorem.
Oil seeds (other than essential). -United Kingdom 10% ad valorem; India 10%.
Palm kernal oil. -United Kingdom 10% ad valorem; Canada 10%; India 10%.
Desiccated coconut. -United Kingdom 10% ad valorem; Newfoundland 4c. per lb.; India 10%.
Coconut oil. -United Kingdom 10% ad valorem; Canada (as defined) 10%; India 10%.
Fresh coconuts. -United Kingdom 10% ad valorem; Australia 1s. per cwt.; India 10%.
Sisal and hard fibres. -United Kingdom 10% ad valorem; India 10%.
Timber. -United Kingdom 10% ad valorem; Australia (certain kinds) 20%.
Tobacco, unmanufactured. -India, rate not yet determined.
Tobacco, unmanufactured, entered to be made into cigars. -Australia 6d. per lb.
Cigars per lb. -Canada 50c; Australia 2s.; New Zealand 2s.; Southern Rhodesia 2s.
Dry gums and resins (including balata and gutta percha). -United Kingdom 10% ad valorem;
Canada 10%; Australia 15%; India 10%.
Essential oils. -United Kingdom 10% ad valorem; Canada 7 1/2 % (increased from 2 1/2 %; Australia 15%; India (citronella, cinnamon, and cinnamon leaf oil only) 10%.
Sponges. -United Kingdom 10% ad valorem; Australia 15%.
Ivory, unmanufactured. -United Kingdom 10% ad valorem; India 10%.
MINERAL PRODUCTS.
Asphalt. -United Kingdom 10% ad valorem; Canada 10%; Australia 10%; New Zealand 10%; South Africa 10%; India 10%.
Copper. -United Kingdom 2d. per lb.
Tin. -United Kingdom 10% ad valorem.
Mineral oil, petroleum semi-refined. -Canada 1c. per gallon (increased from 1 1/10c.).
Plumbago. -United Kingdom 10% ad valorem; Australia 10%; India 10%.
Dalat. French Indo-China.
It is often puzzling to find a hill station off the beaten track. A short description of Dalat may therefore be of interest. From Singapore the direct route is to Saigon by a French boat, which means two nights at sea, and then 54 miles up the Saigon River to the capital of the same name. Saigon is known as the “Little Paris of the East” The official language is French, and Annamite the native. The notices in the shops, the newspapers, wines, pavement cafes, boulevards, and the uniforms of the Colonial Army which add colour and animation to the streets, are French; as is the whole atmosphere of the place. Though Saigon with 150,000 inhabitants is the Seat of the Government of Cochin-China and chief port of the country, arsenal and Naval port, there is nothing of particular interest. There is an Opera house, and there are large rice mills at the Chinese suburb of Cholon. There are two ways of reaching Dalat, one by train (metre gauge) which leaves at night twice a week, and has a restaurant car (excellent food) and couchette sleeping accommodation. The terminus is reached at about 8.30 next morning, after a climb from sea level to nearly 4,800 feet. The latter part of the line is rack and pinion. The gradients are wonderful and the views magnificent. The Langbian Palace is the largest and most expensive hotel, but the Grand Hotel Desanti is much less expensive, quite comfortable, with excellent cooking, and the proprietor most kind and helpful in every way Dalat was only properly laid out in 1922. It is 50 miles from the China Sea as the crow flies. There are three seasons, November to March, dry with a night temperature of 45’F. and a day of 70’F,; April to June, a period of thunder-storms and temperatures of 54 and 78’F.; July to October the rainy season. The air is most invigorating, but it is necessary for comfort to take some warm clothes, as it is really chilly, except when the sun is well up. The walks are many and varied, with beautiful views of mountain and moorland through the pine forests. Several mountain peaks rise to 7,200 feet. Cars and rid-ing horses can be hired. There is good big game hunting (elephant, tiger, gaur, etc.), and for small game there are snipe, black partridge, small quail, wild duck and teal, also grouse, peafowl, rabbits and hares, naturally depending on the seasons. A Government Licence is necessary. Local arrangements can be made for Shikaris. Moi (the aboriginal tribe) carriers and horses. The Moi in looks and dress somewhat resemble the Muruts. Their principal weapon is the cross-bow. There are four public hard tennis courts, and an 18-hole golf course. Swimming and boating in the lake, which is 1 1/2 miles long by 300 yards wide, should be available again at a future date, but early in 1932 a flood higher than known for 80 years carried away the dam and caused much havoc and loss of life. The most interesting way of returning to Saigon is by car. There are two good motor roads to choose from, the shorter one is 180 miles, and both have, magnificent views of the country on the way down to the plain. If the visit to Dalat is chiefly for the sake of health, it would be well to stay there till it is time to catch the return steamer at Saigon. If on the other hand one has sufficient leave as well as spare cash, it would be a great pity not to go by car to Angkor, 300 miles along good roads from Saigon. The Mekong River is crossed en route by a very antiquated Government steam ferry. This trip takes one day, passing most of the time through padi fields and stretches of jungle. The Hotel des Ruines is a good place at which to stay. The ruins at Angkor are considered among the wonders of the world, and are the unique and huge remains of a vanished civilization. Two days will be enough for the ordinary individual to get a general impression, but many days could be spent amongst them. One is not pestered by guides or beggars nor vexed with the sight of horrible kiosks for picture postcards and souvenirs. The French Government makes a minimum charge per head of two piastres (about two Sarawak dollars) which covers a two days’ visit, and then a piastre a day. From Angkor a car can be taken to the Siamese frontier at Arayana, three hours distant, then train to Bangkok, some eight hours, and then from Bangkok back to Singapore. The trip is full of variety, gives one a Continental change, and it brushes up one’s French. Moreover it is always interesting to observe a colony under the administration of a foreign power. -F.I.L.D.
Empire Broadcasting.
We are informed by the Postmaster-General, Sarawak, that the Empire Broadcasting Station opened on the 19th December, 1932. Transmission to Sarawak is on wave lengths of 25.532 and 31.297 kilo cycles 11750 and 9585, call signs G.S.D. and G.S.C. Transmission will continue daily including Sunday from 14.30 to 16.30 G.M.T. (10 p.m. to midnight Sarawak Standard Time). Transmission on the Australian Zone at 09.30 to 11.30 G.M.T. (6 p.m. to 7 p.m. Sarawak Standard Time) cannot be heard in Sarawak on these wave lengths during this season of the year.
Sarawak’s New Planting Hopes.
RECOGNITION OF INDUSTRIAL SCOPE PROMISES MORE TRADE.
Like Malaya, the Dutch East Indies and other markets which largely depend for prosperity upon the annual yield and sale of rubber. Sarawak during the past few years has touched the depths of depression. Yet it is quite possible that the current year will witness the return of the territory to a more satisfactory commercial condition, for the continued slump in rubber has caused the planting community seriously to investigate the possibilities of, among other lines, pepper cultivation on a large scale. The results in this direction have exceeded all expectations, and with Canada granting preferential treatment to the crop, greatly increased production, accompanied, of course, by a keen demand for fertilisers, disinfectants and hand tools, is anticipated.
A MODERN CAPITAL.
This outpost of Empire on the northern side of the Dutch island of Borneo is emphatically not the backward, undeveloped market so many business men imagine it to be Kuching, the capital, is a centre distinguished by many modern buildings, and structural development is still proceeding apace, occasioning a consistent request for cement, iron and steel, domestic and electrical fittings, etc. Most of the principal towns, too, possess an up-to-date water supply, and it is expected that their commercial needs will become steadily more urgent as the current programme of road construction and connection advances. It has for some time been possible, indeed, to motor in comfort from Kuching to the Sadong River, a 6o-miles journey, and with the road programme fully completed a large increase in the number of motor car users may be looked for.
CHIEF LINES OF IMPORT.
As is natural in a native market, the chief article of import is rice, but cotton textiles and provisions are also much in request, while there is a smaller yet consistent demand for luxury goods by European planters and officials. Firms importing supplies of a general nature in Kuching include the Borneo Co., Ltd., which also has an up-do-date branch in Sibu, the Island Trading Co., Ltd., and Messrs. Sime, Darby and Co., Ltd. It is significant that even in such a bad year as 1931 Sarawak, with a total of £65,000, imported British goods to a far greater value than Korea, Albania, Abyssinia or Afghanistan, and there is little doubt that such purchases will be greatly augmented as the market recovers. -(British Export Gazette).
Raising Rice.
Soon after his arrival in this country, H.E. the Governor, opening the Malayan Exhibition, impressed upon his listeners the importance of endeavouring to make Malaya self-supporting in its rice supply. Tempting them with figures which showed how British Guiana had changed-in twenty years, it is true-from an importing to an exporting rice country, he expressed the hope that neither the Government nor the people would rest content until the Malay Peninsula had been converted in the same way. All experimental work on rice aims at an improvement in crop yields. The Agricultural Department has had the matter in hand almost since its inception and the progress made during the 1931-32 season has been, as is shown in the December issue of the Malayan Agricultural Journal, of considerable importance. Three seasons ago experiments were in progress at two stations and twelve smaller test stations: now there are a total of five experiment stations and nineteen test plots distributed throughout the more important padi growing districts of the Peninsula. The results of this year’s work “tend to justify the belief already held that there is a definite maximum beyond which manuring on orthodox lines has no significant effect upon the yields of wet padi,” we read. It has been established too, that the ability or otherwise of soils to grow a satisfactory crop depends on the presence thereon of considerable quantities of organic material of recent origin, but whatever the outcome of further developments on this important aspect of yields, there is plenty of evidence that the Department’s work is gradually breaking down prejudice among indigenous cultivators towards new methods and that bigger mid better crops are in sight. -Straits Times.
“Inferno.”
This is a mad world we live in. Yesterday I read in a London paper hysterical headlines about the “Great Depression.” In the very next column, we are informed, I presume truthfully, that there is an orgy of Christmas shopping in progress. “Not for many years has there been such a rush to buy presents.”
One may well ask where this is all leading. Can it be possible that the entire universe has been moonstruck? Or has an unusually large sunspot affected the human mind with a form of delirium tremens? “Economic depression” seems to be a phrase entirely insufficient to cover this present derangement of our system. The French, with their customary exactness of speech, have more truly expressed it with their crise mondiale.
When one reads of the activities of our modern Statesman (?); the diverting frolics of our “Bright Young Things;” the fulminations of our would-be Dictators; the-, but why continue with this tragic list? Pick up any newspaper, and read of an Era that will be cited in future centuries as that of the “Great Hallucination,” when mankind was stricken raving mad. Or are we in our dotage?
Postulation is useless. Here we are, and somehow or other we have got to get out of the mess our fathers have brewed. Either that, or a short way to the infernal regions. But, if we must go there, let us do it comfortably.
As the lady of uncertain virtue replied, when questioned as to why she had accepted the gift of a Rolls Royce from an aged admirer, “Well, you don’t expect me to go to hell in a wheel-barrow, do you?”
RHADAMANTHUS.
“Cost of Living has gone Up.”
THERE IS TO BE AN EXTRA TAX ON WHISKY IN 1933.
The Powers that be have just found out They haven’t any money,
And so to keep their ends aloft.
They’ve done a thing that’s really soft And not so very funny.
When I was young my teacher said My Boy, “the staff of life is bread,”
But when I’d drifted to the East
I heard that bread was needed least As a prop for Master’s Body.
I found the need for liquid fuel, Not meaning porridge, groats, nor gruel,
But the golden brew of the golden grain That helps us all to bear the strain Of Scots wha’ hae’ left Scotland.
A stengah a day keeps the doctor at bay And loosens our tongues at the close of day, When we meet in the Bar of our stately pub And tell the world just where’s the rub That’s impeding our Country’s progress.
But to make us omelettes the hens must lay, And so to have stengahs we have to pay The price that’s asked for the liquid gold, The price that’s risen umpteen fold Since first I tasted whiskey.
For gin will make a knobbly liver, And beer will surely spoil the figure. And so to keep your manly beauty You know ‘twill be your solemn duty To drink but Ayer Matang Kring And not a cent of revenue bring To case the country’s burdens.
Now when the deepest gloom is rite Because they’ve snatched Your Staff of Life Tell me don’t you think it fishy That they never thought of taxing Vichy.
1820.
Too, Too Sweet.
“Very old people understand far more than you think.” -A clergyman.
Grannie sits by the grandfather clock, Knit-knit-knitting an old. old sock. Wise and wrinkled, crafty and canny. You can’t tell much to my old grannie.
Grannie sits by the grandfather clock, Lavender lace and dimity frock.
“There was a young lady of Hitchin.” says you. “I’ve heard that one, and a better one, too,”
Says Grannie.
Farewell Party.
Members of various communities were present at a tea-party given on the 7th December, 1932. on the eve of the departure from Kuching of the Rev. Fr. and Mrs. E. G. Proctor.
Mr. Tan Sum Guan proposed the health of the guests of honour, and briefly mentioned how the work which Fr. Proctor had, both as a teacher and house-master at the St. Thomas’ School, beside his Church activities, was appreciated by the parents in general. He said that the Principal of the School al the recent Concert given by the children of the Lower School, of which Fr. Proctor was also the supervisor last year, spoke highly of his work, which raised the standard of efficiency of the children and also of the teachers of that section.
The normal classes of Fr. Proctor for those teachers and their very good results testified to this.
Finally he said that the work of Mrs. Proctor at the St. Mary’s Girls’ School was also much appreciated.
Other speakers that followed endorsed Mr. Tan Sum Guan’s opinion.
Mr. C. P. Law, the President of the Teo Kiaw Club, by whose courtesy the party was held on the Club premises, added his share of best wishes. -Contributed.
Our Jay Cyclists.
Singapore cyclists have long been imbued with traffic sense to a markedly greater degree than their brethren up-country. The reason is not that the city-dweller develops a keener intelligence than inhabitants of the quieter towns of the Peninsula, but that a process of natural selection has been at work Singapore traffic has been so dense for some years that those who are unfit to move in it have been weeded out long ago some of them in a painful and peremptory manner. And this applies as much to motorists as to cyclists. In the towns of the Peninsula on the other hand, the traffic sense has been evolving more slowly and it is still possible to see three cyclists riding cheerfully and fraternally abreast through the busiest street of Kuala Lumpur during the afternoon rush hour. Public opinion has now been roused, however and the cyclist is learning that he must adapt himself to modern traffic conditions and modern methods of control. Thanks to persistent police action the flagrant defiance of pointsmen’s signals which was a common sight in F.M.S. towns until recently, is now much rarer, although it has by no means disappeared altogether. Many cyclists of course, have, always understood and obeyed traffic regulations, and for nearly all of this class of road users there is no excuse for ignorance. There still remains, however, the problem of the Chinese market-gardener riding into town on a rusty steed with an enormous basket of produce balanced precariously over the back wheel and with an utter ignorance of the meaning of traffic signals. Magistrates should be lenient with such folk when they are summoned. Nevertheless it should be possible for even rustic visitors to town to learn elementary traffic rules, and the education of cyclists in the F.M.S. must continue until correct behaviour becomes as general and instinctive as it is in European countries. The only point which must be borne in mind is that there must never be the slightest suggestion of favouritism for the motorist as against the cyclist either in police procedure or in legislation. -Straits Times.
The Sarawak Association, Singapore.
At the 12th Annual General Meeting of the members of the above Association the following gentlemen were elected office-bearers for the ensuing year: -President, Mr. Wee Kheng Watt; Vice-Presidents, Messrs. Koh Kim Loh, Phang Chiap Song, Koh Thye Jin and Chua Geok Thuan; Hon. Secretary, Mr. Matthew Lim; Hon. Asst, Secretary, Mr. Ho Hing Chow; Hon, Treasurer, Mr. Tan Thian Sang; Hon. Auditor, Mr. J. S. Chong; Hon. Sports Superintendent, Mr. Sylvester Chong; Committee, Messrs. Charles William, Voon Shak Leong, Koh Cheng Yong and Lim Peck Choo; Employment Committee, Messrs. Yan Ah Seng and Bong Nyan Joon.
Piracy.
There is quite a Seventeenth Century flavour about the warning issued to local shipping companies that a gang of pirates is believed to be making for Singapore, and people in Europe unacquainted with Eastern conditions would be utterly bewildered by such an announcement. The explanation, of course, is simple enough. The modern pirate hailing from Bias Bay does not roam the seas waiting to attack the unsuspecting merchantman. His methods are much more subtle. Owing to the remarkable ease with which Chinese of the artisan class are able to travel, he and his companions can go to the port from which their quarry is starting, find their way on board in the guise of passengers, and wait a favourable opportunity to surprise and overpower the officers. Unless a ship carries an armed guard or the officers receive the alarm and are able to put up resistance, it is comparatively easy for a gang of desperadoes who have no scruples regarding the taking of life to carry out their purpose, and the tale of piracy in the China Sea is a long and costly one. Often officers have been able to put up a gallant fight and turn the tables on the pirates and, given the remotest opportunity, they are always ready to do so. It has been demonstrated, however, that the effective protection against piracy is to carry an armed guard, if only for the reason that the pirates, never anxious to take unnecessary risks, always give a wide berth to a vessel thus prepared. An additional protection, of course, is increased supervision at ports, and in this connection, with all respect to those who oppose the measure, the Aliens Bill recently introduced is surely a help. It gives powers to the authorities which previously have been entirely lacking. Certainly it has been an excellent thing for Malaya in its prosperous days that there should be a plentiful supply of labour, but the ease with which “bad hats” from China could enter Singapore constituted a menace to public safety of which the danger of piracy was only one feature. -Straits Times.
OLD SARAWAK.
From the Sarawak Gazette 47 Years Ago.
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE
1885.] SATURDAY, 3RD JAN., 1885. [Price 10 cents.
Another quiet end somewhat uneventful year has passed away, leaving little of note to chronicle in our yearly retrospective review. We have no great progression to record, still the country has advanced in its usual steady manner, in spite of a bad commercial year and some heavy losses in property.
The heaviest of these losses has been the fire of January last, when over 180 house, and much valuable property, acre destroyed. The house burnt were nearly all old wooden shops, and were always a source of danger to the rest of the town; these are now being replaced by substantial brick buildings, 70 of which have been completed, or nearly completed; many more would have been erected had it not been that the demand for building materials has been greater than the supply, owing to the immediate steps all took to rebuild their burnt down houses
Another loss has been the sinking of the s.s. Rajah Brooke, owned by the Kuching S.S. Co., which was run down in Penang harbour last April.
There has also been great depression in trade, owing to the low ruling prices of produce, particularly of sago flour and rattans, and this will probably cause a considerable falling off in the quantity of exports, though to what extent it is as yet impossible to say, it being too early to look for the yearly trade returns.
In the death of Abang Aing the Government has lost a very old and trusted servant, a chief whom it will be hard to replace, and whose death is deeply regretted by all classes.
The general prosperity of the State, however. has been very good. With the exception of Ngumbang’s unlawful conduct over the borders, and his subsequent refusal to abide by the decision of the Government, consequent on his proceedings, the outstations are in a peaceful and prosperous condition. The Baram district, under a settled regime, is now fairly on its road to prosperity, and its inhabitants have given little trouble. In the Rejang, owing to the praiseworthy energy of the Resident, considerable advance has made among the far inland tribes, probably the wildest and least generally known in Borneo. A new stockade has been erected at Belaga, in the head waters of the Rejang river, about a seven days’ boating journey above Kapit Fort, and another stockade has been made at Katibas between Kanowit and Kapit Forts.
Domestic slavery may now be almost looked upon as a thing of the past. Taking advantage of the new regulations, many have freed themselves, probably nearly all who care to do so, as many will prefer that mild condition of bondage to which they have been accustomed all their lives and which secures them a quiet and lazy life.
The Treasury accounts have not yet been closed, but we are given to understand that they will shew a fair increase in the revenue. The expenditure will naturally be heavy, the increase falling mostly on the Naval Department, owing to the acquirement of the paddle steamer, Adeh, and the brigantine, Black Diamond. The former has proved herself to be a very useful vessel; the latter, which has been purchased for the purpose of carrying coal from the Government mines at Sadong, has not yet arrived.
In Kuching a few additions have been made to Public Works: the new Fish Market is well in hand, a brick Rice Godown and handsome brick stables have been erected.
In the outstations, a bungalow for the use of His Highness has been built at Claude Town (Baram), and in the Rejang some additions have been made, including the two stockades already mentioned.
The Selantek coal fields are again attracting attention. An experienced gentleman is prospecting and surveying these fields for an influential Company in England, who have every determination, if reported upon favourably, to open mines on a large scale.
During the past year Their Highnesses the Rajah and Ranee has been absent in England. The pleasure of their visit to the old country must be greatly enhanced be the welfare of the past, and the bright prospects of the coming year.
First Division News.
RESIDENT’S OFFICE.
November, 1932.
Extracts from the Divisional Reports by Mr. J. C. Swayne, Resident, First Division: -
UPPER SARAWAK DISTRICT.
November, 1932.
The Assistant District Officer, Mr. R. G. Aikman, reports: -
Rainfall. -The highest recorded in 24 hours was 1.90 inches, the daily average was .31 of an inch and the total for the month 9.30 inches.
P.W.D. -Bridge No. 1 was repaired, traffic being stopped for one day to enable repairs to be carried out satisfactorily. A cutting was made on the Kuching Road near the Jugan Road junction, and this is a great improvement as there was a very bad corner at this spot. Work was commenced on cutting back the corner at the first mile. The approach to the new Kranji bridge on the Bau side was finished on the 27th and is most satisfactory.
Work was started on the transformation of the old garage in the bazaar into it market and this was still in progress at the end of the month.
Constabulary. -The constabulary were, throughout the month, engaged in the usual routine guards and duties. The system of road patrols by day and night continues to be carried on and I have no doubt that the moral effect throughout the countryside is excellent.
General. -Dayang Leonora, accompanied by Messrs. F. H. Kortright, R. E. Edwards and R. E. Le Sueur, arrived on the 2lst and stayed for two days.
A visit was paid to Krokong and to the premises of the Tai Ton Mining Syndicate, where the party were shown round the workings by Mr. Ong Seng Chai, the Manager.
The Sarawak Mining Syndicate’s new workings at Buan were also inspected under the guidance of Mr. Ong Hap Leong.
Gold Mining. -The actual gold obtained by the following companies for the month of October, 1932, was: -
The actual gold obtained by the various companies from January to October, 1932, inclusive, amounts to 6,938.18 ounces.
The approximate value of this gold at the average price for the year (to-date) would be $312,210.
Two companies, the Nam Hin Gold Mining Company at Bau Lama and The Kwong Lee Gold Mining Company at Su Shan Shin, commenced leaching during the month, and this brings the number of companies now operating by the cyanide process to six.
I have compiled statistics relative to the gold mining industry in Upper Sarawak in 1932 and I propose to amalgamate these in the December report, as the figures for this month are incomplete.
LUNDU DISTRICT.
November, 1932.
The Acting Assistant District Officer, Mr. E. H. Elam, reports: -
Agriculture. -The weather for the last three weeks of the month was dry and hot and the swamp padi farmers were beginning to get anxious, but the heavy rains later made the prospects of both hill and swamp padi very good.
Trade: -
General. -I walked to Srayan on 10th. 1 reached Simatan via Perigi and Stugor where the path is now quite good. Two posts 36 feet long were erected on the sandbanks in the Simatan river to test their ability to withstand the flood tide should the Simatan-Lundu telephone line be sanctioned. They were still erect at the end of the month.
The gold rush seems to be spreading to the Lundu district and five General Licences have been issued. Rasau and Stungkor seem to be the favoured districts.
SADONG DISTRICT.
November, 1932.
The Acting Assistant District Officer, Mr. S. G. Hansom, reports: -
Health —Number of patients treated at Government Dispensary 45.
General health at Simunjan has been good.
The Dresser at Serian reports a number of cases of measles in that area. A large number of vaccinations have been performed.
Influenza is prevalent in many up-river Land Dyak Kampongs, and a number of deaths from the pneumonia, which is liable to follow the complaint, have taken place. The Dresser has travelled to a number of Dyak Kampongs to treat this epidemic.
Obituary. -It was reported that Mohamad Arun, the Tuan Hatip at Tebekang, died on the 7th instant. One Abang Hassan was elected to fill the vacant office.
Dyak and Native Affairs generally. -Owing to the general bad crops of padi harvested within this district last year, numerous complaints and applications for assistance have been received from many local Malays and Dyaks, and efforts have been made to secure loans of rice locally for those who are genuinely in want.
Agriculture. -Incessant and heavy rain was experienced throughout the month, and this is still holding up the completion of padi farming. It is very satisfactory, however, to note that local natives have apparently made an effort to plant larger quantities of padi this season, and the general impression appears to be that an excellent crop may be expected, in spite of the set-backs occasioned by bad weather.
The tendency to plant more padi has been carefully fostered, and failing anything untoward it is hoped that local natives will be in a position to export quantities of rice to Kuching in the New Year.
Trade: -
Shipping. -The local Chinese vessel the Peng Ann made three trips to Kuching during the month. An increased amount of cargo for Kuching is reported by the owners.
Lands and Survey. -Bujang, Land Inspector, was sent up to Tebekang during the month, in connection with a number of land disputes between Chinese and Land Dyaks. There are also a number of pepper gardens in that area awaiting demarcation.
General. -I visited the substations from the 4th to 11th instant when Gedong, Serian and Tebekang were visited.
At the beginning of the month the Survey Office closed down in this district, the Assistant Superintendent. Mr. R. N. Baron, returning to Kuching on the 4th instant.
A party was left by Mr. Baron at the Kuala to complete several matters there, and returned to Kuching some ten days later.
I proceeded up river to Serian per m.l. Vava on the 30th instant in order to meet the Resident, First Division, there.
Eleven licences to prospect gold have recently been issued locally to various people, including a party of ex-Government clerks
These people have disappeared into the Ulus of the Simunjan and Sadong, from whence there are rumours that gold in sufficient quantity to make profit has been found.
These people are no doubt the overflow from the. “Gold Rush” in the Ulu Sarawak, and it remains to be seen whether their efforts will be rewarded with success.
Chinese Affairs.
November, 1932.
Extracts from the Report of The Secretary for Chinese Affairs, Captain C. D. Le Gros Clark: -
The Secretary for Chinese Affairs returned from his tour of the Third Division (Coastal Districts) on 4th November. During the month, an inspection was made of the majority of Chinese Clubs and Associations in Kuching. All were in order, though it was noticed that the trade depression has seriously affected the income and membership of the Clubs.
General Affairs. -Five cases heard, of which two were passed to the District Court. Of the latter, one case was tried under section 351 Indian Penal Code (Assault), and represented the first prosecution of a Chinese for attempting to boycott Japanese goods by aggressive picketing.
SARAWAK TURF CLUB.
PROVISIONAL PROGRAMME FOR THE SPRING MEETING, 1933.
FIRST DAY, SATURDAY. 18TH MARCH, 1933.
RACE NO. 1 [2.30 p.m.
THE TUAN MUDA’S CUP.
Value $250. A piece of plate of the value of $100. Presented by His Highness the Tuan Muda with $150 added. Second to receive $100. Third $25.
A handicap for Division I ponies. Distance 6 furlongs. Entrance Fee $10.
RACE NO. 2 [3.0 p.m.
THE SATOK STAKES.
Value $250. Second to receive $100. Third $25.
A handicap for Division II ponies. Distance 5 furlongs. Entrance Fee $10.
RACE NO. 3 [3.30 p.m.
THE B.C.L. STAKES.
Value $200. $50 presented by The Borneo Company, Limited, with $150 added. Second to receive $75. Third $25.
A handicap for Division III ponies. Distance 6 furlongs. Entrance Fee $10.
RACE NO. 4 [4.0 p.m.
SIMPANG TIGA STAKES.
Value $250. Second to receive $100 Third $25.
A handicap for Division I ponies. Distance 3 furlongs. Entrance Fee $10.
RACE NO. 5 [4.30 p.m.
THE MATANG STAKES.
Value $250. Second to receive $100. Third $25.
A handicap for Division II ponies. Distance 4 furlongs. Entrance Fee $10.
RACE NO. 6 [5.0 p.m.
THE PENDING STAKES.
Value $200. Second to receive $75. Third $25.
A handicap for Division III ponies. Distance 3 furlongs. Entrance Fee $10.
RACE NO. 7 [5.30 p.m.
THE RANEE’S CUP.
Value $250. A piece of plate of the value of $100 presented by Her Highness the Ranee with $150 added. Second to receive $100. Third $25.
A handicap for ponies of any Division. Distance 1 mile. Entrance Fee $10.
SECOND DAY. MONDAY, 20TH MARCH. 1933.
RACE NO. 1 [2.30 p.m.
THE SLUMP STAKES.
Value $250. Second to receive $100. Third $25.
A handicap for Division I ponies. Distance 5 furlongs. Entrance Fee $10.
RACE NO. 2 [3.0 p.m.
THE COUNTRY STAKES.
Value $250 presented by the Turf Club. Second to receive $100. Third $25.
A handicap for Division II ponies. Distance 6 furlongs. Entrance Fee $10.
RACE NO. 3 [3.30 p.m.
THE SARAWAK STAKES.
Value $200. Second to receive $75. Third $25.
A handicap for Division III ponies. Distance 5 furlongs. Entrance Fee $10.
RACE NO. 4 [4.0 p.m.
THE TURF CLUB STAKES.
Value $250. Second to receive $100. Third $25.
A handicap tor Division I ponies. Distance 4 furlongs. Entrance Fee $10.
RACE NO. 5 [4.30 p.m.
THE STATE SPRINT.
Value $250. Second to receive $100. Third $25.
A handicap tor Division IT ponies. Distance 3 furlongs. Entrance Fee $10.
RACE NO. 6 [5.0 p.m.
THE TOWN STAKES.
Value $200. Second to receive $75. Third $25.
A handicap for Division III ponies. Distance 4 furlongs. Entrance Fee $10.
RACE No. 7 [5.30 p.m.
THE RAJAH’S CUP.
Value $300. A piece of plate value $150 presented by His Highness the Rajah with $150 added. Second to receive $100. Third $35.
A handicap tor ponies of any Division. Distance Race-course (about 1.1/3 Miles.) Entrance Fee $10. $5 refunded to non-acceptors. Handicap published on the Course. Post Entries allowed at $20 but no refund.
REGULATIONS.
Penalties. -Winners of any race at this Meeting after publication of weights shall carry a penalty of 7 lbs. for each race with a maximum of 11 stone 7 lbs.
Allowance. -Professional Jockeys who are Sarawak subjects and have not ridden more than two winners under Sarawak Turf Club Rules, may claim an allowance of 5 lbs.
Entries. -All nominations, accompanied by Entrance Fees, description of ponies, and declaration of colours, to be made to the Honorary Secretary not later than noon, 25th February, 1933.
Scratchings. -Owners scratching ponies before p.m. on March 17th for first day. and 5 p.m. on March 19th for second day, will receive back half their entrance fees.
Handicaps. -For First Day will be posted on the Notice Board at the, Sarawak Club at noon on 4th March, and for the Second Day at noon on 19th March.
Course. -Will be open for training on 11th February, at 5.30 a.m.
Ponies. -Must run on the First Day to be eligible for entry in Races on Second Day.
Owners. -Are requested to see that their syces and jockeys obtain necessary badge for entrance to Paddock.
Totalizators and Cash Sweeps as usual.
Prizes 20% reduction if under 5 entries.
Communications to be made to
G. T. BATES,
Acting Honorary Secretary, Sarawak Turf Club.
[Members are requested to apply to the Acting Hon, Secretary for necessary Badges or obtain them at the Grandstand.]
Hari Bahagian Hadiah Murid-murid Sekolah Melayu Kuching.
Bahagian hadiah itu telah di-ada-kan di-dewan Maderasah Melayu pada hari Ithnain 19th December. 1932, jam pukol 4.30 petang yang di-kurniai oleh Dato’-Dato’ kapada murid-murid Sekolah Melayu. Yang hadzir pada kStika itu ia-lah yang berhormat Dato’ Shahbandar yang di-wakil membahagikan hadiah-hadiah itu. Tuan C. F. C. Macaskie setia-usaha perentah Sarawak, Tuan E. O. Bruce Pengganti Resident bahagian yang pertama, Dato’ Emam, Dato’ Hakim, Dato’ Mentri, Tuan Capt. R. E. Le Sueur, setia usaha Bumi Putera, Sarawak, Tuan H. Jacques Penguasa Pelajaran, Dato’ Amar, Dato’ Bentara, Tua-tua Kampong dan Dayang-dayang.
Dahulu dari-pada membahagi-kan hadiah-hadiah yang tersebut itu yang berhomat Dato’ Shahbandar telah melafadz-kan suatu uchapan dan nasihat-nasihat kapada murid-murid semua kemudian Tuan Haji Bol Hassan Nadzir Sekolah-sekolah Melayu menyatakan pemberita-an Sekolah-sekolah Melayu Kuching. Kemudian pula sa-orang murid Maderasah Melayu telah membacha-kan suatu uchapan kapada Dato’-Dato’ dan tuan-tuan semua.
Uchapan dan nasihat yang di-lafadz-kan oleh yang ber-hormat Dato’ Shahbandar.
Yang ber-hormat tuan-tuan sakalian yang hadzir. Sahaya kendak hurai-kan sa-dikit uchapan nasihat kapada budak-budak sekolah, saperti yang ter-sebut di-bawah-ini: -
Habaya-habaya. Hai sakalian kanak-kanak yang ber-budi dan ber-bahgia, dengar-lah oleh-mu akan nasihat ini. Bahawa dengan kemurahan Duli Yang Maha-mulia Tuan Raja kita, telah di-bangun-kan-nya beberapa buah rumah pelajaran. pnda sa-genap tempat dan jajahan. ia-itu dengan beberapa belanja-nya. Serta pula chukup lengkap dengan penguasa dan guru-guru-nya, kerana pakai tempat budak-budak belajar ber-macham-macham pelajaran ‘ilmu dan kapandaian. supaya boleh menjalan-kan akal dan menambah-kan fikiran di-atas sa-suatu apa jua peker-ja’an yang hendak di-usaha-kan pada masa
belakang hari. yang boleh jadi ka-senangan di-atas jalan ka-hidupan kapada masing-masing, bagimana ka-ada-‘an bangsa yang lain-lain. Maka bagitu-lah ka-man’an perentah Raja kapada kita. Kerana hal yang demikian wajib kapada adat negeri supaya jangan jadi sesal kita kapada-nya.
Maka di-atas yang ter-sebut itu, bukan-kah , nanipak kaseh sayang Raja kapada kita? Maka sekarang patut-lah kita menerima shukur kapada Allah mendatang-kan Raja kapada kita, serta beribu-ribu menerima kasih kapada-nya. kirana di-atas jalan usaha dan pilihara-nya kapada kita. Dimikian-lagi. Hai kanak-kanak yang ber-budi ketahwi oleh-mu. Ada-pun ilmu dan kapandian itu, ia-lah tangga kapada pangkat ka-kaya’an. Dan ka-kaya’an itu membawa kapada ka-besaran dan ka-mulian. Maka tiap-tiap hamba Allah yang hidup di-dalam dunia, semua-nya meng-hendaki akan perkara yang ter-sebut itu. Maka tiada-lah sa-orang jua pun yang benchi akan-dia, jikalau demikian ‘ilmu itu-lah tangga akan menaikan-nya. Dan-lagi ‘ilmu dan kepandaian itu-tiada-lah ia-pandai habis atau hilang, bagai-mana ka-adan herta dunia, jika becherai nyawa dari-pada badan baharu-lah ia-b chirai. Sougia-nya. bagi kanak-kanak yang ber-budi, mudah-mudahan-lah kira-nya di-buka-kan Allah mata hati-nya, silagi ada hayat, jangan-lah kamu lalai dari-pada menuntut-nya, sementara pada masa muda-mu. la-lah ketika peluang yang sa-baik baik-nya, kerana ada-lah beneh yang demikian. barang di-mana ter-champak melain-kan bertumboh. Dan-lagi jikalau ada bagi-mu ‘ilmu dan kepandaian itu. tiada-lah engkau ter-buang atau di-hina-kan orang, melain-kan ter-mulia-lah jua dari dunia sampai ka-akhirat dengan sejahtera- nya.
Pada akhir-nya sahaya uehapa-kan beribn-ribu ter-ima kaseh di-atas perentah Duli Yang Maha Mulia, menitah-kan sahaya mengunjok-kan hadiah kapada budak-budak yang lebeh pengtahuan. pada tiap-tiap pangkat dan darjah-nya. Demikian juga banyak-bnnyak ter-ima kaseh kapada Yang Mulia Tuan H. Jacques Penguasa Pelajaran siapa yang telah menjalan-kan banyak-banyak p r-usahn-an nya di-atas pelajaran budak-budak sa-kolah, dan jua kapada Tuan Haji Bol Hassan Nadzir-sekolah- sekolah Melayu serta sa-kalian (Guru-guru-demi- kian-lah ada-nya.
Pemberita-an Sekolah-sekolah Melayu yang di-lafadz-kan oleh Tuan Haji Bol Hassan.
Maderasah Melayu.
Murid-murid Maderasah itu berjumlah hampir-hampir 400 orang 82 peratus-nya dari-pada yang tersebnt itu telah lulus dari-pada periksa-an. Bacha-an, tulis-an, dan kira-kira mereka itu terlebeh baik dari-pada tahun-tahun yang dalulu. Keda- tangan murid-murid nampak rajin semua-nya.
Pada sa-tahun dua ini tiga pelajaran baharu telah di-mulai-kan ia-itu p lajarau berkebon, bertukang kayu dan anyam-anyaman. Ketiga-tiga pelajaran itu nampak-nya maju.
Sekolah Merpati Jepang.
Sekolah itu berjumlah murid-nya 96 orang, 70 dari-pada yang tersebut itu telah lulus dari-pada pereksa-an. Pelajaran mereka itu bacha’an. tulis-an, dan kira-kira sedarhana baik. kedatangan murid- murid-nya pun rajin. Pada tahun ini Sekolah itu telah di-ada-kan dengan pelajaran berkebon juga, di-harap-kan pelajaran itu akan mansang.
Sekolah Kampong Gersik.
Sekolah itu berjumlah 134 murid-nya. Pelajaran mereka-itu-bacha’an, tulis-an dan renchana sedarhana baik, tetapi kira-kira mereka itu ada tekurang sa-dikit.
Sekolah Enche Boyong.
Sekolah itu berjumlah murid-nya 84 orang. Pelajaran mereka itu, bacha’an, tulis-an dan ren-chana-nya baik tetapi kedatangan murid-murid ada terkurang sadikit.
Sekolah Pemaisuri.
Sekolah itu bejumlah murid-nya 51 orang sahaja. 48 orang dari-pada yang tersebut itu telah lulus dari-pada pereksa-an. Bacha-an, tulis-an dan jahitan sangat baik dan kedatangan mereka itu pun demikian juga. Sekolah itu ha-nya di-enggankan dengan sa-banyak 51 orang dahulu, dari-kerana bilek pelajaran itu tiada menyukupi. Kelak apa-bila sekolah ini telah di-besar-kan nes-chaya ber- kehendak pula kapada murid-murid lagi.
Dan lagi pula sahaya nyatakan ia-itu pada tahun ini 3 orang guru-guru yang berjasa telah behanti dari-pada jawatan-nya ia-itu Mohd. Amin guru besar Maderasah Melayu. Abang Haji Hipni guru penu-long dan Mohd. Sirat guru besar Sekolah Merpati Jepang. Keberhantian mereka itu sangat memberi duka-chita dan kenangan kapada murid-murid dan kapada guru-guru ada-nya.
Uchapan yang di-bacha oleh sa-orang murid.
Dengan beberapa gemar dan suka-chita di-hati kami murid-murid Sekolah Melayu dan guru-guru kami menyambut kehadziran Dato’-Dato’, Dayang-dayang, Tua-tua Kampong dan Tuan-tuan semua yang sudi mensaksi-kan hari hahagian hadiah kami pada ujian tahun ini. Sunggoh-nya hadiah itu telah di-berhenti-kan pada sa-tahun dua yang lain oleh kerana masa kepichek-kan. Maka dengan kasehan dan kemurahan Dato’-Dato’ semua kembali-lah hadiah itu semula serasa-rasa kejatohan hujan bagi menyubor-kan tumboh-tumboban pada musim yang sedang kemarau. Maka oleh yang demikian ber-banyak-banyak-lah kami menjunjong terima kaseh serta mempaku-kan segala kebudian dan nasihat mereka-itu kedalam batu kapala kami. Di-harap-harap ia-nya tiada menjadi luroh atau lun-tor selama-lama-nya kerana ada-lah hadiah-nya itu sa-olah-olah baja kami pada menuntut pelajaran dan nasihat-nya itu sulohan kami pada sebarang kegelapan. Bah-kan berdoa-lah kami ka-hadzrat Tuhan Yang Maha Tinggi mudah-mudahan di- balasi-kan-nya Dato’-Dato’ semua akan sebagai balas-an yang kebajikan berlanjutan asia turun-temurun memangku jawatan yang kemashoran supaya terhampit-lah kami anak-anak negri-nya akan keharuman yang sangat di-chita-chitai itu ada-nya, Amin.
St. Michael’s Catholic Club.
WELCOME TO THE REV. FR, JOSEPH CHIN TING HUONG.
On Sunday, 18th December, the Catholic community of Kuching had the great joy of welcoming the Rev Fr. Joseph Chin Ting Huong, the first Sarawak boy to be raised to the dignity of the Priesthood.
Fr. Chin began his school life in Sibu under the Rev. Fr. Quadekker, thence he proceeded to St. Joseph’s School, Kuching, later going to Canton. The last six years of his student life were spent at the General College, Penang, and there on 4th December, in the presence of the Right Rev. Mgr. Dunn, Prefect Apostolic of Sarawak, Fr. Chin received the Sacrament of Ordination at the hands of His Lordship Bishop Perron.
Fr. Chin sang his first Solemn High Mass on Sunday, 18th December, and as a newly ordained Priest has a special privilege when celebrating his first High Mass, this ceremony was carried out in the presence of a large congregation, with all due solemnity, thus commencing a new chapter in the history of the Catholic Church in Sarawak.
In the evening a dinner was given by the members of St. Michael’s Catholic Club in honour of Fr. Chin. Over a hundred members and guests partook of the excellent fare, and among the guests besides Mgr. Dunn and the Fathers of the Mission, we were honoured by the presence of the Director of Education, Mr. H. Jacques, and Mr. W. J. Chater, Prominent members of the Chinese community were also present, among them being Dr. Tan Sim Poh, Messrs. Tan Boon Siew, Tan Sum Guan, Law Cheng Hiang, Tan Buck Lim, C. P. Law and Kuek Choo Seng. When the time for speeches arrived Mgr. Dunn mentioned that it was the Holy Father’s oft repeated desire that every nation should have its own Priests and that at last Sarawak had been successful. The Hon. Secretary of the Club, Mr. L. K. L. Chan, next made a very appropriate speech and, after several other speeches, Fr. Chin expressed his thanks for the many congratulations and kindnesses he had received.
This concluded the more formal part of the proceedings, and after some music rendered by the old boys of the School, the gathering dispersed, all well pleased with the day’s celebrations.
Second Division News.
November, 1932.
Extracts from the Second Divisional Reports by Mr. J. B. Archer, Resident: -
On 2nd instant I passed sentenced of death on a Sebuyow Malay for the murder of a Chinese trader there last mouth. This sentence was subsequently confirmed by the Supreme Court and carried out.
On the 18th, 58 N.C.O.’s and men of the Sarawak Constabulary arrived from Kuching and were despatched to Engkilili on the 9th and 10th, after having been detailed off into three columns, commanded respectively by Mr. A. Macpherson, Mr. J. R. Combe and Mr. J. C, H. Barcroft.
On the 10th, accompanied by these Officers, I proceeded to Engkilili, where final arrangements were made for the troops to go up river to their various destinations. The columns left Engkilili on the 12th and I returned to Simanggang.
I left for Saratok on the 28th and was still away at the end of the month.
Various Third Division Dyaks, who had run over into this Division in connection with the rebels, were arrested and returned to Sibu.
At the end of the month Dyak affairs were in the same unsatisfactory state, but blockhouses, strongly garrisoned, had been established in the Ulu Ai, Lobang Bayar. and Engkari.
The kitchens of Debak Barracks were destroyed by fire.
A grandson was born to Datu Haji Dulrashid.
SIMANGGANG DISTRICT.
November, 1932.
The Cadet Officer, Mr. W. H. C. C. Morice, reports: -
Crime. -On the 30th November, 1932, Matasim bin Sam, of Sebuyow, was executed for murder.
Agriculture. -Padi planting is in full swing. It is hoped that a fairly good harvest will be reaped.
Pepper. -The Inspector is examining gardens in the Engkilili district and will be returning to Simanggang shortly. These gardens seem to be doing well. A good crop is hoped for in August, 1933. Some of the old gardens are suffering from pests but new ones in the Undup and Entulang are doing very well.
Trade: -
General. -The 11th, Armistice Day, was a public holiday. The two minutes’ silence was duly observed. On the 14th Mr. J. C. B. Fisher left for Lingga, returning on the 17th with the troops from Kuching.
On the 22nd, Mr. D. A. Leach, Surveyor, arrived from Kuching in connection with the work in this Division. He had not left at the end of the month.
On the 10th, Mr. A. Macpherson, Mr. J. B. Combo and Mr. J. C. H. Barcroft, left for Lobang Bayar, Engkari, and the Ulu Ai respectively. They are still away at the moment of writing.
ENGKILILI DISTRICT.
November, 1932.
The Assistant District Officer, Mr. A. Macpherson, reports: -
Total rainfall 12.42 inches.
Trade: -
SARIBAS.
November, 1932.
The Acting Assistant District Officer, Mr. J. R. Combe, reports: -
Trade: -
General. -Visitors during the month were Messrs. L. K. Morse and D. L. Leach; the later left Betong for Bukit Sadok and the former heard Court Cases and other matters.
SARATOK DISTRICT.
November, 1932.
The District Officer, Mr. R. L. Daubeny, reports: -
Trade: -
Staff. -The Acting Assistant District Officer, Mr. Morse, handed over the affairs of the district to me on 1st December.
General. -The Acting Assistant District Officer visited Saribas (Betong. Pusa and Debak) from 17th to 24th, when various outstanding cases were settled.
The Resident, Second Division, arrived here in the m.l. Anne on 28th and returned to Simanggang again on 1st December.
I arrived here on 30th instant by s.s. Lucille to take over the affairs of the district from Mr. Morse, who left for Kuching on 1st instant.
On 11th November, Armistice Day, the customary ceremonials were duly carried out.
SURVEY DEPARTMENT.
November, 1932.
The Assistant Superintendent of Surveys, Mr. N. Mace, reports: -
During November, gardens were demarcated by prismatic compass, and the work finished at Stirau, Ulu Sebuyau, and along the banks of the Batang Lupar below Stumbin.
Controls were completed at the mouth of the Sebuyau, excluding Batang Raba, and in the Sungei Tatai.
The three theodolite men were transferred to Kuching for a month’s training, together with one prismatic compass man. This leaves only two men, prismatic compass here, both engaged on demarcation of gardens.
I visited all parties except one which had finished its work just as I arrived, making the journey mainly by prahu, with help from the Anne from Stirau to Lingga, and from the Hong Heng Huat from Lingga to Simanggang. The trip included visits to Stirau, Ulu Stumbin, Kranji, and Ulu Sebuyau.
Third Division News.
November, 1932.
Extracts from the Third Divisional Resorts by Mr. C. D. Adams, Resident: -
SIBU AND KANOWIT DISTRICT.
November, 1932.
The District Officer, Mr. W. F. Dick, reports: -
Trade: -
The corpse of a Dyak boy was found floating at Singat. It was subsequently discovered that this was probably the corpse of a boy drowned at Gat.
Dunggaw, a Dyak concerned in the murders at Kanto in Dutch territory, was arrested and brought down on 9th.
General. -The offices were closed on Friday, November 11th, the two minutes’ silence was observed at the end of which the last post was sounded by the Constabulary buglers.
SARIKEI, BINATANG AND REJANG.
November, 1932.
The Acting Assistant District Officer, Mr. F. L. Crossley, reports: -
Crime. -Acting on two reports of housebreaking by night and robbery with violence the police made a search of Chinese houses in the Sungei Nyelong. Some of the stolen property was discovered in the house of a Cantonese named Chee Peng, who had, however, absconded.
Agriculture. -All Dyak hill padi is flourishing and promises a good crop. The Sungei Tukup Chinese padi in Binatang is reported to be failing, but reports from other areas are so far encouraging.
Trade: -
General. -I left Sarikei on the 18th, together with Native Officers Wan Ibrahim and Abang Openg, to visit Drake. I proceeded up the ulu Sarikei, thence over into the Wak and Julau rivers, returning via the Pakan and the Nyelong. Abang Openg accompanied me only as far as the ulu Sarikei. Penghulus Seli and Andin, the new penghulus, were with me on the entire trip, which took ten days. There is nothing outstanding to report, the district being quiet.
Binatang was twice visited during the month, and I was in Sibu for the Armistice Day holiday.
Visitors to Sarikei included Mr. Roach, of the Island Trading Company, Selalang, and Mr. Daly of the Steamship’ Company.
MUKAH DISTRICT.
November, 1932.
The Acting District Officer, Mr. J. J. Hill, reports: -
Dyak and Native Affairs. -The main Mukah river and Selangau were visited between the 9th and the 21st instant. Although all the Dyaks were complaining about the hard times it was noted that at least a third of the houses have still plenty of padi for food. Eight Dyaks from Rumah Juieng, Batang Mukah, are reported to have proceeded overland to Sibu, Kanowit or Song without passes. The Officer-in-Charge of Constabulary, Sibu. has been informed. In one or two of the houses “lampit” mats were seen. On inquiring the price the writer was astonished to find that the owners still asked the same prices as were ruling in 1926-27 during the boom period.
Agriculture. -The 1932-33 padi crop, from all accounts, will be very poor in this district. The main reason for this was the weather, as only some 10 days of consecutive fine weather was experienced.
The burns were, therefore, in the majority poor, and in consequence grass is plentiful on the farms. The usual pests are also in abundance.
The weather has been, in the main, very stormy, although on the whole very little rain has been experienced in the station.
Trade: -
Remarks. -236 1/2 koyans of raw sago, 280 piculs of Jelutong, and 2 1/2 piculs of Gutta Jangkar were exported during the month.
Shipping. -During the month 11 vessels entered and 13 vessels cleared the port.
Stormy weather has been prevalent during most of the month and several vessels have been in port for over a mouth awaiting a favourable opportunity to clear.
The m.l. Leonora left for Oya on the 27th and had not returned at the end of the month.
General. -On the 9th instant, accompanied by Abang Mustapha, Native Officer, I left by m.l. Leonora for the ulu Mukah. The objects of the trip were to collect outstanding door tax, firearms tax, fines, and to familiarize myself with the district. The river was very low, and after four days boating we arrived at the house of Penghulu Umpoh, which is the last house in the ulu Mukah. From here I proposed to walk across to Rumah Tuieng in the ulu Selangau, as I had heard that there was an old path. On the following morning we left at about 7 a.m. and, after following a padi farm path for about half an hour, came into thick jungle. The path was now no longer visible and we followed pig tracks for the next four hours. Several hills of considerable height, including Bukit Trusang, Bukit Panai, Bukit Jatan, were climbed. Rumah Tuieng was eventually reached at 4.20 p.m. I found out later that this path is seldom used by Dyaks and has never been used by a European before. In this way two nights were saved and it was found possible to visit houses in the ulu Gigis and ulu Sikat. I returned to the station on the 21st instant.
On the 11th instant, Armistice Day, the offices were closed. During my absence Mr. W. M. Johnson, Sarawak Oilfields, Limited, paid a short visit to the station.
OYA AND DALAT DISTRICT.
November, 1932.
The Acting Assistant District Officer, Mr. N. E. Hughes, reports: -
Agriculture. -The weather was poor during most of the month, rain being plentiful.
In the ulu, padi prospects are bad owing to the wet weather having prevented the Dayaks from getting a proper burn. On many farms the young padi looks very thin, and in some cases it has not come up at all. Catch-crops such as jagong are very behindhand.
At Bungan, in the Igan, the padi promises to turn out well.
Trade: -
Remarks. -Sago maintained a slightly higher price during the month, 40 cents per pasu being at one time offered in Dalat bazaar.
Shipping. -M.V. Kim Chin Seng cleared on November 11th, having been held up by rough seas for 29 days.
General. -On November 11th I left for up river, accompanied by Wan Hussein, Native Officer, and three police, using the Bujang Rimba which the Divisional Forests Officer had kindly placed at my disposal. In the course of this trip every house except two in the Lower Oya, S. Paku and tributaries, was visited, and a number of outstanding disputes were settled.
On November 22nd I reached Rumah Gasieng, S. Bekikek; on the following morning I walked to S. Tua, then on to Pengarah Ngalambong’s house at Nanga Bawan, whence I reached Kanowit by boat. The walk from the Bekikek to the Bawan takes about five hours, and in the course of it a view is obtained from the top of Bukit Kati which rivals that to be seen from Matang. Kanowit hill stands up in the centre foreground, and one can see as far as the hills in the ulu Ngemah on the one side and the ulu Julau and ulu Sarikei on the other.
At Rumah Penghulu Untol, Nanga Susut, I met the Reverend Father Buis, of the R.C. Mission, Kanowit, who informed me that he intends to build a permanent Church and quarters at Nanga Susut in the course of the next few months.
I returned to Dalat via Sibu and S. Kut on November 26th.
Visitors to the station included Captain C. D. Le Gros Clark, Secretary tor Chinese Affairs, and Mr. J. L. Noakes, Assistant Superintendent of Surveys, Third Division.
KAPIT DISTRICT.
November, 1932.
The Acting Assistant District Officer, Mr. D. C. Hudden, reports: -
Shipping. -S.S. Angby made two trips during the month and s.s. Soon Ann four.
General. -The Divisional Forest Officer, accompanied by Penghulu Temonggong Koh, arrived back from the headwaters of the Balleh and Gat on the 1st, and left for Sibu on the 3rd. He reports ideal jungle between the Menyong and the Gat and suggests a large reserve with natural boundaries to prevent the destruction of valuable timber through Dyak farming methods. This is almost the only large area of virgin jungle left in the Balleh. All other forest has re-grown from old farming land and the timber is of little value.
The Rev. J. P. Stamor, who was on leave from Sumatra, spent several days in the station towards the beginning of the month, and accompanied me on a short visit to the Yong. On the 7th, he returned with me to Sibu in m.l. Young Harry. I was in Sibu until the end of the week, returning with the Resident when he brought up the relief patrols for the Kanowit, Katibas, etc., on the 12th.
On the 22nd, I visited the Chermin for one night, and on the 28th, the Amang. Continual quarrels are occurring in the latter between the Dyaks and the Chinese in the Foochow settlement, who appear to have no regard for any customs other than their own. In addition they have again gone over the boundary and started felling Dyak jungle.
The Divisional Land Officer arrived on a visit of inspection on the 23rd, and departed for Sibu on the 27th.
During the month I received two letters from Mr. T. H. Harrison, a member of the Oxford Expedition now in the Baram district. Mr. Harrison has, apparently, come over from the Tinjar and has been collecting specimens in the Belaga. Having got as far as Belaga it seems a pity that he did not come the rest of the comparatively short distance to Kapit.
Rainfall. -The rainfall for the month was 7.95 inches.
MATU AND DARO DISTRICT.
November, 1932.
The Officer-in-Charge, Mr. G. F. J. Pegler, reports: -
Trade: -
General. -On the 31st October I proceeded to Kampong Tian and from there went overland to Daro.
The work on the new canal from this kampong to the ulu Daro makes very slow progress owing to the flooded state of the land through which the canal is being made.
I again visited Daro on the 28th instant and was still there at the end of the month.
Fourth Division News.
MIRI.
October, 1932.
Extracts from the Fourth Divisional Reports by Mr. F. G. Carpenter, Acting Resident: -
Agriculture. -A much larger area is under padi cultivation than in previous years, and prospects are good generally. An exceptionally wet October is said to have been of infinite assistance to the crop, which is reported to be healthy everywhere.
Trade: -
Remarks. -Apart from oil the chief export trade is in jelutong. This produce is worked in large quantities in the district, but the quality produced is said to be exceptionally bad, due apparently to varying methods of coagulation employed by the tappers. This has been made the subject of separate correspondence.
November, 1932.
Health. -Dispensary Patients 100; repetition attendances 394.
Trade: -
Staff. -I handed over the affairs of the Fourth Division to Mr. H. D. Aplin on the 2nd, and resumed the duties of District Officer.
BARAM
October, 1932.
The Acting District Officer, Mr. F. H. Pollard, reports: -
Courts. -An inquiry was held into the death of a small Dyak boy from Sungei Lai, Bakong, who was accidentally speared by another small boy, who was exonerated from all blame. Pati Nyawa of $60 was awarded to the relations of the dead boy.
Agriculture. -Padi prospects are poor owing to heavy floods.
Rainfall. -Rainfall amounted to 10.07 inches.
Trade: -
Gutta jangkar having shown a substantial rise in price. Letters were sent up river advising people to work this in preference to rotan.
General. -I returned from Kuching via Miri on 5th. Mr. White and Wan Suror visited the Dyaks at Poyut, Sebatang and Linai from 11th to 16th. Accompanied by Messrs. Hartley and Shackleton of the Oxford University Expedition I left for Long Lama on 31st.
November, 1932.
Agriculture. -The padi on the river banks has again been washed out by phenomenal floods. Rainfall amounted to 14.21 inches.
Trade: -
General. -On 3rd I returned from Long Lama with Mr. Shackleton of the Oxford University Expedition, Mr. Hartley staying at Long Laput to investigate the birdsnest caves there. Mr. Shackleton later succeeded in climbing Mt. Mulu.
Mr. White and Tuanku Mohamed left on 12th to visit the Tutoh and Apoh and meet the Penans at L. Melinau. The returned on 18th.
On 18th I left for L. Lejok, Mr. Hartley accompanying me as far as L. Tru whence be visited Luagan Luak. I returned to Baram on 24th, accompanied by Messrs. Richards and Hartley.
Mr. Banks and Messrs. Harrison, Hobby, Ford and Moore arrived at Baram on 29th.
BINTULU.
October, 1932.
The Assistant District Officer, Mr. J. G. Anderson, reports: -
Visitors. -Visitors to the station included Mrs. Pitt-Hardacre and Mrs. Hammond from Kuching, Mr. J. G. Gjording, of 7th day Adventist Mission, who visited Tatau, and Mr. R. L. Moir of the Borneo Company, Limited, Kuching.
Trade and Customs. -The trade statistics for the month were as follows: -
The principle exports during the month were as under: -
Fifth Division News.
LIMBANG.
November, 1932.
Extracts from the Fifth Divisional Reports by Mr. F. H. Kortright, Resident: -
Health. -General health-good.
Dr. Martindell, Medical Officer, Brunei, made his monthly visit on the 29th.
Agriculture. -Rainfall 18.96 inches.
There is promise of a good rice crop this year.
Trade: -
P.W.D. -The usual maintenance of roads and of the station was carried out.
General. -On the 2nd Mr. W. P. N. L. Ditmas, Cadet, returned from vacation leave, accompanied by Lieut.-Colonel and Mrs. Ditmas.
The Resident, Fifth Division, left for Kuching to attend to official matters on the 9th, and returned on the 30th.
11th November, Armistice Day was observed as a public holiday.
Lieut-Colonel, Mrs. and Mr. Ditmas visited Lawas.
Other visitors to the station were Mr. Gifford, of British American Tobacco Company, Messrs. Aitken and Tolley, of the Borneo Evangelical Mission, Sungei Prangga, and Mr. and Mrs. Clarke from South Africa, who passed through on their way to visit the Mission at Sungei Prangga, for a few days. They left on the 30th.
Mr. W. P. N. L. Ditmas, Cadet, was promoted to be Acting Assistant District Officer, Limbang, on the 14th November.
LAWAS.
November, 1932.
The Acting Assistant District Officer, Mr. J. O. Gilbert, reports
Obituary. -It is regretted to have to announce the death of Kho Kong Kian, ex-Court Writer, Trusan, which occurred on Sunday the 13th. Kho Kong Kian, was only invalided out of the service on October 6th after 16 years’ service in this district.
Rainfall. -Lawas 21 inches.
Rubber exported from Lawas (Sarawak) Rubber Estate 34,496 lbs.
The padi is looking good, and a good harvest is expected.
Trade: -
General. -On Armistice Day a sports meeting was held at Lawas and the final for the football shield was played, the Government Team treating Trusan 3-1. Heavy rain fell most of the day which rather spoilt the enjoyment. Visitors were Lieut.-Colonel and Mrs. Ditmas and W. P. Ditmas, Esq., from Limbang, and Messrs. O’Reilley and Gifford from Labuan, Mr. and Mrs. Colina and Mr. Cook from Tagai.
