VOL. LXIII.
No. 961.
The Sarawak Gazette
Price
KUCHING, Monday, October 2nd, 1933.
20 CENTS.
Contents.
The Sarawak Gazette	MONDAY, OCTOBER 2nd, 1933.
Local and Personal.
SEPTEMBER.
His Highness the Rajah’s birthday occurred on Tuesday, 26th September. At 8 a.m. a salute of twenty-one guns was fired from Fort Margherita. His Highness the Tuan Muda presented Long Service Decorations and Medals at the Court House. We take this opportunity of wishing His Highness the Rajah very many happy returns of the day.
His Highness the Tuan Muda left on a short visit to Mukah and Oya by H.H.M.Y. Maimunu on 15th September, returning on 19th. His Highness was accompanied by Mr. A. A. Rennie, Treasurer, Mr. C. P. Lowe, Director of Public Works, and Mr. R. H. Bateman, Manager of the Sarawak Electricity Supply Company.
A most enjoyable dance was given by His Highness the Tuan Muda at Astana on the eve of His Highness the Rajah’s birthday.
Mr. C. E. L. Blagg returned from home leave by s.s. Vyner Brooke, arriving at Kuching on 25th September.
The “Midah Bangsawan” of Singapore arrived on 15th September, and has played nightly to large audiences. Their performances are excellent and have been much appreciated by all communities.
A severe storm occurred on the afternoon of Friday, 29th September. Thunder, lightning and heavy rain was experienced We understand The Residency was struck by lightning but fortunately no serious damage was sustained.
A number of visitors for race week arrived at the end of the month, including Messrs. P. M. Adams, H. E. Cutfield, F. L. Crossley, and B. J. C. Spurway from Sibu; Mr. and Mrs. R. H. Carew, and Mr. and Mrs. H. M. Ince from British North Borneo.
His Highness the Rajah’s Birthday.
Tuesday, 26th September, being His Highness the Rajah’s birthday, a Public Holiday was observed throughout the State. A salute of twenty-one guns was fired from Fort Margherita at 8 a.m., and all ships in port were dressed. After the salute His Highness the Tuan Muda proceeded from Astana to the Pangkalan Batu were a Guard of Honour of the Sarawak Constabulary were drawn up under the command of Mr. D. V. Murphy. After inspecting the Guard, His Highness proceeded to the Court House, where all European and Native Government Officers were assembled. His Highness then distributed Long Service Decorations.
During the afternoon sports were held at the Sarawak Constabulary Depot, Fort Margherita. There were many spectators representative of all classes of the community. Fine weather, the gaily decorated ground, and the excellent music rendered by the Constabulary Band, all went to make a very enjoyable afternoon.
Obituary.
We regret, to record the death of the Reverend Mother Mary Agnes of Assisi of the Order of St. Francis, which took place on the morning of 30th September at St. Theresa’s Convent, Kuching. Mother Agnes came to Sarawak in 1891 and, except for a short term of service at Singghi, was stationed at Kuching for nearly forty-three years.
During the last few years she had very poor health, but we who had the privilege of knowing her could but admire her patience, under suffering and will miss her.
The Funeral Ceremony on 1st October was attended by almost the entire Catholic Community of Kuching and many other friends of the Mission Sisters. A Requiem Mass on 2nd October was also well attended. R.I.P.
We wish to convey our heartfelt sympathy to the Sisters of St. Theresa’s Convent in their bereavement.
Death of Datu Haji Dulrashid.
On the 16th August, after an illness of only a week, Datu Haji Dulrashid. Senior Native Officer of the Second Division, died at his residence in Simanggang.
The Datu was the eldest son of the late Abang Haji Abdullah, himself a Government Officer of many years, and the Government tradition extends as far back as the Datu’s grandfather. After some years spent in helping his father and as a school-master the Datu was appointed a Native Officer in April, 1905, and after service, in most of the stations in the Division was promoted to the dignity of Datu in January, 1924, and from thence onwards was Senior Native Officer. He was sworn in to the Council Negri in 1909.
For the last ten years the Datu had been suffering from a disability which might well have appalled many others; in spite of this, however, he never lost the energy he displayed in earlier years, and the courage and cheerfulness with which he faced his troubles is an example to those who suffer similar misfortunes.
The late Datu was an authority on padi cultivation, and his knowledge in this respect was of great use to Government. Belonging to an older generation, yet he kept himself abreast of the times, and read and wrote Romanized Malay with ease and had some knowledge of English.
Many European Government Officers will remember his genial manner and the patience with which he explained any native customs or words to the newly arrived.
A personal friend of His Highness the Rajah and of His Highness the Tuan Muda, a personal friend to many Officers, and a tried and trusty Government servant, the loss to the State is inestimable, and the memory of “Datu Dul” will remain green for many a day.
The late, Datu married Dayang Isah, daughter of the late Datu Haji Tamin of Simanggang, and leaves a widow, a son and three daughters, to whom we extend our sincere sympathy. The Datu and his family, with the exception of the youngest daughter, made the pilgrimage to Mecca in 1922-23.
The funeral took place in the afternoon of the 17th in the presence of a large assembly of Malays and Chinese.
The whole Government Staff at Simanggang and several others from other stations, headed by the Resident, followed the body to the grave where a detachment of Sarawak Constabulary was drawn up. -O.F.
Tropical Golf.
There was a man playing golf yesterday at Alwoodley in shorts and a solar topee. Wise chap! -though a friend of mine who has played golf in a topee in China tells me that it is very hard to keep your eye on the ball and your topee on your head at the same time. It has an awkward way of spinning round like a roulette wheel at the moment of impact.
In this country, tropical outfits might serve to indicate the status of the player. Clearly a solar topee and shorts call for a plus man. A scratch man may wear shorts but no topee, and those with handicaps of 4 and 5 will be allowed puggaree. And so, working down to handicaps of 24 or thereabouts, we come to the good old panama hat. Players whose performance does not warrant even a 24 handicap must be content to go round with a handkerchief knotted over their ears.
The sight of this man in his topee and shorts lent Alwoodley quite a tropical aspect, I am told. So tropical, in fact, that I can well imagine the pukka sahibs stretching their legs in the club house, and calling impatiently for chota pegs and stengahs. -Yorkshire Post.
Johore’s Peasantry.
One of the most startling facts brought out by the Rice Cultivation Committee was that the amount of rice produced in Johore each year is only sufficient to feed the Malay population of that State for three weeks. This is a situation that can be paralleled nowhere else in the Malay Peninsula. Except for the coconut districts of the West Coast, it is believed that the Malay population of every State except Johore is now self-supporting in its rice supply, and most districts are producing a small surplus for sale. Since the Johore Malay is no less dependent upon rice as a staple food than his compatriots elsewhere, it is clear that he has been content to rely upon cash crop, to a degree unique in this country, and is in an extremely vulnerable position should another wave of depression sweep over the world. Fortunately, the Johore Malay counterbalances this weakness in one direction with strength in another, in that he lives under a government which is the only one in Malaya in possession of substantial reserve funds at the present lime. All the Unfederated Malay States are balancing their budgets this year, thus selling an example to the much-landed Federation, but Johore goes one better by having surplus money to spend on productive works. As Mr. B. J. R. Barton has pointed out recently, Johore can afford to assist its Malay population financially. and the only question is whether a promising means of doing so is available. Mr. Barton’s proposal to give permanency to the present increase in rice cultivation in Johore by means of agricultural training and land settlement has been commented upon sceptically in this newspaper, for the reason that a new land policy would be necessary to prevent a return to rubber during a long period of high prices, and even if such a policy were adopted it would be most difficult to enforce in a very numerous and scattered rural population.
Nevertheless, there can be no doubt at all that rice cultivation offers the most suitable object of expenditure in Johore at the present time. What can be done with comparatively small sums of money is exemplified by schemes recently undertaken on the east coast of Paining, near Pekan and Kuantan. Here flat, swampy areas have been drained at Government expense and the peasantry have felled and cleared the jungle themselves. These peasants then raise a crop of rice on their holdings, but continue to follow their original vocation as fishermen or coconut growers, leaving their kampongs to work on their padi fields, perhaps four or five miles away as often as may be necessary. Thus they are assured of a supply of their staple food and are no longer solely dependent on one means of livelihood. It was these classes of Malays, and also the small rubber growers in districts where no padi land was available, that suffered most during the period of minimum prices for rubber, copra and all other commodities last year. To-day, in districts where they have added rice cultivation to their activities, they can view another slump much more hopefully. The same thing is happening in the Sabak Bernam district of Selangor, where a large population of Malay fishermen and coconut growers has taken up more than eight thousand acres of newly drained jungle swamp and is getting satisfactory crops of padi off it. In Johore it is most important that every possibility of undertaking small schemes of this kind in proximity to closely settled districts dependent upon fishing, coconuts, rubber other means of livelihood should be explored.
Unfortunately there is little suitable land in the coconut belt from Batu Pahat to the Malacca boundary, and in the rubber district, it is doubtful whether new rice cultivation is practicable except in the small patches that have already come into existence here and there. The only hope of really big development lies in the swamps of eastern Johore, and anyone who is pessimistic about prospects there should remember that the brilliantly successful Krian scheme was earned out in very similar type of country. (There was already a substantial rice area in Krian before the irrigation and drainage scheme was commenced, but a very large part of the present area was at one time under swampy jungle.) In considering the prospects of the Malay settlement of the Endau region it must be borne in mind that land settlement under government auspices has never yet been attempted in the Malay Peninsula in an area as remote and sparsely inhabited as this is. On the other hand, if a long view is taken, it is plain that the natural increase of population on Johore’s west coast will cause either progressive impoverish-ment or an overflow to other districts, and if it is known that good land is available on the west coast there may well be a steady migration to that region. The chances of success of a deliberate policy of Malay settlement on the east coast seem to be bright, for the menace of rubber is largely nullified by the grim alternatives of large production at low prices or small production at slightly higher prices. The Johore smallholder has an inestimable advantage in his proximity to the great marker of Singapore, and he could lead a very much happier and more secure life than he does now if he were to make a fresh start by practising mixed cultivation and husbandry in a new district opened up for him by his benevolent and comparatively wealthy Government. -Straits Times.
OLD SARAWAK.
From the Sarawak Gazette 46 Years Ago.
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE
1887.] THURSDAY, 1ST SEPT., 1887. [Price 10 cents.
Last month His Highness the Rajah graciously distributed the prizes awarded to the pupils of the Malay school during the past year, an account of which ceremony will be found in another column.
The school which was started some five years ago on a very small scale has since been gradually but surely increasing in size and importance, whilst the work done by the pupils has also improved, until at the present time the sixty boys who attend the classes show almost as much aptitude at their work as boys of the same age in an elementary school in England, a fact proved by the eminently satisfactory results of an examination in reading, writing and arithmetic, recently held by Her Highness the Ranee, assisted by Mr. Awdry.
We consider that at present the education given by the school is ample for all practical purposes in Sarawak, as the majority of the rising generation must make their living by the work of their hands aided by common sense rather than by head work alone, and such employments as planting, boat building and working timber can be successfully carried on with a knowledge of the three Rs only, always provided a previous knowledge of the business itself has been obtained. A more advanced education with an extended range of subjects would have a tendency to produce that discontent with one’s lot which is so noticeable in western countries, where almost every one above the class of unskilled labourers aspires to raise himself from the rank of life in which he was born to a higher one, an aspiration praiseworthy, certainly in many places, but which would be fatal in Sarawak, which is not yet ready to receive in all its intricacies the doctrines of European civilization, tending to bring about that block in the labour market of brain-workers which England is now suffering from so severely.
Sarawak Library.
The following books have been purchased by the Committee: -
First Division News.
DISTRICT COURT.
August, 1933.
The Acting District Officer, Mr. W. S. B. Buck, reports: -
General. -His Highness the Tuan Muda’s birthday occurred on the 8th; the Government Offices were closed and a salute of 21 guns was fired from Fort Margherita.
UPPER SARAWAK DISTRICT.
August, 1933.
The Assistant District Officer, Mr. R. G. Aikman, reports: -
Obituary. -I have to report the death, on the 4th, of Orang Kaya Raseh of Sennah. This man had been paramount Chief of the Sennah Land Dyaks for about ten years.
General. -The 8th, being the anniversary of the birthday of His Highness the Tuan Muda, was observed as a Public Holiday and the Government Offices were closed. I left Bau on the 25th for a visit to the Land Dyak villages of Gumbang and Tringgus and returned on the 29th. I was informed that this was the first visit of a Government Officer to the latter kampong for over thirty years and I can well believe it, for the path from Gumbang is virtually non-existent and of most difficult access. There, are three separate kampongs at Tringgus, all situated at the foot of the Bungo range amidst very fine scenery. I was struck by the very large area of farming land at the disposal of both the Gumbang and Tringgus Dyaks. A night was spent at Pengkallan Tebang, not far from Gumbang, where there is a small colony of Chinese rubber and pepper planters, most of whom have lived there all their lives. Telephonic communication was established during the month with the works of the Borneo Gold Mining Syndicate and the Nam Loong Gold Mining Company at Bidi. Visitors to the station during the month included the Acting Principal Medical Officer. Dr. W. Hutchison, the Secretary for Native Affairs. Mr. R. E. Le Sueur, the Assistant Superintendent of Surveys, Mr. W. Harnack, Messrs. Harding, Leach, and Summers. Mr. J. Haderup took over the Managership of Dahan Rubber Estate from Mr. J. B. Simpson, who is proceeding on home leave.
Gold Mining. -The Jebong Gold Mining Syndicate, Limited, at Pegong Tengah, commenced leaching on the 20th. There are now twelve establishments mining for gold by the cyanide process. There are an almost similar number of companies who are constructing their plant, and it would appear that some of these concerns are going to find themselves short of labour, as it is evident that all the available local labour has already been absorbed by existing companies, or have returned to the more congenial work of tapping rubber coincident with the slight rise in the price of that commodity.
It is interesting to note that gold prospectors are now working in localities only a very few miles from the Sarawak-Netherlands Indies border. Forty-one General Prospecting Licences were issued during the month. Six applications for Exclusive Prospecting Licences were received and eleven such licences were issued. Two Provisional Mining Leases were issued. The actual gold obtained by the following Companies for the month of July, 1933, was: -
LUNDU DISTRICT.
August, 1933.
The Acting Assistant District Officer, Mr. E. H. Elam, reports: -
Agriculture. -The natives have started making their padi nurseries and some have started clearing their fields. All are complaining of the incessant rain and good burns are not very likely. Government padi seed has been distributed to various farmers.
Trade: -
There is a welcome revival in the timber trade.
Chan Kee Ong, of the Kuching Sawmills, visited Lundu and placed large contracts for wood with three Malays and two Chinese. Over three hundred people are working and the workers are distributed all over the district, some from Lundu and some from Simatan. There should be no hardship from now on.
SADONG DISTRICT.
August, 1933.
The Acting Assistant District Officer, Mr. S. G. Hansom, reports: -
Dyak and Native Affairs generally. -During the month I visited the Dyaks of the left-hand branch of the Melikin River, and also those of the left and right-hand branches of the Simunjan River. Dyaks appear to be in more or less comfortable circumstances and are in most cases already busy with the planting of their padi.
Agriculture. -Local burning off of padi lands is not yet completed, although in many cases padi has already been planted. It is noticeable that Dyaks are well ahead of local Malays in this respect. Three weeks of exceedingly wet weather have no doubt retarded matters.
The Director of Agriculture had a short visit to Simunjan at the beginning of the month, when I was able to discuss the foregoing and other matters with him.
General. -Mr. J. S. W. Bean, Director of Agriculture, paid a short visit to Simunjan on the 7th instant, by m.l. Para, returning the same evening.
The 8th instant, His Highness the Tuan Muda’s birthday, was observed as a Public Holiday, and Government Offices closed.
Athletic sports, followed by a football competition, were held on the Padang on Sunday the 20th instant, and a very successful and enjoyable day was obtained. Large numbers of Dyaks came down from the Ulu to participate.
On the 23rd instant I started up river, accompanied by Abang Zamhari and Abang Samsudin, Native Officers. Via Gedong, I boated up the Melikin River, visiting Balai Ringin, and the longhouse of
Orang Kaya Rapak. I then walked overland to the Ulu Simunjan, and later visited R. Penghulu Ringkai, R. Jirok, R. Gayau, R. Munggu Ai, R. Pekok and R. Ayu, returning to Simunjan on the 30th instant. The paths encountered during this trip were exceptionally bad.
The rainfall for the month was 10.85 inches.
Chinese Affairs.
August, 1933.
Extracts from the Report of The Secretary for Chinese Affairs, Captain C. D. Le Gros Clark: -
Secretariat for Chinese Affairs. -The rise in prices of many raw products has had its inevitable effect on labour, and a labour shortage in the State is beginning to be felt in various districts. This is not yet acute, but may become so if prices continue to rise, or the market shows signs of stabilization. A memorandum on the subject is now being prepared by the Protector of Labour.
Traffic Regulations.
AUTUMN RACE MEETING, 1933.
1. After the hour of 11 a.m. on the 7th and 9th October, 1933, all Motor Vehicles must proceed to the Race-course via Padungan Road or Ban Hok Road only, and up to the hour of 7 p.m. on these days, must return by the Sekama Road only.
Exceptions: -
1. His Highness the Rajah’s Cars.
2. The Government Secretary.
3. The Resident, First Division, Kuching.
4. The Principal Medical Officer.
5. The Honorary Secretary, Sarawak Turf Club.
6. In cases of extreme urgency permission may be obtained on the Course for other cars to return via Ban Hok Road.
2. After depositing passengers at the Grandstand, vehicles will line up on the extreme left-hand side of the Grandstand road, one behind the other, and within three yards of each other, facing away from the Grandstand.
3. Rickshaws and bicycles may proceed to the Race-course at any time, and by any road, and must park on the Bandstand plot. They will not be allowed to remain on any part of the road leading to the Grandstand or roads leading to the Race-course.
4. All vehicles must move to their parking grounds without delay, as directed by the Constabulary.
WARNING: -
5. The driver of any vehicle: -
(a) endeavouring to turn in Grandstand road or,
(b) Stopping to pick up passengers in Grandstand road,
will be prosecuted for causing an obstruction.
Second Division News.
August, 1933.
Extracts from the Second Divisional Reports by Mr. J. B. Archer. Resident: -
I returned to the Division on the 1st, bringing with me Wan Mahadar, Probationary Native Officer, who has been transferred from Kuching.
I regret to report the death on the 16th of Datu Haji Dulrashid bin Abang Haji Abdullah. His funeral on the next day was attended by all Government Officials and a large number of Malays and Chinese.
Mr. A. Macpherson passed through Simanggang on his return from a patrol in the Engkari and Ulu Skrang.
Mr. J. J. Hill visited Simanggang to discuss Saribas affairs. Mr. B. Summers, Land Officer, left for Kuching on the 9th on transfer.
The constant rain during the month prevented the natives from burning their farms. The slight rise in rubber has brought many gardens into tapping again.
Fifty Ulu Ai Dyaks went to Miri for the Sarawak Oilfields, Limited, and a certain number of other Dyaks are finding Jelutong work in the Fourth Division.
SIMANGGANG DISTRICT.
August, 1933.
The District Officer, Mr. R. L. Daubeny, reports: -
Dyak and Native Affairs generally. -Penghulus Lambai, Goyang, and Grinang, visited the station during the month.
General. -The Resident, Second Division, returned from Kuching on 1st instant. The Resident paid a visit to Engkilili from 18th to 20th instant.
Mr. Fisher left for Kuching for medical treatment on 24th instant and was still away at the end of the month.
Tuesday, 8th instant, the birthday of His Highness the Tuan Muda, was a public holiday. The flagstaff was dressed, and a full-dress parade was held by the Constabulary in front of the offices.
BETONG DISTRICT.
August, 1933.
The Acting District Officer, Mr. J. J. Hill, reports: -
Obituary. -It is with regret that I have to report the death of Kueh Hunt Wee, the late Capitan China of the Betong Bazaar, who died on the 18th instant.
Agriculture. -During the month an abnormal amount of rain has been experienced. It would appear that if the weather does not improve the natives will find it difficult to get good burns for their new farms.
LUBOK ANTU DISTRICT.
August, 1933.
The Assistant District Officer, Mr. A. Macpherson, reports: -
Agriculture. -Ulu Ai burnt off their farms at the end of the month. All other Dyaks are still waiting for another spell of dry weather.
Miscellaneous. -Penghulus Sambau and Nanang visited the station during the month, reporting all well.
News of Datu Haji Dulrashid death was received on 16th. I proceeded to Simanggang, accompanied by P.I. Abang Mentaril, to attend the funeral, returning on 21st with Mr. Baron, Divisional Land Officer.
ENGKILILI DISTRICT.
August, 1933.
The Acting Assistant District Officer, Mr. E. M. Selous, reports: -
Agriculture. -Clearing is now over and the Dyaks are waiting for a dry spell to allow them to begin to burn.
The pepper crop is in full swing and some excellent pepper is being put on the market, though the crop from many gardens has fallen below expectations owing to the prevalence of black disease.
General. -A larga clouded leopard was shot by Dyaks on Tiang Laju on the 30th, its measurements were: Length 6’ 2’’, tail 2’ 9’’, Hind foot 7’’, Ear 2’’. It should also be mentioned that on the 18th July a gavial measuring 14’ 2’’, was shot by Edi bin Hj. Abdulrashid at Batu Kudi-a rare event for this district.
The 8th, being the anniversary of the birthday of His Highness the Tuan Muda, was observed as a holiday.
KALAKA DISTRICT.
August, 1933.
The Acting Assistant District Officer. Mr. J. C. H. Barcroft, reports: -
Agriculture. -The rainfall was exceptionally heavy this month, and some concern is felt by the natives who are practically ready to burn their farms.
Small amounts of black pepper were marketed this month and the quantity of rubber sold was greater than the previous month.
Third Division News.
SIBU AND KANOWIT DISTRICT.
August, 1933.
The District Officer, Mr. W. F. Dick, reports: -
Dyak and Native Affairs. -The Government boundary for Dyak houses in the Ngemah was moved from Wong Silaw to Nanga Lakah, and the Ngemah Dyaks have now agreed to move below the new boundary.
Agriculture. -Owing to heavy rain during the month it is feared that many Dyaks will not get good burns for their farms, this applies especially to people farming old jungle.
Engkabang trees are reported to be flowering in all districts, but it is as yet too early to know whether there will be a crop.
Trade: -
Miscellaneous. -The new kindergarten school, opened by Mrs. J. M. Hoover last month, has proved very popular, both with the local Chinese and with their children. There are already seventy-three children of varying ages between four and seven years in this section of the school, which is run on most practical lines.
SARIKEI, BINATANG, REJANG, DARO AND MATU.
August, 1933.
The District Officer, Mr. H. E. Cutfield, reports: -
Trade: -
General. -On the evening of the 9th His Highness the Tuan Muda arrived per H.H.M.Y. Maimuna, accompanied by Messrs. A. A Rennie. K. H. Gillan, and H. B. Crocker. The Acting Resident, Third Division, Mr. P. M. Adams, arrived the same evening. The following morning His Highness went out by car to the 9th mile Peninjau road. On his return he granted interviews to representatives of the Chinese and other communities. His Highness and party left on their return to Kuching in the afternoon, and Mr. Crocker accompanied the Acting Resident on his return to Sibu.
Mr. Pegler, formerly Officer-in-Charge, Matu and Daro, arrived here on 6th on transfer, as the Matu and Daro Districts are now incorporated in Administration from Sarikei.
Travelling. -Binatang was visited on 2nd, 15th and 26th. Rejang and Selalang on 17th to 18th.
Mr. Pegler visited Matu and Daro, accompanied by the Officer-in-Charge of Lands, from 23rd to 29th.
On 20th I accompanied the Divisional Forest Officer, Mr. Spurway, to the Wak to point out some stands of belian I had formerly discovered while Travelling District Officer, which I considered worth conservation. Mr. Spurway remained in the Wak while I returned to Sarikei on 22nd, the journey from Penghulu Nyambar’s house in the Wak to Sarikei being undertaken in one day.
On 5th August, Lamat, the Juragan of a Chinese launch at Sarikei. came to report that while coming down the Sarikei a large crocodile broke surface about two fathoms in front of the bows of his launch with a human body in its mouth, but on seeing the launch immediately submerged again. Lamat reported that he had gone astern and circled round for some time but no further signs were observed so he continued his journey and reported the matter on arrival at Sarikei.
MUKAH DISTRICT.
August, 1933.
The District Officer, Mr. L. K. Morse, reports: -
Shipping. -Thirty-seven vessels entered and forty cleared the port during the month.
The painting of the m.l. Leonora was finished, and the decks were caulked.
OYA AND DALAT.
August, 1933.
The Acting Assistant District Officer, Mr. N E. Hughes, reports: -
Agriculture. -The month has been marked by heavy rain, and I understand that the Dyaks up river have again failed to take advantage of the dry spell in July, and have therefore been unable to obtain proper burns. Unless we get another dry spell before the landas breaks, this will mean that they will have a poor padi crop for the third year in succession.
Fourth Division News.
August, 1933.
Extracts from the Fourth Divisional Reports by Mr. H. D. Aplin, Resident: -
In the early hours of the morning of the 4th, His Highness the Tuan Muda anchored off Miri in H.H.M.Y. Maimuna. I accompanied His Highness to Baram and then on to Limbang. We left Baram 11 p.m. on 5th, arriving at Limbang at 10.30 a.m. on 7th.
Miri was reached at 9 p.m. on 8th, His Highness immediately sailing for Sarikei
The District Officer reported that during my absence, three Malay employees of Sarawak Oilfields, Limited, had been murdered whilst changing shift at District 2 Office, and that three foreign Malays, also employees of the Company, had been arrested in connection with this affair.
MIRI DISTRICT.
August, 1933.
The District Officer, Mr. F. G. Carpenter, reports: -
Agriculture. -Pepper gardens are reported to be making satisfactory progress in all districts.
Several houses of Dyaks started burning off their new farming areas.
Trade: -
General. -The Resident proceeded to Baram and Limbang, accompanying His Highness the Tuan Muda, from the 4th to 8th.
Mr. A. G. Taylor, Government Auditor, arrived on the 4th and audited the Stores accounts.
The 8th, being the anniversary of His Highness the Tuan Muda’s birthday, was observed as a holiday.
Mr. P. M. Scott passed through the station on his way to Limbang on the 29th.
BINTULU DISTRICT.
August, 1933.
The Acting District Officer, Mr. J. G. Anderson, reports: -
Agriculture. -Serupai (Tatau) reported the only good harvest among the Dyaks in this district, all others only having enough to last them till end of Nugal or the year.
Fifteen bags of wet line padi seed were supplied by the Agriculture Department and issued to Malay and Dyak headmen with a request for report on harvesting.
Trade. -Large shipments of jelutong were made to Kuching and Singapore owing to a slight rise in prices. Figures were as below, showing steady improvement in Exports and Imports nearing 1933 level.
General. -A public holiday was observed on the 8th, in honour of His Highness the Tuan Muda’s birthday.
The Resident visited the station from the 23rd to the 30th.
BARAM DISTRICT.
August, 1933.
The Acting District Officer, Mr. F. H. Pollard, reports: -
Agriculture. -Rainfall amounted to 8.45 inches in 15 days. The people in the ulu Tinjar have all burnt their farms.
Trade: -
General. -His Highness the Tuan Muda, accompanied by Mr. H. D. Aplin, Resident, Fourth Division, Mr. A. A. Rennie, Treasurer of Sarawak, Captain C. D. Le Gros Clark. Secretary for Chinese Affairs, and Mr. H. B. Crocker, visited the station from 4th to 5th. A number of Penghulus and Tuai Rumah were present to meet His Highness but their followers were few, all being busy on their farms.
In the evening His Highness received the Native Officers, Penghulus and Chiefs on board the Maimuna. His Highness and party left for Limbang at 11 p.m. on 5th.
LIMBANG DISTRICT.
August, 1933.
The District Officer, Mr. E. O. Bruce, reports: -
Trade: -
Average local market rates: -
Travelling. -His Highness the Tuan Muda paid a visit to the station on the 7th, accompanied by The Resident and Mrs. Aplin, and Messrs. Rennie, Crocker, and Captain C. D. Le Gros Clark.
Mr. K. H. Gillan returned from Lawas the following day and joined the party for the return journey to Kuching.
Establishment. -Mr. P. M. Scott reported for duty, on the 30th, and will take over Lawas District.
Miscellaneous. -At the invitation of the British Resident, I visited Brunei on the 12th to attend a State Banquet on the occasion of the return of His Highness the Sultan of Brunei.
A cloud-burst occurred on the 23rd when 2.38 inches of rain fell between 3 and 4 p.m.
Rainfall recorded for the month was 20.86 inches, heavy rain has since persisted every evening.
LAWAS DISTRICT.
August, 1933.
The Acting Assistant District Officer, Mr. W. P. N. L. Ditmas, reports: -
Agriculture. -The Lawas (Sarawak) Rubber Estates, Ltd., exported 30,880 lbs. of dry rubber during the month.
The recent rise in the price of rubber has resulted in a large number of rubber gardens being cleared and tapped
Rainfall. -The following rainfall was recorded during the month: -
Trade: -
General. -The 8th, His Highness the Tuan Muda’s birthday, was observed as a public holiday.
On Sunday 13th I took a football team over to Sipitang, B.N.B. Lawas were defeated three to nil.
I visited Sundar and Trusan on the 10th and called at Awat Awat on the way. One night was spent at Trusan and one at Sundar. On the return journey I visited Punang.
The Resident of Labuan, Mr. G. Rawlings, and Mr. Bowman, M.C.S., arrived in the s.l. Lady Clementi and stayed the week end of the 26th.
Visit of Kuching Football XI to Miri and Sibu.
With the kind permission of His Highness the Tuan Muda it was possible to send a representative soccer team to Miri on Sunday, 3rd September, travelling by H.H.M.Y. Maimuna. which was carrying a draft of Constabulary on transfer to Miri. The team was selected by Mr. D. V. Murphy and consisted of members of the Medical, Chinese and Constabulary teams. In the unavoidable absence of Mr. Murphy, Mr. Tan Kui Choon took charge of the team. This was a return match against Miri, as it will be remembered the latter visited Kuching in October, 1931, when they deservedly defeated the Kuching side in a splendidly contested game. Unfortunately it was impossible to send any European players, for the simple reason there were not any to pick from. Shades of the cold Kuching Football Club! After a rough voyage the team staggered ashore at Miri. They had a day’s rest and pulled themselves together and turned out on the 6th, Wednesday evening, to face the might of Miri.
The first thing that impressed the visitors was the wonderful playing field with it’s splendid turf. The teams lined up. Kuching having won the toss played with the sun behind them. Scrappy opening with Miri pressing, Chiang Koon was tested by several long shots which he saved well. The visitors began to get into their stride and pressed. Half time arrived with no score. Very even game so far.
The Kuching defence impressed. Ten minutes after resumption of play saw Dollah, the speedy Miri outside right, slip through and score with a nice drive, the ball glancing off Deli’s leg into the far corner of the net. Jack was damaged and positions changed.
The game became fast and interesting, with Kuching pressing, Andrews clearing cleverly on several occasions. The visiting forwards were disappointing. At last Stephen Harry snapped a ball at close range and drove in a low one which gave Gabriel no chance.
This goal encouraged Kuching, and their forwards pressed in earnest. Unfortunately Jack was almost a passenger owing to injury. Paiee receiving possession swung it nice pass over to Kheng Hai, who dribbled right through into the penalty area.
Unfortunately for Miri, the Miri right half, in a desperate attempt to stop Kheng Hai, fouled him.
The latter took the spot kick and easily converted. Time arrived with Kuching leading two goals to one. Very interesting game in parts, fast and clean.
The defence on either side was superior to the attack. Mr. Leslie, who played such a sterling game here in 1931, is of the opinion that the Kuching side is much faster and better balanced this year.
The Kuching members had a thoroughly enjoyable time in Miri and much appreciate the hospitality shown to them.
It is hoped that Miri will send down a team early next year.
Mr. Mackenna, the referee, controlled the game admirably.
The Kuching party left Miri on Friday 8th, calling at Sibu on Saturday 9th. The Resident, Mr. P. M. Adams, arranged for a Sibu XI to turn out and an exhibition game was played.
Sibu were unfortunately short of their crack centre forward Rayallie, who was ill and unable to turn out.
A very excellent game was witnessed, Kuching played fast and clever football, the forwards on this occasion excelling themselves. Jack was absent through injury, his place being taken by Lim Ewe Soon.
The final score was 8 to 1 in Kuching’s favour, but this by no means represented the run of the play, as Sibu put up a stout and plucky show and at times fully tested the Kuching defence, which played a sterling game.
Mr. Parker was a capable referee. A very enjoyable evening followed the teams being entertained by the Sibu Community. Kuching was reached on Sunday 10th. A thoroughly enjoyable trip in spite of the sea voyage.
On Tuesday evening the “Miri” XI played the “Rest” Kuching on the K.F.C. ground and a very excellent game was witnessed, with a glut of goals. The “Miri” XI took some time to settle down and the Rest were out to show them what they could do, and they certainly put up a very good show.
The result was “Miri” XI 6- “Rest” of Kuching 3. Some very clever forward play on both sides was witnessed. -Contributed.
CORRESPONDENCE.
[The Editor is not responsible for the opinions of Correspondents.]
The Editor,
Sarawak Gazette,
Kuching.
CAERAU,
ROSS,
HEREFORDSHIRE,
14th August, 1933.
DEAR SIR,
In your issue for the 1st July a contributor writing on the Bintulu Regatta, 1933. says, that a sailing race held as the last item of the programme was believed to be an innovation for any Sarawak Regatta. At the Sibu Regatta in 1907 a sailing race from the Fort Pangkallan to the opposite side and back was an item of the Regatta. About 15 boats entered, the majority capsized in a sudden squall. The squall was followed by a dead calm, so that the winner with heavy wet sails could not reach the winning post until after dark.
Yours faithfully,
A. J. CUTFIELD.
