VOL. LXIII.
No. 958.
The Sarawak Gazette
Price
KUCHING, Saturday, July 1st, 1933.
20 CENTS.
Contents.
The Sarawak Gazette	SATURDAY, JULY 1st, 1933.
Marriage.
REED-RICHARDSON. -On 20th June, at Kuala Lumpur, Dr. J. G. Reed to Miss Penelope Richardson.
Engagement.
MCLAINE-WALLS. -The engagement is announced between Mr. A. L. McLaine, Sarawak Civil Service, and Miss Joyce Walls, younger daughter of the late Alex Walls, and Mrs. Walls of Glebe Crescent, Stirling.
Local and Personal.
June.
His Highness the Tuan Muda arrived in Singapore on 17th June, and Kuching on 19th June. We take this opportunity, on behalf of our readers, of tendering His Highness a hearty welcome.
The marriage of Dayang Leonora, eldest daughter of His Highness the Rajah, to the Earl of Inchcape took place at St. George’s, Hanover Square, on 1st June. We tender our hearty congratulations and best wishes to the happy couple. An account of the wedding appears in our columns.
Their Highnesses the Rajah and Ranee gave a dinner party at the Savoy on Thursday, 18th May. Among those present were Dayangs Leonora, Elizabeth and Valerie, and the Right Honourable the Earl of Inchcape. The healths of Dayang Leonora and Earl of Inchcape were proposed together and drunk by all present.
The Sarawak Government Gazette of 16th June, 1933, announces the following results of the recent examinations for Government Officers. Passed Standard II (Senior Examination): -Messrs. E. M. Selous (with honours), J. C. Barcroft, W. P. N. L. Ditmas, S. G. Hansom, F. Harding and R. F. Sinclair. Passed Standard I (Junior Examination): -Messrs. J. C. B. Fisher, W. H. C. C. Morice, and G. F. J. Pegler.
The marriage has taken place of Mr. Patrick McKerron, of the Malayan Civil Service, to Miss Majorie Rettie, the youngest daughter of the late Mr. A. T. Rettie, of Spring Valley, Badulla. -Times of Ceylon.
Count Rudolf Von Strachwitz, of the German Diplomatic Service, paid a visit to Kuching, arriving by s.s. Kudat on 26th June, and was the guest of Captain and Mrs. C. D. Le Gros Clark.
We welcome back to Kuching Mr. P. D. Cobbold, of the Borneo Co., Limited, who returned from home leave on 23rd June.
Mr. R. L. Daubeny, District Officer, Simanggang, accompanied by Mrs. Daubeny, arrived from Singapore by s.s. Vyner Brooke on 23rd June. Mr. and Mrs. Daubeny were recently married at Penang. We take this opportunity of tendering our hearty congratulations and wishing Mrs. Daubeny welcome to Sarawak.
Amongst the awards of His Majesty the King’s Birthday Honours, we note His Majesty has been pleased to bestow the honour of Companion of the Imperial Service Order on Charles Hannigan, lately Commissioner of Police, Federated Malay States. Mr. C. Hannigan left Sarawak a short time ago after one year’s service as Adviser to the Sarawak Constabulary, on the Force’s reorganisation.
Mr. R. G. Talbot arrived in Kuching by m.v. Marudu on 19th June, 1933. Mr. Talbot has been appointed a Probationary Assistant Commissioner to the Sarawak Constabulary, having completed a three months’ course with the F.M.S. Police at Kuala Lumpur. By this same vessel arrived Mr. G. A. Farrelly who joins the Land and Survey Department.
Mr. A. L. McLaine, Assistant, Treasurer, returned from home leave on 12th June. By this same vessel arrived Mr. W. Park who is to relieve Mr. R. J. S. Davies of the Chartered Bank. At the same time as welcoming Mr. Park we wish Mr. Davies, who is now stationed in Singapore, bon voyage and good luck.
ARRIVAL OF HIS HIGHNESS THE TUAN MUDA.
His Highness the Tuan Muda arrived from Singapore on Monday, 19th June. His Highness was met at Pending by the Government Secretary, Mr. C. F. C. Macaskie, and proceeded to Kuching by H.H.M.Y. Maimuna. On passing Fort Margherita a salute of 21 guns was fired.
On arrival opposite Astana, the Treasurer of Sarawak, Mr. A. A. Rennie, and the Acting Resident, Mr. C. D. Adams, proceeded on board to meet His Highness, who was rowed ashore in the State barge. His Highness the Tuan Muda then proceeded to inspect the guard of honour furnished by the Sarawak Constabulary under the command of Mr. D. V. Murphy. The party then proceeded to Astana where the Datus, Heads of Departments, and a number of unofficials, representative of all members of the community were waiting. Mr. C. F. C. Macaskie proposed the health of His Highness, which toast was drunk by all. We join our readers in welcoming His Highness the Tuan Muda back to Sarawak.
“Princess Gold” of Sarawak.
MARRIED TO EARL OF INCHCAPE.
QUIET WEDDING IN LONDON.
The Earl of Inchcape and Miss Leonora Margaret Brooke, eldest daughter of the Rajah and Ranee of Sarawak (Sir Charles and Lady Brooke) were married at St. George’s, Hanover-square, yesterday.
Every effort had been made to keep the ceremony as quiet us possible-only immediate relations and close friends had been invited-but quite a fair-sized crowd had gathered outside the church to watch the bridal party arrive. As Miss Brooke was handed out of the car by her father the crowd pressed forward eagerly. An attempt was made by some of the women among the onlookers to follow her into the church, but they were stopped by policemen.
There were no bridesmaids, but Miss Elizabeth Brooke, the bride’s sister, stood near her at the altar steps to hold her bouquet during the service. The bride wore a gown of lustrous white satin, the bodice of which was trimmed with old Brussels lace. A twelve-foot train of the same material as the gown fell from the waist. Her Brussels lace veil was held by orange blossoms, and she carried all enormous banquet of golden lilies. Miss Brooke is known in Sarawak among her father’s subjects as “Princess Gold.”
Masses of white arum lilies decorated the church. The service was taken by the Archdeacon of Middlesex (Preb. F. N. Thicknesse).
When Lord and Lady Inchcape reappeared at the church the crowd had grown much larger. People on the steps untied the side flaps of the awning in order to get a better view of the bridal pair as they left the church.
Among those who signed the register were the bride’s mother and father, the bridegroom’s mother, Jean Countess of Inchcape, and the best man, Mr. G. F. Hotblack.
Eleanor Viscountess Esher, Viscount and Viscountess Elibank, Sir Frederick and Lady Allen, Sir John and Lady Bell, Miss Phyllis Dare, and Miss Angela Brett were among those present.
There was no official reception after the service. Instead, a few friends and relatives were entertained at a private luncheon at Claridge’s.
It has been announced that the bridegroom’s mother, widow of the first Earl of Inchcape, who died last year, wishes to be known in future as Jean Countess of Inchcape. -Daily Telegraph.
Black Magic.
The office had been unbearably hot, that morning. The thermometer was near to bursting, and the clerks, bathed in perspiration, drooped over tables that loomed through a haze of calidity. Even the Buddha, laughing and big-bellied, which acted as a paper-weight on my table, seemed to exude sweat from every brassy pore. It was the sort of torrid heat that makes us strong silent men raving maniacs. I would have welcomed an amok, if only for the excuse of turning berserk myself.
And to make things worse, the “cases” had been unusually crying. Wives running away from their husbands; husbands running after other men’s wives; domestic brawls and bloody limbs. All the sordid details of domestic life that hail to be straightened out, lost “faces” recovered, quarrelsome spouses becalmed. It all needed so much tact, but the wisdom of Solomon had been conspicuous by its absence that morning. Somehow the fire of genius had been burnt out by the sudorific furnace that claimed to be my office. And so I gave an inward groan when I saw the forty seventh couple approaching my table. At least, I saw only one person at first. She was large and muscular, an Amazon, and she sailed up to me like a schooner before the wind, with all sails set.
It was only when my table arrested her onward progress that I saw the other emerge from behind her enormous bulk, like one of those comic little fish that hang around a whale. He was a small men with watery eyes, and his hair was getting thin on top. It was quite evident that he was badly in need of it bottle of antidebility tonic.
“Well.” I said to the woman with an assumed sir of drollery, “Have you been beating up your husband, or has he been beating you?”
The virago kept silent. Only her eyes, glowing with a dormant fire, betrayed her passion. Sha was like a volcano that may explode at any moment. So I turned to the trembling figure that stood beside her, and asked him what he wanted.
“She wants to kill me. Sir.”
“Wants to kill you? Why should you think that she wants to kill you? Has she threatened to kill you?”
“No she has’nt said she wants to kill me. But, she does.”
“Your wife has not threatened you with words. Has she threatened you with any sort of weapon?”
“No, she has’nt threatened me with words or with a weapon. But she wants to kill me.”
This was getting rather difficult. The discussion looked like going round in an endless circle and I was no nearer to the root of the complaint. I must try a new line. So I turned to the woman.
“The little man seems rather upset about something. What have you been doing to him? Have you ever threatened him in any way?”
The slumbering volcano began to come to life. “No, I’ve never threatened him. He is lying.”
“But,” I replied with vast patience, “why should he want to report to me, if he has no reason for making such a complaint?”
“I don’t know,” and Etna again subsided. The little man had been fumbling in his clothes and at this point of our conversation, brought out a very soiled cloth bundle which obviously had not just returned from the wash. With infinite care he untied a greasy string and laid the contents on the table before me. He looked exactly like a bedraggled spaniel that had just retrieved a ball from a muddy pond.
“Well,” I asked, “and what’s all this?”
“She is trying to bewitch me,” whined the spaniel, “and this is a charm.”
So that was the trouble. The black art of necromancy, numbojumbo, the evil eye. The whale, then, was attempting to rid itself of its parasite.
With the end of a pencil, I sifted the contents of the bundle which were covered by a thick layer of dust. So far as I could see, the charm contained the following ingredients: -
Several black hairs.
Two pieces of yellow bone.
Half a rat’s tail.
One tooth which must have given its original owner considerable pain before they parted company.
One cockroach which had evidently died many moons before.
One dried sea-horse.
A miscellaneous collection of oily strips of cloth, string, dirt, etc.
“Where did you find this?”
The little man was becoming excited. His hands were shaking with emotion. “I found it under my bed. She put it there. She wants to kill me. If the charm doesn’t work under my bed, she will pound it up and mix it in my food.” Sweat was pouring down his face, and his knees were showing signs of imminent collapse.
“Did you put this charm under his bed?” I asked the whale.
The mountain of flesh seemed to quiver for a moment. I expected her to spout a long stream of water to the ceiling. “Yes. I did.” Again she subsided into the depths.
It was a domestic squall that needed unusual tact if a tragedy, or at least a permanent estrangement, were to be averted. On her own admission, the woman had concocted an incantation, and the victim was in fear of imminent death. Both of them were clearly and deeply superstitious, and their childish credulity could not be cured by ridicule. No, I must be careful not to hurt their feelings. Inwardly, I called to my aid the shades of Solomon and Daniel, and addressed my audience, or rather the female portion of it.
“I don’t know what reason you had for wishing to take your husband’s life, nor why you should want to encompass his end by this particular method. Of course, you must realize that we are now in Sarawak, and that the familiar customs so dear to the people of your own country may not always he acceptable here. I should warn you, too, that if your husband had died mysteriously and suddenly, there would have been grave suspicion that you had a hand in his demise. And for persons implicated in sudden deaths we have a law, and that law is severe.”
I was getting on finely, and imagined that my peroration was having its proper effect on my hearers.
“Well,” I continued, turning to the whale, “you have heard what I’ve said. Now tell me, in what way can your husband escape the evil effect of this spell, this bewitchery?”
He can escape the effects of the charm in one way only,” she replied.
“And what is that way?”
“If the charm be given to another.” and her eyes glowed evilly when she said this.
Now, I have never believed in witchcraft or nonsense of that sort, but I must confess to an inward trepidation when I saw those eyes, I began to sympathize with the little man. Still, the case clearly demanded a Judgment and-I had it! A vicarious sacrifice was needed, with myself as the sacrifice. After all, this rubbish about enchantment need not be taken seriously, and the woman couldn’t swallow me.
“All right,” I said, “I will take the charm, and to-night it will lie beneath my bed. If to-morrow morning I wake up a corpse, I shall know the reason.” And I laughed heartily, thinking to myself how very clever I had been to solve the problem so quickly.
With the assistance of a peon, the contents of the dirty bundle were once again heaped into the rag, tied up with the greasy string, and ostentatiously placed in a drawer of my table reserved for nondescript objects. I closed and locked the drawer and threw the key on the table. Everyone seemed pleased with the judgment.
The little man’s knees had stopped trembling, and the whale was actually smiling, if that hideous grin on her face could be described as a smile.
With a final leer at me over her shoulder, she turned to go, the limpet taking his place once more beneath the shadow of that massive volume of flesh. Suddenly I remembered something.
“By the way,” I asked her, “what made you want to kill your husband? He’s never done you any harm, has he?”
The woman turned her full broadside on me. “He may not have done me any harm, but he’s certainly never done me any good. That charm I gave him was not intended to kill him. It was a love-potion.” And she strode out of the room.
“A love-potion!” I gasped, “an aphro-“ words completely failed me.
So that was why the tired little man had shaken with fear! That was why the whale had thrown that licentious look at me! And I, the innocent fool, had taken the charm! It seemed that the birth of Solomon had ended in an abortion so fares my morning’s work was concerned.
Slowly I opened the drawer, drew out the bundle, and dropped it into my waste-paper basket. The office was stifling; not a breath of air stirred in the suffocating heat, and the paper-weight-
Was it my imagination, or had that infuriating grin on the brazen Buddha’s face really become broader! With a delirious shriek, I snatched the bauble from the table, and flung it, grin and all, far into the sweltering haze outside. -Contributed.
Dogs.
In spite of the promising title, this article is not addressed to, nor will it interest particularly, those readers who term themselves “Dog-lovers.” I do not propose to debate the comparative qualities of “Killtick” Dogsoap, or “Whatnot’s Cooling Powders,” for apart from knowing that a dog, although being fitted with a leg at each corner is not of the same natural order as a table, it must be confessed that my knowledge of the canine is nil. It is on the subject of a recently developed craze which would appear to have swept the dog world from nose to tail that I tentatively submit these passing observations. I refer to their unbridled passion for concerted music, and I would be glad to know whether any other reader has studied this phenomenon? Having been an unwilling spectator at some of the performances I hope these notes will be of use to someone who may be writing a paper on the subject of “Why Dogs are found Dead.”
The more ambitious type of concert usually occurs when the moon is full, the most popular venue being my garden The performers assemble shortly after my bed-time, no matter how often this hour is changed, and with my hound as conductor, chosen no doubt by virtue of his white front, they begin to test out their throat and head notes on a little light entracte stuff. The arrival of a dozen or so larger dogs, whose jowls proclaim them to the initiated to be basses, coincides with the start of the “piece de resistance” namely the “Boneyard Sonata” Opus 23 by the celebrated composer Ivor Bark. This opens quietly with wood-wind and strings, but works up towards the end of the first movement with the entry of a splash of scarlet from the brass, rendered by a group of ginger-coloured dogs on the middle right. The whole of this movement is remarkable fur the improvised cadenzas, usually of clarinet pitch, and being the result of an extra well aimed brick or boot from my window. The first movement ends with a wail of fiddles followed by a wonderful staccato passage on a high note, as a hefty stick connects with the conductor’s right ear.
This is the signal for the whole band to race off round the town applauding themselves and routing out any regular members who had elected to remain at home. The second movement is resumed at the old spot after an interval of about half an hour or just long enough for the average person to get to sleep. The subject is announced in the form of a bassoon solo by a liver-coloured hound, who has one eye bunged up with mud, the motif being taken up, with variations by the strings, and finally repeated “tutti,” this being an especially fine, effort.
The basses at last come into their own, and their neck veins stand out like sergeant-majors. The lined movement has never yet been performed as at this point daylight usually breaks. In my opinion the whole interpretation suffers from a lack of timpany and other percussion effects, but these will be supplied at the next series by a “Gatling” worked at high speed from the bedroom window.
There is going to be some Shikar at the time of the next full moon. -Contributed.
Durians!
With scientific detachment a contributor to the Malayan Medical Journal discusses the question of whether the incidence of the durian tree bears any relation to the local birth rate. This being a matter of administrative importance, having regard to the evil of overpopulation from which the world is suffering, we give the passage here:
“Is it senseless to ascribe to the durian the fluctuations of, and therefore an influence on, human fecundity? The trend of ideas is evolved on some such lines as; the birth rate varies according to the seasons; climatic conditions in themselves are not sufficient to cause the variations; the other main factor in this country that shows distinct seasonal variations is fruit; the most renowned local fruit likely to be associated with generative powers is the durian. Up to this point the argument is not strictly of scientific value as the word “probably” is implied practically in every sentence, but it is “extremely probably” correct. In order to strengthen its probability one may continue as follows: the durian and the birth-rate fluctuations correspond in “wave length” and also in “intensity”; the more “Malay” a district is, the greater is the similarity of the fluctuations; Malays are the biggest consumers of the durian, and they possess the highest birth rate, therefore their appreciable effect as a factor in the calculation enhances the degree of probability in favour of the contention at issue. The practical value of these observations is very questionable, probably nil, unless an incentive to further scientific investigation of the “magic powers” often attributed to the durian may be regarded as reasonably possible. If no practical value can be claimed perhaps a certain amount of interest in the peculiarity of the births curve may prove justified.” -Straits Times.
[The durian was the subject of a ballad published some years ago. the last verse being as follows: -
“So man whose hair is sparse and gray
Should travel East without delay,
In ships, canoes, or boats-
To eat the fruit that fires the mild-
The fruit that helps the growing child-
The fruit that makes tame women wild,
And old men skip like goats!” -Ed.]
“Flung on the World.”
AND THEN HAD TO TIP THE STEWARD.
A contributor to the “Daily Sketch” tells a pathetic story of the flight from the “axe” in Kenya. Says he:
The Colonial Service has been undergoing some pretty drastic cuts under the economy axe.
I lunched with one of the “axed,” a young man who had only the previous day arrived back from East Africa.
Naturally he was a trifle unset, for be bad given seven valuable years to his work, and had married in the meantime on what he considered a safe salary.
Now he has been suddenly flung on the world, having sold all his effects abroad in a poor market after buying originally at a good price, with little experience beyond a knowledge of East Africa.
He told me that at least 50 other men in the Colonial Service, who travelled back aboard the same boat, had also been “axed.”
During the voyage he made friends with the ship’s steward, who confided to him the amount of income tax he was due to pay.
My friend discovered that the steward received four times as much as he did as a civil servant.
After that it was embarrassing, not to say ironical, to have to give him a up on leaving the vessel. -East African Standard.
“?”
We come from England’s pleasant lands To live like pioneers.
With promises of air-mail
We’ve stilled our mothers’ fears.
We’ve got tubes and tubes of serum To counter snakes which bite. And we’ve quantities of pemmican To ward off cold at night.
We mean to lead the simple life And so we do not wash;
We see no reason why one should Employ a shaving brush,
And we have left our manners
At home across the seas-
We think such things unnecessary Among the jungle trees.
Our feet are very, very big,
Our foreheads are immense, If you can’t recognize our worth You must be very dense.
Our work is simply-vital-
Per-cent-one-hundred stuff.
We do not stop to rest or play, We cannot work enough.
Our brains are fairly chock-a-block
With biologic lore,
You cannot tell us anything We did not know before,
We never, never take advice
Whatever has occurred,
Since as we know we’re always right Your views are just absurd. -Contributed.
Intimation has been received that unless unforeseen circumstances interfere a running commentary on the Final Shoot at Bisley on 22nd July for His Majesty the King’s Prize will be broadcast by the Empire Broadcasting Station to the Indian Zone at 10.0 p.m. Sarawak Standard time, on that date.
OLD SARAWAK.
From the Sarawak Gazette 59 Years Ago.
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE
No. 89 MONDAY, NOV. 2ND, 1874. Price 5 cents.
A VISIT TO THE LINES.
(From an occasional Correspondent.)
In contrasting the present season with the past, it will be recollected that at this same time last year our capital of Kuching was visited by cholera of a virulent type, which broke out first of all in the barracks, -at that time situated at a short distance removed from the site of the present Court house. The ground was low and swampy and undoubtedly unhealthy, but was made use of on account of its proximity to the fort. On the first appearance of the epidemic among them, the men were removed to healthy positions on the hills, their old quarters being at once pulled down. Since then, new barracks have been erected on high ground on the opposite side of the river to the fort, which present the appearance of a little town of themselves when seen from the river below Tanah Puteh. The houses are well constructed in native style in four blocks.
Dyaks and Malays are quartered at a distance one from the other, and separate dwellings are allotted to men with either wives or families.
The Commandant’s house-the old Residency-is but a short distance removed, and what used to ho the croquet ground has been considerably enlarged and is now devoted to purposes of drill till just before sundown, when the young men of the garrison generally turn out and a spirited game of “raga” or native football, is carried on till night fails them, or the bugle summonses them to their respective duties.
A band of some ten or twelve performers-lads who volunteered from the company and all natives-is attached to the Rangers. They meet every day for practice, and parade from 8.30 till 9 p.m. every evening, when they perform in very creditable style: when it is remembered that at this same time last year no band was in existence, great credit is due to the men who have enrolled themselves in it, and to those who have undertaken the task of their instruction.
The Resident’s hill has long been spoken of as the proper site upon which to build a fort, it is undoubtedly the most commanding position in the neighborhood, and there is little doubt, that, before long, the citadel as well as the barracks, will be removed to the same side of the river. A proper fort in a commanding position is what we greatly require, and now that the Court house is finished it is to be hoped that it will not be long before this important work is begun.
Sarawak Library.
Kindly presented by Mr. J. R Combe: -
Kindly presented by Mr. R. G Aikman: -
Purchased by the Committee: -
First Division News.
DISTRICT COURT.
May, 1933.
The District Officer, Mr. R. E. Le Sueur, reports: -
General. -Mr. C. D. Adams, Resident, Third Division, accompanied by Mrs. Adams, arrived in Kitching, from Sibu, by m.v. Sri Mukah on 28th May.
Mr. C. D. Adams is to take over as Resident, First Division, at Kuching.
Obituary. -It is with deep regret I have to report the death of Mr. E. R. Stirling at the General Hospital on 19th May.
UPPER SARAWAK DISTRICT.
May, 1933.
The Assistant District Officer, Mr. R. G. Aikman, reports: -
Agriculture. -The Dahan Rubber Estates harvested 32,000 lbs. of dry rubber during the month. The rainfall at Bau was 5.39 inches. The highest recorded in 24 hours was .85 of an inch and the daily average was .17 of an inch. The rainfall for the month at Dahan Rubber Estates was 6.92 inches.
General. -There was an attempted amok in Bau Bazaar on the 2nd. Fortunately, the Chinese who ran amok was caught before he could do any serious harm, though a constable was wounded on the knee. The man has since been found to be mentally deranged. Telephonic communication with the Tai Ton Mining Syndicate’s works at Tai Ton was effected on the 16th and with the Krokong Mining Syndicate at Krokong and the Kuching Gold Mining Company, Limited, at Tarieh on the 29th. The line to Tai Ton (3 miles) was put through in six days and this work reflects the greatest credit on the telephone linesmen responsible.
Gold Mining. -Almost all the known gold-bearing land in this district would now appear to have been taken up, and there has been a very appreciable decrease in the number of applications for Exclusive Prospecting Licences. No fewer than six new companies are now laying out their plant, and all may be expected to be in operation within the next three or four months. There is a slight shortage of labour and some of the new companies are finding it rather difficult to obtain workmen. Twenty-one General Prospecting Licences were issued during the month. Four applications for Exclusive Prospecting Licences were received and twenty-one such licences were issued in May. Three Mining Leases were issued. The actual gold obtained by the following companies for the month of April, 1933, was: -
LUNDU DISTRICT.
May, 1933.
The Acting Assistant District Officer, Mr. E. H. Elam, reports: -
Agriculture. -The padi harvest is now all in and has been quite good for the Malays on the coast and the Jagoi and Slakow up-country Dyaks, but to the Sebuyow and Larahs round Lundu it has been a great disappointment, especially the swamp padi. The crop had promised to be really excellent but failed at the last, most of the padi being husks.
Trade: -
General. -The Acting Resident arrived on 31st and permission was given to Orang Kaya Jumat to open a school in Kampong Lundu under the supervision of the S.P.G. School at Stunggang.
The slight rise in the price of rubber has started most of the natives tapping and has had one beneficial effect, in that many have cleared their gardens which very much resembled jungle.
SADONG DISTRICT.
May, 1933.
The Acting Assistant District Officer, Mr. S. G. Hansom, reports: -
Dyak and Native Affairs Generally. -During the mouth I visited the Land Dyaks of the left-hand branch of the Ulu Sadong (Kedup). These people, on the whole, have sufficient padi. but two kampongs: -(1) Perukan, a severe shortage of padi, and (2) Meringu, no padi at all, on account of an epidemic of the influenza type, which resulted in the death of forty persons at Meringu and twelve at Pernkan.
Agriculture. -The padi harvest, except in a few isolated cases, is completed and, taking the district as a whole, is above the average.
Trade. -Remains poor. A Chinese junk arrived from Singapore to load belian, and was still here at the end of the month.
Land Dyaks complain of the exceptionally poor price received by them for sale of padi to up-river Chinese traders. It appears that eight pasu are demanded for two dollars.
Land and Survey. -Four other applications were received for Exclusive Prospecting Licences in the Ulu Melikin.
While travelling in the Ulu Sadong, I visited the Chinese settlements (pepper planters) at Terbat and Tebedoo.
There are twenty pepper gardens immediately at Terbat, and thirty at Tebedoo.
There are undoubtedly a number of Chinese owned pepper gardens in isolated and distant parts of the Ulu, often far inland from the river, for which no sort of title or permit is held. The Chinese headmen at Terbat and Tebedoo have been informed that all Chinese gardeners without proper titles or application slips must take steps to apply for their hand in the orthodox manner within the next two months.
General. -Mr. D. L. Leach of Survey Department was here at the beginning of the month, in connection with surveys, and left later for the Second Division.
On the 15th I left Simunjan for Tebekang and the Ulu.
Land Dyaks in the left-hand brunch appear to be more or less in comfortable circumstances and saving one or two exceptions, in have a sufficiency of padi.
The paths encountered during this trip were in excellent condition.
I returned to Simunjan on the 31st instant.
The 24th instant, Proclamation Day, was observed as a Public Holiday, and Government Offices closed.
The rainfall for May was 12.58 inches.
Chinese Affairs.
May, 1933.
Extracts from the Report of The Secretary for Chinese Affairs, Captain C. D. Le Gros Clark: -
Secretariat for Chinese Affairs. -The appeals to the Supreme Court by members of the Secret Society of the Third Division (mentioned in my last report) failed. These persons will be deported on expiration of their sentences.
Investigations continued into the gang activities among the Hengwha Community in Kuching. Further raids were made by the Constabulary, but an examination of documents, etc., did not produce more evidence against them. There is no doubt, however, that the action taken by the Constabulary and this Department has succeeded in breaking up the gangs for the time being, and many of the leaders have already left the country, either voluntarily or as deportees.
The Secretary for Chinese Affairs toured Upper Sarawak, and inspected most of the districts where Gold Mining Companies are operating. Bau reflects the current prosperity by the display of goods in the shops. Optimism prevails, and the new workings show promise for future production.
Gold is now about $50 per ounce, and the average company can probably continue working their holdings if the price drops to $40 or below. There is a danger, however, that a sudden rise in rubber may attract some of the labour back to the estates. Market fluctuations are very unsettling to labour, a fact which is to be deplored the more by reason of the improbability that the price of rubber will r main stationary for any period.
St. Michael’s Catholic Club.
RESULT OF BILLIARDS HANDICAP, ENGLISH GAME 250 UP.
Highest break prize was won by D. Uzaraga who scored 40 points.
L. K. L. CHAN,
Hononary Secretary.
S.C.F.A. Football League Table, 1933.
N.B. -The three Teams which finish 1st, 2nd and 3rd in the League contest will be required to play again for the final by a knock-out system which shall be duly drawn for. The winner of this final will then hold the championship of the S.G. F. A. League.
Second Division News.
May, 1933.
Extracts from the Second Divisional Reports by Mr. J. B. Archer, Resident: -
On the first I had a meeting of all the down-river Penghulus, eight in all, when various matters were discussed.
The Penghulus presented a petition asking Government to stop the migration of their anembiak to other Divisions, giving various reasons for their request. The matter is under consideration. In the meanwhile, except in certain cases, no migration is being allowed pending a decision.
The Officer Administering the Government, Mr. C. F. C. Macaskie, was in the Division from the 7th to the 9th, visiting Simanggang and Engkilili.
I was away visiting Engkilili and Lubok Antu from the 19th to the 24th. Whilst at Lubok Antu I inspected the garrison, the new barracks and other buildings. Accompanied by Mr. A. Macpherson, I went as far as Ranggau’s house at Nanga Mepi in the outboard motor boat. The journey to and fro between Engkilili and Lubok Antu was done in this boat, which behaved well. Abang Mentaril, Sub-Inspector of Police, arrived at Lubok Antu for duty there. I also inspected the beginning of the bridlepath to Nanga Mepi.
After an absence in Kuching owing to sickness Mr. J. R. Combe returned to Betong on the 24th.
Mr. R. L. Daubeny left Simanggang on the 23rd on one month’s local leave.
Mr. A. G. Taylor arrived on the 24th to resume his audit. Mr. Gifford, of the British-American Tobacco Company, visited this Division during the month.
See Kong, a well-known Chinese and formerly a Government clerk, died in Simanggang Hospital.
SIMANGGANG DISTRICT.
May, 1933.
The District Officer, Mr. R. L. Daubeny, reports: -
Agriculture. -Padi harvesting is now over in the district, and reports on this year’s crop are satisfactory.
General Mining. -One Exclusive Prospecting Licence was forwarded to Engkilili for issue to Yew Thai Lee Kongsi on the 31st.
General. -On the 2nd of May, the Resident, Mr. J. B. Archer, accompanied by the District Officer. Mr. R. L. Daubeny, visited Engkilili and returned to Simanggang the same day.
The Officer Administering the Government, Mr. C. F. C. Macaskie, visited the station on the 7th. He arrived in the m.l. Betty and stayed with the Resident, Second Division, with whom he proceeded to Engkilili on the following day. Returning the same day from Engkilili. Mr. Macaskie inspected the Government Offices.
ENGKILILI DISTRICT.
May, 1933.
The Officer-in-Charge, Mr. E. M. Selous, reports: -
Dyak and Native Affairs. -Penghulu Suel, T.R. Manchu, Kiroh and Sabat proceeded to Simanggang on the 15th in connection with the reported presence of murderers in the Lemanak. As a result T.R. Manchu and Sabat were remanded pending the deposit of a picul pledge and Penghulu Suel was severely reprimanded. Sabat’s pledge was received on the 29th but Manchu’s has not yet been paid in full.
Agriculture. -The padi harvest is now over. The Penghulus, as stated last month, report that they have obtained sufficient but only sufficient for their own consumption.
The pepper crop is beginning to be gathered and the fruit, which has been brought to the central selling station, up to date appears to be of good quality. Complaints of black disease continue to come in and few gardens are entirely untouched by this misfortune.
General. -Four telephone linesmen arrived on the 21st and started laying the line to Lubok Antu on the 22nd.
The Government Secretary paid a short informal visit to the station on the 8th, together with the Resident, returning in the Betty the same day. The Resident paid a short visit on the 2nd and was also in the station for one night, when he passed through with Mr. Macpherson on his way to Lubok Antu on the 19th.
A fine specimen of the clouded leopard was shot by a Chinese on 7th May, and purchased on behalf of the Sarawak Museum.
LUBOK ANTU DISTRICT.
May, 1933.
The Assistant District Officer, Mr. A. Macpherson, reports: -
Dyaks and Native Affairs generally. -An Aum of Penghulus was held concerning incest adat and it was agreed to hold a big Aum at Nanga Telaus in the near future, not only on incest matters but to drive home the various points made by His Highness at Engkilili.
The Dyaks were reported to be quiet and amenable by Abang Abdul Latip, Native Officer, on his return from patrol. (5th to 14th)
General. -I paid a visit to Engkilili on 9th, returning on the same day. I left for Simanggang on 16th by outboard and returned on 20th, accompanying the Resident, who spent three nights in the station, leaving for Engkilili on 23rd.
The Resident paid a visit to Nanga Mepi on 21st, returning the same day.
SARIBAS-BETONG DISTRICT.
May, 1933.
The Acting Assistant District Officer, Mr. J. R. Combe, reports: -
Dyak and Native Affairs generally. -Very few up-river Dyaks have been down during the month, as everybody has been busy with the harvest.
Penghulu Igoh came down on the 22nd and reported that Bakar, Ganai, Usik and Usop, late followers of Asun, came to his house and stated they wished to surrender to Government. However, when the Penghulu suggested they came down to Betong they refused, saying that they only wanted to let Government know that they wished to surrender but had no intention of coming down themselves. They all slipped out of the house during the night. They also visited Mandol Chaing’s house with the same story.
If these men are left alone I think in all probabilities they will soon come in on their own accord as they can find no help locally.
An Aum has been called on 16th June in order to discuss the local adat regarding incest cases.
Agriculture. -Although the harvest cannot be described as a “bumper” one, there has in most cases been enough harvested to be sufficient for the family concerned. There have been a few cases of complete failure, but I am thankful to say that these are rare.
General. -I returned from sick leave in Kuching on the 22nd accompanied by the Venerable the Archdeacon Champion, who was on a visit to the S.P.G. Mission, Betong, spending some ten days at this station.
KALAKA DISTRICT.
May, 1933.
The Acting Assistant District Officer, Mr. J. C. H. Barcroft, reports: -
Dyak and Native Affairs generally. -During the month I visited Ulu Awek and Krian. The Natives were quiet and peaceful, but there were numerous applications to move into other Divisions; very little jungle in left in this district.
Agriculture. -The harvest is now all in, and on the whole very satisfactory reports have been received from all parts of the country.
A further increase in the local market prices this month has greatly stimulated rubber and sago workers.
Third Division News.
Extracts from the Third Divisional Reports by Mr. P. M. Adams, Acting Resident: -
SIBU AND KANOWIT DISTRICT.
May, 1933.
The District Officer, Mr. W. F. Dick, reports: -
Crime. -On 6th a Cantonese, by name Chin Poh, was brought in suffering from gunshot wounds on the face and a parang wound on the head, he was in a very critical state but was very much better by the end of the month, and there is every reason to believe that he will live. Three Dyaks by name Leng, Kudi and Lisa, were arrested in connection with this.
Trade: -
General. -A boat crossing the river from the ice factory to the bazaar was caught in a squall and capsized, one man, a Chinese, was drowned.
On the 3rd three flying boats of 205 squadron, with Group Captain Jackson and Squadron Leader Burling arrived at 9.30 a.m. The next day Group Captain Jackson was flown to Kuching in one of the flying boats, which returned the same day.
The three flying boats left for Kuching at 8 a.m. on the 11th.
Mr. D. C. Hudden arrived on transfer from Kapit to Sibu on 19th.
The offices were closed on 24th, Proclamation Day. Mr. P. M. Adams arrived on 24th by the Sri Mukah and took over the Division from Mr. C. D. Adams, who left the following day, accompanied by Mrs. C. D. Adams, for Kuching.
KAPIT AND SONG DISTRICT.
May, 1933.
The Acting Assistant District Officer. Mr. F. L. Crossley, reports: -
Dyak and Native Affairs. -An Aum was held in Belaga by Mr. D. C. Hudden, representatives of all the Kayan houses being present, and it was decided to adopt the Baram adat and fines in the Belaga district, subject to the approval of the Secretary for Native Affairs. Hitherto, the Malay undang-undang has been followed by the Rejang Kayans.
Penghulus Juga, Atan, Grinang, Manok Manchal, Ansi, and Sibat, came down during the month.
General. -Mr. D. C. Hudden, together with Abang Abu Seman, Native Officer, and Penghulu Sibat, returned from the Ulu Rejang on the 16th, after a protracted tour of the Kayan and Punan district, the difficulties of which were enhanced by continual high water. Mr. Hudden left for Sibu on the 19th after handing over up-river affairs.
An outboard motor was received from Sibu for use in this district.
SARIKEI, BINATANG AND REJANG.
May, 1933.
The District Officer, Mr. H. E. Cutfield, reports: -
Dyak and Native Affairs generally. -Both Dyaks and Malays completed the harvesting of their crops, which were somewhat above the average except in the Rejang district, where the Malays can be said to have had no crop at all.
Agriculture. -The Native Officer of Binatang reported the Malays of Binatang harvested 15,000 passu of padi this year. This figure excludes Semah and Serdeng.
Trade: -
A few remarks may be made on the increase of Exports at Sarikei and Binatang over the previous year.
OYA AND DALAT.
May, 1933.
The Acting Assistant District Officer, Mr. N. E. Hughes, reports: -
Dyak and Native Affairs. -On 12th May, I left Dalat in m.l. Leonora for a tour of the lower Oya and tributaries. In the course of this tour I went for the first time to the Ulu Tamin, taking three days to reach the last house; the Tamin is a much longer tributary than is generally supposed, and flows through beautiful country. The Tamin Dyaks are, as a whole, far superior to those in the main river, and it is always a pleasure to reach their clean and spacious houses after the filthy hovels in the Lower Oya. Furthermore, their general attitude is quite different to that of the main river Dyaks, since they are always tractable and easy to deal with; and it is a fact that they invariably seem to get good crops of padi, even when harvests elsewhere fail completely.
From the Tamin I went to Sungei Jijeh, and from there set out for a tour of Sungei Baoh and its numerous tributaries. Owing to exceptionally favourable weather conditions this trip was completed three days earlier than was anticipated, and I returned to Dalat on 22nd May.
The Dyaks seemed reasonably contented, though naturally they are worried by existing economic conditions.
Trade. -During the month there was a welcome rise in the price of sago, rubber and jelutong.
Sago now stands at about 36 cents per passu, and if this figure is maintained the district may look forward to a spell of comparative prosperity.
Shipping. -A large quantity of raw sago was taken round to Binatang during the month by bandong and barongs, many traders taking advantage of this form of transport in order to save freight. As a result, there are no proper cargoes left for motor-schooners, and I understand that the m.s. Kim Chin Seng intends to call only once a month in future.
MUKAH DISTRICT.
May, 1933.
The Acting District Officer, Mr. J. J. Hill, reports: -
Agriculture. -The first of the new Dyak rice has now arrived in the bazaar.
On my recent trip to Balingian I was able to purchase new Dyak rice in the bazaar at 15 cents per gantangs. The price however in the Mukah bazaar is still over 20 cents a gantang.
The weather has been fairly good during the early part of the month but towards the end heavy rain was experienced every day.
General. -On the 10th instant R.A.F. Flying Boat No. 1419, under the command of Squadron Leader McEntegart, visited the station. After a stay of about an hour the Flying Boat left for Sibu.
The offices were closed on the 24th instant for Proclamation Day.
On the 25th instant, accompanied by Mr. J. L. Noakes, Assistant Superintendent of Land and Survey, I visited Balingian station.
Sibu Football Association.
REPORT ON 1932 SEASON.
GENTLEMEN,
We have had a very successful season and are looking forward to a still more successful one.
A glance at the accounts will show you a surplus of income over expenditure to the tune of $18.89. The heavy expenditure of $156 was mainly due to the purchase of balls and the trophy, and this year the expenditure will be considerably less.
For the past season our President kindly presented the medals for the winners, thus saving us a very big item of expenditure. Our thanks are due to him for this and the keen interest he took in the activities of the Association.
Thanks are also due to the Committee and the general public for the warm support afforded the Association.
Fourth Division News.
May, 1933.
Extracts from the Fourth Divisional Reports by Mr. H. D. Aplin, Resident: -
On the 2nd at 9.30 a.m. three R.A.F. Flying Boats passed over Miri on their way to Bintulu from Labuan.
I left for Bintulu on the night of 4th in the Chinese owned vessel Chin.
I went to Tatau in company with the District Officer and took the occasion to pay a visit to the Seventh Day Adventist Mission at Bukit Nyala. Many Dyaks visit the Mission to obtain medicines, and Mr. Youngberg hopes shortly to start a school.
A report was received from Native Officer Wan Ahmat that the body of Abit, a Bintulu, had been found at Suai with gunshot wounds in the chest and that he had detained Osman and Usop, Kedayans, in connection with this.
On the 22nd H.M.S. Herald arrived and Lieut.-Commander Jones, R.N., paid an official call. The ship arrived for the week-end 27th, and whilst doing survey work off this part of the coast will make a few visits to Miri.
The Right Reverend the Bishop of Labuan and Sarawak arrived from Baram on the 18th and proceeded to Kuching the next day.
Mr. F. H. Kortright passed through on board s.s. Kudat on his way to England on retirement.
MIRI DISTRICT.
May, 1933.
The District Officer, Mr. F. G. Carpenter, reports: -
Agriculture. -Good harvests are reported everywhere, especially in the Sibuti.
Sibuti pepper planters estimate a crop of 200 pikuls this year.
Trade: -
General. -The maximum rainfall was 2.53 inches, the total for the month being 6.92 inches.
Mr. D. V. Murphy, accompanied by Captain Grant Taylor, visited the station early in the month.
A fleet of nine Lanun boats visited Miri and Kuala Baram. They were said to be employed in diving for shells.
Accompanied by Mr. W. L. P. Sochon I visited Niah and Suai on the 17th, returning on the 19th. Investigations were made in the death of Abit, and his two companions were brought to Miri and later charged with murder.
BARAM DISTRICT.
May, 1933.
The Acting District Officer, Mr. F. H. Pollard, reports: -
General. -Mr. White left for Bakong on 3rd and returned on 4th. I left for Bakong on 6th and returned the next day.
The Assistant Resident, Kuala Belait, and Datu Shahbandar Abang Serujee, walked over here from Labi on 7th and returned on 9th by the same way.
The Right Reverend Bishop of Labuan and Sarawak visited here on the 15th and left for Miri on the 18th. On the 27th I left for Bintulu by s.s, Gladys to attend the regatta there and was still away at the end of month.
BINTULU DISTRICT.
May, 1933.
The Acting District Officer, Mr. J. G. Anderson, reports: -
Trade: -
General. -The Resident visited the station from the 5th to the 11th, and I accompanied him to Tatau.
The Resident left by m.l. Joan on the 11th for Miri, accompanied by Mr. W. H. Avery, who went to Baram to supervise the Dyak crocodile catchers under Jalin from Sibu.
The three Royal Air Force Flying Boats arrived on the 2nd on their way to Sibu. They left on the 3rd with Mr. Crowther, of S.O.L., as passenger.
A Public Holiday was observed on the 24th, Proclamation Day.
Bintulu Regatta, 1933.
On 3rd June, a Regatta was held in Bintulu, the first after a lapse of four years. This date was chosen in the hope of good weather, and in this the choice was justified, and also on account of its proximity to the completion of the harvest.
It was decided to confine entries this year to local boats only, chiefly because time was too short to advertise the conditions widely enough to attract outsiders; but it is hoped to make the Regatta an animal event if possible and to encourage visiting boats to enter from neighbouring districts in future years.
For this reason a short account of the various events may be of interest.
It should be mentioned that three courses of different lengths were marked out to suit the varying sizes of competing craft.
The full course was from Mr. Avery’s pangkallan (about 1 1/2 miles), three-quarter course from Kuala Sibiew, and half course from pangkallan Abang Naga.
The full course events were by far the most popular, up to a point. At this point it was found that a large number of boats fell out, and the existence of a rival drinking joint was strongly suspected as, owing to lack of funds, free drinks on the Regatta were not given except to such Penghulus and other notables who appeared distressingly thirsty.
The duck hunt was a bit of a failure, as on two occasions an over-generous Regatta official waited until a seething mass of small boys were gathered with open arms waist deep in the river, and then carefully placed the bewildered bird in their midst.
It cruised about with a pained expression for a good half second before recapture.
However, everyone enjoyed themselves, and there was much joyful shouting, general confusion, and other attributes of a good rumor.
Malay ladies turned out in force in their many coloured raiment and occupied small “langkos” along the beach.
Lillie-bodied Dyaks, clanking with silver, strode about talking loudly and looking for the free drink tent which they failed to find, and in disgust crowded round the various hawkers, who collected piles of shekels.
A sailing race was the last item on the programme and it is believed that this was an innovation for any Sarawak Regatta.
The breeze, unluckily, dropped, but held up enough to enable a dozen or so of very assorted craft to round a buoy moored at the Kuala and come home in fair time.
A record number of entries started for the 10-men Temuai. The starter counted up to 40 and had to retire with an acute squint, which was only rectified by a draught of good Regatta ale at the finish.
Johnny Walker won the one-man Dayong race, God bless him; he denied the allegation that he was backed by the local arrack farm, and insisted he had no use for anything but the genuine usquebaugh (which he was given). -Contributed.
RESULTS.
1. Boys 5. Any type of boat, 1/2 course, entries 7.
1. Mr. Buxton’s Manai Tukod.
2. Yaya’s Bintang Timor.
Won by two lengths.
Bintang Timor led till the Government wharf when Manai Tukod led to win by two lengths.
2. Temuais, open, 5 men, entries 27.
1. Tima Belompat.
2. Sri Kilat.
Won by half a length.
All boats were practically in a line till half-way when Tima Belompat forged ahead closely followed by Sri Kilat, which decreased the length between them at the winning post. A very exciting race.
3. Bedars, 10 men, 3/4 course, entries 17.
1. T.K. Sezen’s Kuching Sebiew.
2. Datu Abang Hj. Suhaili’s Torpedo.
Mr. Buxton’s Manai Tukod, Rajah Walli, and the two winners, led until the half-course mark when Rajah Walli swamped Manai Tukod next followed Rajah Walli. Crew of Kuching Sebiew paddled well considering it is a 25-man boat.
4. Dayong, 1 man, 1/2 course, entries 19.
1. Johnny Walker.
2. Bindang Layar.
Race very even. Bindang Layar gaining 2nd place by a mishap to another boat. Both oars snapping.
5. Temuais, 10 men, 3/4 course, entries 45.
1. Sri Bunga, Penghulu Jalin owner.
2. Galang Champong.
One and two led from start. One won easily.
6. Bedar, 5 men, 1/2 course, entries 7.
1. Bintang Timor, Yaya owner.
2. Manai Tukod, Mr. Buxton.
Won by three lengths.
Very even race and good start, all getting away well.
7. Boys, 10 boys, 1/2 course, entries 7.
1. Bintang Timor, Yaya owner.
2. Sri Plandok.
No. 1 led from start having advantage of wharf side and calm water.
8. Temuais, 20 men, full course, entries 37.
1. Bujang Menawas, Pg. Jalin owner.
2. Naga Padang.
Won by two feet.
The excitement at the start made it impossible to get them in proper line. In trying to get them in line a general cry went up and the 37 boats rushed away for “home.”
9. Panau, 12 men, full course, entries 6.
1. Bujang Puteh, Data Abang Hj. Suhaili owner.
2. Bunga Mas.
Won by two lengths.
All got away in good style. Heavy seas and head wind gave crews a difficult race.
10. Government Departmental Race, 1/2 course, entries 5.
1. P.W.D. and Wireless.
2. Customs and Shipping.
Heavy head win and waves caused great distress to Forest, Customs and Police boats. No. 1 had the advantage of sheltered side.
11. Bedar, 20 men, full course, entries 12.
1. Bujang Ribut.
2. Sireh Slapit.
Very close race. Heavy seas caused four boats to swamp.
12. Unlimited any type, full course, entries 23.
1. Singa Kala (48 men) Penghulu Jalin’s Temuai.
2. Sri Belari (50 men) Dato Abang Haji Suhaili’s Temuai.
Twelve boats were swamped majority Bedars including Anjing Sebiew, etc.
Tua Kampong Man’s Bedar was a close third.
13. Sailing Race to Kuala and back, entries 12.
1. Lang Laut, Hj. Mat owner manned by Mr. J. G. Anderson’s team.
2. Mat
Eight boats fouled going over the starting line before the five minute gun. Only four got off after the gun. Mr. Pollard’s boat led at the start with Lang Laut close behind. Lang Laut took the buoy first and romped home on a mild breeze in very good time. Course approximate 2 1/4 miles.
LANTERN PROCESSION.
1. Datu Abang Haji Suhaili.
2. Chan Chong Boo.
It will be noted that the Bedar’s were outclassed by the Dyak Temuais. The weather was partly responsible, and perhaps next year will see an improvement.
Fifth Division News.
LIMBANG DISTRICT.
April, 1933.
Extracts from the Fifth Divisional Reports by Mr. F. H. Kortright, Resident: -
Agriculture. -Towkay Teo Chiok Sia set up a small padi mill in his sago factory. The mill works very satisfactorily and it is hoped that this mill will enable a larger quantity of local padi to be sold.
Rainfall 6.61 inches.
Trade: -
General. -Hari Raya Haji was observed as a holiday. Mr. F. Thompson, Manager of Batu Apoi Estate, brought over a football team and a match was played with a Limbang team.
On the 9th I accompanied the Resident to Sungei Pranga, in m.l. Sylvia, where we stayed the night with Mr. and Mrs. Southwell of the Borneo Evangelical Mission. Next morning the houses of Sandom and Penghulu Belulok were visited. We returned to Limbang the same day.
On the afternoon of the 22nd the Resident and myself were kindly invited to Brunei to witness the arrival of the three flying boats from Singapore. I returned to Limbang the following evening. On the 24th one flying boat flew over from Brunei and passed low over Limbang. The Resident Fifth Division and the Resident of Brunei were on board.
Mr. T. F. Carey, British Resident, Brunei, accompanied by a number of European visitors, visited the station on the 29th and 30th.
May, 1933.
The Acting Assistant District Officer, Mr. W. P. N. L. Ditmas, reports: -
Obituary. -I regret to report that Penghulu Bat, of the Panderuan river, died on the 18th.
Dyak and Native Affairs generally. -Penghulus Wee, Tamanok, and Belulok, with a large number of their people, were in Limbang during the month.
Agriculture. -Rainfall 11.56 inches.
Trade: -
General. -The Resident was away in Lawas from the 4th to the 7th.
On the 9th the Right Revd. the Bishop of Labuan and Sarawak visited Limbang, and left on the 10th.
I regret to report that the seven-year-old son of Tuai Rumah Elun, of Kubong, was taken by a crocodile, while bathing.
On the evening of the 20th the Malay Community gave a farewell Malay dance in honour of the Resident on his retirement. A very large number of local inhabitants were present, also a largo number of Dyaks, Muruts and Bisayahs. The following evening a dinner was given at the Club by the Limbang Recreation Club and Chinese Community. After dinner there was Malay and Dyak dancing. Unfortunately rain early in the evening made it necessary to move into the club, where the dancing was continued.
LAWAS.
April, 1933.
The Assistant District Officer. Mr. W. S. B. Buck, reports: -
Agriculture. -The following rainfall was recorded: -Lawas 10.27 inches, Lawas Estate 8.35 inches and Trusan 11.30 inches.
The Lawas (Sarawak) Rubber Estates exported 44,800 lbs. of dry rubber during the month.
Trade: -
May, 1933.
Agriculture. -The Lawas (Sarawak) Rubber Estates exported 6,459 lbs. of dry rubber during the month.
Rainfall. -The following rainfall was recorded: -
Trade: -
General. -On the 4th the Resident, Fifth Division, Mr. F. H. Kortright, paid a farewell visit to the station and remained until the 7th. Land Sports were held on the 6th followed by speeches in honour of the retiring Resident. The spoils, though got up hurriedly, were well attended, amongst those being present were Mr. and Mrs. V. H. Bentham, from Labuan, Mr. and Mrs. G. Clifford, Mr. and Mrs. A. G. Colina and children, Messrs. R. C. B. Buck, C. J. Cook and V. H. Doughty.
On the 25th the Resident left from Labuan on the s.s Kudat.
Other visitors to the station were Mr. W. V. Hanson, Divisional Treasurer, who arrived on the 2nd and returned to Miri via Labuan the following day Mr. L. R. F. Earl, British Resident, Labuan, and Mr. E. O. Reilley, Harbour Master, Labuan, who arrived on the 28th and returned to Labuan on the 29th.
CORRESPONDENCE.
[The Editor is not responsible for the opinions of Correspondents.]
The Editor,
Sarawak Gazette,	Kuching.
S. THOMAS’ SCHOOL,	12th June, 1933.
SIR,
In the Sarawak Gazette of June 1st, it was interesting to read that one Mohd. Nor was believed to be the first local Malay boy who had passed the Cambridge Preliminary Examination.
Ethnologically, however, the names of: -
Kassim John Nichol
Juing Insoll
Matthew Basi
Saban Brandah
Juan Michael
Augustine SiRau Nais
may be of even greater interest, as they are true-blooded Dyaks, who have recently been successful in the examinations.
Kassim John Nichol in spite of being in hospital for over three months last year, passed the higher examination in December, having been successful in the Preliminary together with Juing Insoll and Saban Brandah in 1931. Matthew Basi’s name was published in 1930. Augustine and Nais are Land Dyaks from Quop and Duras and are the first Land Dyaks who have satisfied the examiners.
Yours faithfully, F. SEPTIMUS HOLLIS.
