VOL. LXIII.
No. 957.
The Sarawak Gazette
Price
KUCHING, Thursday, June 1st, 1933.
20 CENTS.
Contents.
The Sarawak Gazette	THURSDAY, JUNE 1st, 1933.
Births.
CLARK. -On 14th April, 1933, at Sibu, to Mr. and Mrs. W. L. Clark, a son.
KELLEY. -On 16th May, 1933, at the General Hospital, Kuching, to Mr. and Mrs. W. H. Kelley, a son.
Death.
STIRLING. -At Kuching General Hospital on 19th May, after a very short illness, Edward R. Stirling, beloved husband of Margaret Brand, 7, Duke Street, Arbroath, Scotland, and of Sungei Tengah, Kuching. Deeply mourned and sadly missed. Interred in the S.P.G. Cemetery, Kuching.
Acknowledgment.
Mr. D. MacDonald, on behalf of Mr. E. R. Stirling’s relatives, would like to return sincere thanks to all friends in Kuching, Hospital, and S.P.G. Mission for the kindness and sympathy shown to them on their recent sad bereavement, and also for the many beautiful floral tributes received. SUNGEI TENGAH, KUCHING.
Local and Personal.
MAY.
His Highness the Tuan Muda sailed from Southampton for Sarawak, via Singapore, on s.s. Hector on 20th May.
Mr. H. M. Calvert, Commissioner of Trade and Customs, has been appointed, with the approval of His Highness the Rajah, to be Honorary Imperial Trade Correspondent for Sarawak.
Mr. P. M. Adams arrived from Home leave by s.s. Kudat on 15th May and left for Sibu on 23rd. We are informed that Mr. P. M. Adams is to be appointed Acting Resident, Third Division while Mr. C. D. Adams takes over as Resident, First Division, at Kuching. Mr. E. O. Bruce, who has been acting Resident, First Division, proceeds early in June to Limbang, where he has been appointed District Officer.
Mr. and Mrs. C. D. Adams arrived from Sibu by m.v. Sri Mukah on 28th May.
It is with deep regret we have to report the death of Salleh bin Mausa who died in Kuching on 19th May. Many of our readers will remember Salleh as a prominent jockey of some twelve years’ experience who rode many winners.
The Daily Mail gives an interesting and thrilling account of the attempted escape from Parkhurst Prison of a convict, Frederick Harris, and his subsequent capture, within fifty minutes, by the Prison Deputy-Governor, Mr. S. Ennion. Harris was working with a gang outside the Prison. Standing on the road was a car belonging to the prison Medical Officer. Harris bolted from the gang and was in the car and off before the worder realized what was happening. The Deputy-Governor with warders set off in pursuit of Harris in a high-powered car. Harris temporarily eluded his pursuers at Cowes, but later was seen by a warder, the alarm was raised, and as Harris was driving off Mr. Ennion arrived in his car. The two vehicles collided and Mr. Ennion jumped from his car on to the convict’s car just as it was getting away and after a struggle recaptured Harris. Mr. S. Ennion will be remembered by many of our readers. He joined the Sarawak Police in 1925 and resigned in 1928 to join the Prison Service in England.
Subject to the approval of His Highness the Tuan Muda it is proposed that the Autumn meeting of the Sarawak Turf Club be held about 26th September.
On 3rd of May a Flying boat of the R.A.F arrived at Kuching, bringing Group Captain A. H. Jackson, Officer Commanding R.A.F. Far East, who left for Singapore by s.s. Kudat on 6th.
Mr. C. F. C. Macaskie, Officer Administering the Government, visited the Second Division during the month, leaving Kuching on 7th and returning on 9th.
On 8th of May a Flying boat of the R.A.F. arrived in Kuching bringing a minor casualty. The Resident, Third Division, Mr. C. D. Adams, and Divisional Medical Officer, Dr. A. D. Hutchison, took the opportunity for a trip to Kuching. The Flying boat returned to Sibu the same day.
An item of religious intelligence from Memphis, Tennessee:
First Presbyterian Church.
Rev. Dr. Holcumb will preach. Subject:
Is the Financial Depression disappearing?
If so, what lessons are we learning? Mrs. W. L. Brown will sing: “Search me, O God!” -The New Statesman and Nation.
Obituary.
The death of Mr. E. R. Stirling at the General Hospital on 19th May, came as a profound shock to the local community.
Fit enough to play a fine game of football only the previous Tuesday, the suddenness of his end was all the more distressing.
Mr. E. R. Stirling was born in 1898, and saw service during the Great War with the R.A.F. Coming to Sarawak originally as Assistant on the Dahan Rubber Estate in 1926, he was transferred to Sungei Tengah Estate in August, 1929, and went home on furlough the following year. In 1932 he married Miss Margaret Brand, of Arbroath, and, but two months later, sailed again for Sarawak. Mr. E. R. Stirling was good at all games but especially at football. In his younger days he had played for such fine teams as Arbroath, Dundee United and Rochdale and, right up to the end, he was probably the most finished player that we ever had the pleasure of watching in this country.
Generous to a fault, he had the art of making friends and was universally popular. The sympathies of all go to his widow and relatives in their sad bereavement. -Contributed.
Warning to investors in gold mining enterprises.
We have been informed that many gold mining enterprises that have been started in Sarawak during the past year are not registered companies and yet dealings are active in scrip which purports to represent shares in these enterprises. We think, therefore, that it might be of interest to some of our renders to explain the legal position of holders of such scrip.
It appears that the method adopted is as follows: -A given sum is decided upon as the nominal capital of the enterprise and this sum is divided into so many shares. Each promoter is issued one or more share certificates amounting in the aggregate to the total of the nominal capital. The promoters are registered as partners in the enterprise under the Business Names Order. If a promoter wants to sell any part of his holding he offers it to the public and in return for cash, often much more cash than the nominal value, gives a purchaser his personal receipt. In some cases the names of the holders of these receipts are recorded in the books of the enterprise, in other cases they are not, and very rarely are the holders registered as partners under the Business Names Order, nor could they be if the total number of partners exceed twenty. Whether or not their names are recorded in the books of the firm, the holders of these receipts do not become partners in the sense that they have any certain rights against the partnership as such, or any right of control: their right is limited to a personal claim against the partners who issued to them the receipts.
A shareholder in a limited company obtains substantial legal protection. If his shares are fully paid up he is under no liability in respect of them and his sole anxiety is whether or not the company will make a success. He has, by virtue of his voting rights, some power of control, qualified by the amount of his holding, and has some say in the fortunes of the company. If it succeeds he obtains his reward in the shape of dividends, if it fails he loses the money he paid for his shares, but that is all he can lose.
The, holder of a mere receipt from a partner in a partnership which is not registered as a company is in a much less favourable position. He has no voting right and cannot, therefore, exercise any control whatsoever over the management of the enterprise. He probably acquires no right as against the partnership, but in the event of the partnership’s failure he may possibly be called on to defend himself against the claim that he is a partner and so liable to make good the losses of the partnership. While the shareholder of a limited company has but one anxiety, the purchaser of a share in an unlimited partnership has three anxieties-firstly the enterprise may fail, secondly the shareholder from whom he purchases his receipts may fail, and thirdly the failure of the enterprise may involve him in unlimited loss.
The moral of the above is that a prudent man will invest nothing in any enterprise which is not a limited company, or in which his interest is not shown by registration of his name as a partner under the Business Names Order.
“It Takes Your Breath Away.”
8,000 MILES BY AIR.
MAN WHO WAS TEN DAYS AGO IN LONDON.
“It takes your breath away,” is the way in which Lieut.-Commander E. V. B. Bakar, R.N., of H.M.8. Herald, describes his journey from London to Singapore by the Royal Dutch air liner. He is the first passenger, and the first naval officer, to make the through journey, and he arrived here on Thursday.
Commander Baker decided to take the air route as it would be an interesting experience and would give him 18 days extra leave in England. Of course, he had to get the special permission of the Admiralty to fly back to his ship, but it was given very freely.
“What was London like and what was happening there when you left about ten days ago?” a Straits Times reporter asked him.
“There isn’t much difference in London,” he answered. We have been having beautiful weather. It was warm, but just warm enough to be nice. It was pretty dead, however. I don’t think anybody is missing much by not being there-although I don’t mind going back!
PENNY OFF THE PINT.
“Everybody seemed pleased about the threatened penny off the pint, and there were, hopes that it would be much stronger in future! No one spoke about the income-tax-I don’t suppose anybody seemed to be caring about it!
“Then, of course, there was the, usual talk of the Cup-tie, and what Mr. Jardine says about body-line bowling. Apart from that, nobody seemed to be caring very much about anything else,” commented Commander Baker.
Speaking of his trip, he said that he actually left Croydon on Wednesday afternoon, although he could have made his departure on Thursday morning. The plane was full from Amsterdam to Budapest, but after the latter place, practically everybody got off. After Baghdad he was alone, until he arrived at Bangkok when two young American women joined the plane for Singapore.
“VERY FINE FELLOWS.”
“It is very comfortable on board.” said Commander Baker. “It was a bit lonely from Baghdad, of course, but the Dutch pilots were very fine fellows. They told me nothing about the trouble. They didn’t speak to me about it and naturally I did not mention it to them. I, however, undoubtedly agree with them. I think it must be an awful strain, but they seem to be cheery,” he commented.
A few years ago Commander Baker flew from Mexico City to Vera Cruz, while on his way to England, by the Pan-American Airways’ plane. In those days, he said, the plane just had room for the pilot and a passenger. There was no question of sitting back in armchairs as he did on the Dutch plane-one had to sit in the cockpit, and the plane had to fly higher than 18,000 feet, which affected Commander Baker’s ears rather badly.
“I found the flight from Amsterdam to Singapore an interesting one and a marvellous experience,” concluded Commander Baker, who leaves to-day by boat to join H.M.S. Herald which is stationed at Miri. -Straits Budget.
The Wilson Report.
Interesting comments on the Wilson Report from the point of view of a man who has spent a great deal of time in the U.M.S. is provided by Dr. A. L. Hoops in a letter published in the Malacca Guardian:
“As an old servant of the Kedah Government,” he says, “the findings of the Wilson Report regarding the Unfederated Malay States give me deep pleasure-a pleasure that will be shared by most Europeans whether official or unofficial, who have been privileged to live in any of these States. Sir Hugh Clifford said in the Legislative Council, when deprecating rash democratic experiments; ‘The Great War has proved the failure of Democracy.’ The number of nations that have since been driven to Autocracy to preserve their very existence is sufficient proof of his words. The benevolent oligarchies that rule in all the Unfederated States are peculiarly suited to the needs and character of their peoples: they are fair to foreigners popular with their own race, economical, national and yet at all times loyal to the British connection. How efficiently such a Government functions can be realized only by one who has experienced it. In fact it success forms a convincing argument for decentralization. A career is open to the talents; several Malays occupying high office and membership of State Councils have obtained their promotion through pure merit without family influence. The Malay does not grudge the employment of outsiders whether British or Asiatic when neces-sary; but he naturally wishes to reserve to his own countrymen such posts as they can fill adequately. There are now Malays even in professional positions-doctors, veterinary surgeons, engineers and agricultural officers in Unfederated States. The British officer, especially if of high rank, when sent to serve in an Unfederated State, has much to learn from the Malay; it is only in proportion as he recognizes this fact that this administration can be a success. It is not without a struggle during the past generation that these States have preserved their present measure of independence. Now, with the spread of English education, another rock lies ahead of them-to prevent the denationalization of their youth. The soul of a people is in its language. There must be preserved to the English-educated Malay his native traditions and his mother tongue. It cannot be doubted that such able and patriotic Rulers as the Sultan of Johore and the Regent of Kedah will surmount this and other difficulties which the kaleidoscope of our everchanging age may have in store.” -Straits Times.
Wit from the Belgian Congo.
Somewhat thrilled, if also somewhat sceptic (not septic. Mr. Printer), we read in L’Essor du Congo of the epoch-making discovery of two Katanga bacteriologists who had isolated the microbe of sex-appeal. Not often do we descend to the use of bromides, but on an occasion so historic we could not help muttering “Ex Africa semper aliquid novi” before beginning to speculate on the offers for consignments of this microbe which would be cabled from Hollywood. The next article, entitled “A New Industry for Katanga,” dealt with the fish of Lake Mweru, which, on account of the heavy alluvial deposits of tin in the lake, were stated to be so covered with the metal that when dried they tin themselves. Our esteemed contemporary’s “Special Fantastic Supplement” is an amusing effort, and, appropriately enough, was read by us on 1st April. Which was as it should be! -East Africa.
Airminded.
A Straits paper has published a short article emphasizing the importance of formation flights undertaken by Royal Air Force flying boats along the coast of Borneo, not only from the point of view of military defence, but more especially of the valuable information that may thus be obtained for the future operation of commercial aircraft. “Where the Royal Air Force flies to-day, the commercial aeroplane plies to-morrow.”
The truth of this axiom cannot be questioned. The history of the British Empire and, indeed, of every great world power of the past, has continually exemplified the pursuit of trade and commerce in the tracks of military forces. But, whereas formerly those forces were despatched to conquer, now they are messengers of peace. We owe much to these pioneers, men who are blazing the way.
Writing as a layman who was privileged to accompany the Flight up the coast, my chief impressions were the speed and safely of this means of travel. Of course, speed is only a relative term. A hundred years ago, the first steam engine must have terrified our bewhiskered grandfathers. The ground was probably littered with the swooning-but still graceful-figures of our becrinolined grandmothers. Fifty years hence our children will climb into their aeroplanes at Kuching, press a button and shoot vertically thirty miles into the stratosphere; press another button and rocket over to Bintulu in three minutes. And yet, the time of three and a half hours it took us to journey between these two places last month was nearly ten times faster than the trip would have taken by sea!
Needless to say, I was thrilled with it all! The smooth ease with which the boat forsook the water and climbed into the sky. The nonchalant manner in which we circled higher and higher, watching the while the other two boats take off beneath us. The closing of the Formation, and the commencement of the flight towards our first stopping place. Kuching nestled by the river, which seemed to bend back upon itself almost to abutment.
Within a few minutes we were over the sea, passing over a fleet of Chinese fishing vessels, numbering between seventy and eighty Kotaks. We turned eastwards across the bay. and I was interested to note how clearly the channel of the Samarahan river could be seen from above. Aerial photography of river channels and bars would surely be of inestimable assistance to mariners in a country like this? The Sadong and Batang Lupar were, unfortunately, somewhat obscured by a sudden storm which rushed towards US with alarming speed and immensity. However, we took a course, which skirted the heart of the squall, and it seemed only a few seconds before we were again in fine weather, the sun above us.
About an hour after leaving Kuching, we were flying over the extreme point of Tanjong Sirik. Visibility was good, and one could obtain a good idea of the amount of land under padi.
Later, I compared this impression with the air-mosaics of the same area in the Land and Survey Department, but found comparison difficult as the air-mosaics were photographed from a height of 10,000 feet, whereas we were, at this stage, flying at about 1,200. It was evident, however, that the area of padi cultivation had greatly increased. A herd of cattle, terrified at our approach, rushed along the beach. I did not see the end of their headlong flight, but can only hope that they did not emulate the feat of the Gadarene Swine!
The enormous delta, through which pour the waters of the Rejang, Leba-an, and Igan rivers, took about half an hour to cross. One could observe the discoloration of the sea for a great distance from their mouths. Here, again, I was struck by the ease with which the channels could be clearly distinguished from the air.
At Oya, one boat left us to survey possible landing grounds. The other two boats proceeded to Mukah, over which we circled and photographed for nearly half an hour. The whole population seemed to have turned out to watch us, many having congre-gated on the wharf. As our original plan to alight here for a short time was only cancelled just before we starred, the disappointment must have been intense when we finally disappeared northward. This we did on the arrival of the third boat from Oya, and the Flight resumed formation. Between Mukah and Bintulu, we gradually rose to a height of 1,800 feet, flying about three miles from land. The sea was calm, and a rippled surface did not prevent us from seeing the larger piscatorial life beneath. Shoals of porpoises plunged below us and, occasionally, a longer form, suggestive of a shark, could be seen intent on some sinister purpose.
We passed the Batangs Balingian and Tatau. With these exceptions, the country seemed devoid of all habitation, human or otherwise. One was struck, in fact, by the vastness of the jungle, and by the minute extent to which that jungle had, apparently, been encroached upon. Signs of man could be seen only at the months of rivers, or a few miles up those rivers,-mere drops in an ocean of forest. I can imagine nothing so impressive as a flight in an aeroplane for bringing home to one the paradox of human nature-the seeming insignificance of man amid Nature, and the amazing energy which impels him to overcome that Nature.
Between Tatau and Bintulu, we passed a curious clearing in the jungle, but some distance from any waterway. This same clearing was noticed later by others. The Malays of Bintulu say that it had probably been made by tembadau, the small ox peculiar to Borneo. If this is so, a chance for some good shooting offers itself to sportsmen who are looking for a little excitement!
We reached Bintulu at 12.10 p.m., the exact time wirelessed by the Wing Commander when we left Mukah. A wide sweep over the Kampong, a circle which brought us again facing seawards, a quick drop down to the river and, within two minutes from the start of the descent, we were tying up to the buoy opposite the Fort.
At least one passenger regretted the end of the flight, despite the burns on face and knees from the sun. If I ascended at Kuching an ardent supporter of flying, I came down at Bintulu airminded. Speed, sureness, and safely are all here, and it seems only a matter of months before our present methods of sea and land travel will be supplanted by air. Commercial flying is still in its infancy, but the great airways of the world attract an ever-increasing number of passengers. Shall we see daily a flying boat or aeroplane leave Pending for Miri in the morning, and return each evening at 5 p.m.? Why not? Our waterways are good, and as for potential landing grounds, the country was created for them!
There is a sequel. About a week later I dreamt that I was flying over lofty snow-capped mountains. Far below. I could see valleys of indescribable beauty. The pilot seemed to have lost his way, and was bewildered as to which direction to take. He turned to me and pointed to a mountain peak on our right on which was erected a square granite stone. Around this we circled and I could see that the stone was a boundary mark. On one side was carved “BRITISH EMPIRE,” on the other “TIBET.” We turned north-east, and took the route to Tibet. I never understood the significance of this dream, nor why we headed for Tibet, for, to my great disappointment, I awoke while we were still sailing down those marvellous valleys. But, the moral to this is that I had, in fact, become completely.
AIRMINDED.
OLD SARAWAK.
From the Sarawak Gazette 59 Years Ago.
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE
No. 81 WEDNESDAY, JULY 1ST, 1874. Price 5 cents.
Our rice harvest is now over and is doubtless the most abundant we have had for years. We have received reports of the most satisfactory nature from all parts of the country; the least favourable being from Simanggang where the crops were exceptionally good in the upper parts of Sakarran and Batang Lupar, but poor down river on account of the ravages committed by rats.
The fine sea-on so favourable to rice partly accounts for this abundance, but we are of opinion that the real reason lies deeper: by referring to the trade returns we find scarcity of rice commenced with the working of gutta, the high price paid for that article caused rice culture to be neglected and farming a secondary consideration, as the wealth so easily obtained gave those engaged in collecting it the means of purchasing not only rice but luxuries.
In 1872 over three thousand tons of rice were imported from Singapore, in 1873 three thousand seven hundred tons. This year it has not reached nine hundred tons and shews two hundred pikuls imported in June month against five thousand eight hundred pikuls last year.
The gutta export is now much smaller owing to its scarcity and the difficulties of collecting, farming has therefore received more attention and a large increase in the production of rice the result. Rice is getting cheaper every day and being exported to the Brunei side. The people an working steadily at their farms and collecting rattans; and, in spite of the falling off on the export, of gutta and import of rice, we consider it a sign of prosperity far healthier than
that attained in 1871 and 72 by the rush after gutta, inasmuch as it benefits the whole of the population instead of enriching the few.
Sarawak Library.
Kindly presented by Mr. R. G. Aikman: -
Kindly presented by Mr. J. R. Combe: -
Purchased by the Committee: -
First Division News.
RESIDENT’S OFFICE.
April, 1933.
Extracts from the Divisional Reports by Mr. E. O. Bruce, Acting Resident, First Division: -
A tour through the Ulu Sadong area is being undertaken by the Acting Assistant District Officer in the near future, inter alia, to investigate the reports of a rapidly increasing community of pepper planters between Tebekang and the N.I. border.
Government offices were closed on 14th and 17th for Easter week end. Examinations for Government Officers commenced on the 18th.
On the 19th a flight of three R.A.F. boats arrived from Singapore, proceeding north on the 2lst.
Total registered applications for land bordering the Kuching-Simanggang trunk road total 7,824 acres to date.
Gold Prospecting Licences continued to be applied for during the month, mostly for the Bau District.
KUCHING DISTRICT COURT.
April, 1933.
The District Officer, Mr. R. E. Le Sueur, reports: -
General. -The offices were closed on the 6th being Hari Raya Haji and also from the 14th to 17th for the Easter Holidays.
Two Village Constables were engaged for Sambir to take the place of the uniformed constables there. It has been arranged for them to undergo a short course of training at Kuching before taking over their new duties.
UPPER SARAWAK DISTRICT.
April, 1933.
The Assistant District Officer, Mr. R. G. Aikman, reports: -
Agriculture. -The padi crop appears to be up to the average of former years. Most of the farmers report that they have sufficient padi for their own consumption. The Dahan Rubber Estates harvested 30,000 lbs. of dry rubber during the month. The rainfall at Bau was 6.67 inches. The highest recorded in 24 hours was 1.20 inches and the daily average was .22 of an inch. The rainfall for the month at Dahan Rubber Estates was 10.98 inches.
Gold Mining. -The weather during April was milder than the previous month and gold mining operations have received fewer set-backs owing to wet weather. The majority of the mines continue to record a steady output and the number of persons now engaged in gold mining operations must amount to nearly 2,500. Four companies are laying out their plant and they may all be expected to be in operation by the end of the half year. Thirty-nine General Prospecting Licences were issued during the month. Ten applications for Exclusive Prospecting Licences were received and six such licences were issued. The actual gold obtained by the following companies for the month of March, 1933, was: -
LUNDU DISTRICT.
April, 1933.
The Acting Assistant District Officer, Mr. E. H. Elam, reports: -
Agriculture. -The Natives have nearly finished harvesting their padi.
Total rainfall during month was 8.20 inches.
The greatest fall in any one day was 1.46.
Trade: -
General. -The Divisional Forest Officer, Mr. T. Corson, arrived in the La Follette on the 1st to examine neighbouring State Land, as there are a number of applications for licences to work in the reserves.
The Acting Assistant District Officer, Mr. E. H. Elam, and Native Officer Abang Mustapha visited Telok Srabang on the 29th.
The offices were closed from the 14th to 17th inclusive for the Easter Holidays.
SADONG DISTRICT.
April, 1933.
The Acting Assistant District Officer, Mr. S. G. Hansom, reports: -
Agriculture. -Previous indications of an excellent local padi harvest are now being realized, and it would appear that good crops are generally being gathered, with the exception of the Sebangan River, where Malays and Dyaks report a superabundance of pests.
Trade. -Continues poor. Small quantities of belian are still exported to Kuching, and there has been a recent increase in the amount of jelutong worked, owing to the rise in price of this commodity. Arrangements have been made to assist local natives in the working of jelutong, by allowing, in approved cases, time for the payment of the permit fee. There are many Malays and Dyaks, ready to work jelutong at the present price, who are unable to find the fee for the issue of a licence before going to work.
General. -I left Simunjan on the 12th instant for the Ulu Sebangan, spending the night at Rumah Penghulu Berong and visiting Bintangor the following morning. Dyaks in the Sebangan report poor harvests generally, owing to the depredations of various types of pest.
It would appear that very little jelutong remains in the Sebangan River. This is said to be due to the activities of Kampar Dyaks from the Second Division in past years, who have visited the Sebangan and bled these trees to an extent which caused their early death, afterwards returning to their own district. I visited Sebangan, Jaie, Semrah and Sungei Bilis, where nothing of note was reported.
Thursday the 6th instant, Hari Raya Haji, was observed as a Public Holiday.
I was absent from the district from the 17th to 24th instant in order to attend the Examination for Government Officers in Kuching.
Rainfall. -The rainfall for the month was 11.16 inches.
Chinese Affairs.
April, 1933.
Extracts from the Report of The Secretary for Chinese Affairs, Captain C. D. Le Gros Clark: -
Secretariat for Chinese Affairs. -The result of the trial of the persons arrested on a charge of being members of a Secret Society in the Third Division resulted in the conviction of nineteen. These will be deported on the expiration of their sentences. I understand that four have lodged appeals against their sentences.
For some months past, the existence of rival gangs among the Hengwha Community in Kuching has been suspected. During 1932, this Department raided a number of houses, but without definite result. Information was received during the end of March pointing to increased activities by the gangs in question, resulting in street affrays and assaults. Co-operating with the Constabulary, this Department carried out a series of day and night raids during the first two weeks of April, covering a wide area. There is little doubt but that these gangs exist, but documentary evidence is difficult to find. The raids, however, have had salutary effects. Three of the known leaders have hastily left the country, some have been placed on security and have had their finger-prints taken, and Singapore reports previous convictions against others before their arrival in Sarawak. The matter is still under investigation, and further action against these gangs may be anticipated in the near future.
On the 21st April, the Secretary for Chinese Affairs proceeded to Bintulu and district on Chinese and Immigration Affairs. By the kindness of Group Captain Jackson and Wing Commander Burley, he was enabled to accompany the Royal Air Force flying-boats from Kuching to Bintulu. He returned to Kuching on the 27th.
Native Affairs.
April, 1933.
Extracts from the Report of The Acting Secretary for Native Affairs, Mr. R. E. Le Sueur: -
Dyak Affairs. -During the month eight, Third Division, rebels including the rebel Undi arrived at Kuching from Simanggang. Undi’s wife and other women and children of Third Division rebels, in charge of Bakar, a Skrang Dyak, arrived by a later boat. They have all been sent to Sibu.
General. -The Annual Examination of Government Officers was held from 18th to 22nd. Candidates were examined at their Divisional Headquarters.
Inquiries were made into certain allegations against Abas, Tua Kampong of Tambirat, with the result that he was sentenced to six months’ imprisonment and fine of $100 for criminal breach of trust, and dismissed his post as Tua Kampong.
St. Joseph’s School.
Results of the Preliminary and Junior Cambridge Examinations: -
(a) Preliminary: 3 candidates and 3 passes, viz.
MARTIN LIEW
TAN KIM POI
MHD. NOR.
N.B. -MHD. NOR is supposed to be the first local Malay boy to successfully pass this Examination.
(b) Junior: 3 candidates and 3 passes, viz.
POH CHIN HANG WONG CHIAP FAT CHONG KIA TUAN.
Sarawak Turf Club Notes.
1. The following alterations to the Classification of Ponies have been made: -
Casanova, Silver Blaze and Radio go to Division II.
White Knight to Division I.
Jorrocks to Division II.
2. Capt. R. E. Le Sueur to be Honorary Secretary vice Mr. Bates.
3. It was decided to convert a number of stalls at the race-course paddock into boxes and build syces quarters for use of Outstation Owners in accordance with Mr. J. B. Archer’s suggestion.
4. It was decided to give 3rd prizes even if only 3 starters. Also to increase the value of the 3rd prize to $40.
5. It was agreed that any Borneo pony may be imported from B.N.B. and shall be eligible for entry in races open to Sarawak Division I, ponies provided such pony is not more than 13.2 hands and carries top weight on the first day’s racing. Any ponies having imported blood in them shall only be eligible to race provided that their sires and dams were foaled in Borneo. Regulation No. 14 is altered accordingly and Regulation No. 16 is rescinded.
6. Subject to approval of His Highness the Tuan Muda it is proposed to hold the next race meeting about 26th September.
Sarawak Turf Club.
Spring Race Meeting, 18th and 20th March, 1933.
ACCOUNT OF INCOME AND EXPENDITURE.
R. E. LE SUEUR.
Honorary Secretary.
for The Borneo Company, Limited,
G. T. BATES, Manager, as Custodians.
Kuching, 22nd May, 1933.
The large loss made on the last meeting is entirely due to the falling off in turnover on the Unlimited Sweep, Cash Sweep, Totalizator and Race Entrance Fees owing to few outstation ponies being entered.
The prize money and expenditure was the same us the previous meeting.
Second Division News.
April, 1933.
Extracts from the Second Divisional Reports by Mr. J. B. Archer, Resident: -
During the month Undi, family and certain followers surrendered to Government via Skrang. Whilst many Skrangs were in Simanggang an attempt was made to induce them to choose someone to be Penghulu of the Upper Skrang. The only one chosen, however, refused to accept the position. No one seems anxious to take on the position.
The Government Auditor, Mr. A. G. Taylor, spent a week in Simanggang.
The Honourable Mr. R. K. Hardwick visited Simanggang in order to inquire into conditions in connection with the collection of crocodile and snake skins.
Messrs. E. M. Selous, J. C. H. Barcroft, W. H. G. C. Morice and J. C. B. Fisher sat for their Government examinations in Simanggang.
I visited Kabong for the Easter holidays and was present at a successful regatta there.
Mr. J. R. Combe, Acting Assistant District Officer, Saribas, proceeded to Kuching Hospital at the beginning of the month and was still there at the end of the month. Mr. J. C. H. Barcroft, Acting Assistant District Officer, Kalaka, paid a visit to Betong in order to settle various urgent matters.
On the 12th a small motor car arrived in Simanggang, the first to be driven in that place.
Mr. W. H. C. C. Morice, Office-in-Charge, Engkilili, proceeded on local leave, being relieved by Mr. E. M. Selous.
SIMANGGANG DISTRICT.
April, 1933.
The District Officer, Mr. R. L. Daubeny, reports: -
Crime. -On 10th April, the body of a Chinese, by name Toh Tai Kang, was found hanging from a tree in the graveyard at Bukit Sabun. At the Coroner’s inquest held the next day a verdict of suicide while of unsound mind was duly recorded.
Agriculture. -Padi crop reports are good from all districts and there should be an excellent harvest.
General Mining. -The Bukit Entali Syndicate has been issued with Exclusive Prospecting Licence and is commencing operations.
Mr. Foong Cheng Hoi of Marup Gold Syndicate is proposing to form a new company and utilize machinery.
General. -A most enjoyable week-end was spent at Kabong during Easter by kind invitation of the Acting Assistant District Officer, Mr. J. C. H. Barcroft. A local regatta had been arranged which was organized and run entirely by the Natives themselves and proved most successful.
ENGKILILI DISTRICT.
April, 1933.
The Officer-in-Charge, Mr. E. M. Selous, reports: -
Crime. -One serious case of causing hurt with a dangerous weapon occurred in Spenggal on the 1st. Three men have been put on trial for this crime and a final hearing will take place early in May.
Agriculture. -An average pepper crop may be expected, though the condition of the gardens varies considerably with the district.
Spenggal seems to be the area least afflicted with disease, with Marup as the next healthiest. On my last visit the Sarangan vines were very poor, those of Bukong and Masong fair.
The Penghulus report a sufficient padi harvest.
Staff. -I took over the station from Mr. Morice on Friday, 14th April.
General. -The Assistant District Officer Lubok Antu came down on business on the 12th and 22nd returning the same day. He was the only visitor. Mr. Morice and myself went down to Simanggang on the 16th in order to sit for the Government Examination. I returned on the 24th, Mr. Morice proceeding on vacation leave.
LUBOK ANTU DISTRICT.
April, 1933.
The Assistant District Officer, Mr. A. Macpherson, Reports: -
General. -The prahu for the new outboard motor was completed.
The two Native Officers left for up river on 5th instant to make a trace of Proposed Bridle Paths on left and right banks of Batang Ayer respectively, returning on 20th instant.
SARIBAS-BETONG DISTRICT.
April, 1933.
The Acting Assistant District Officer, Mr. J. R. Combe, reports: -
General. -Mr. J. C. H. Barcroft paid a short visit here on the 24th and left for Saratok on the 26th instant.
KALAKA DISTRICT.
April, 1933.
The Acting Assistant District Officer, Mr. J. C. H. Barcroft, reports: -
Agriculture. -The padi harvest is nearly over now and a fair crop has resulted.
Trade. -A slight increase in the price of sago and rubber has improved local conditions, but even so the Kalaka traders are in a very unhappy state.
It is interesting to note that most of our exports are now shipped to Binatang in preference to Kuching.
General. -I returned from Nyabor and Kabong at the beginning of the month.
On the 14th, accompanied by many of the Government staff, I went down to Kabong for Easter. The Resident, Messrs. Daubeny, Summers, and Fisher arrived at Kabong in the Anne at 3 p.m.
On the 15th a Regatta was held at Kabong. It included sailing and paddling races and was the first of its kind to be held in the Division. A slight and uncertain breeze rather marred the success of the sailing races but even so a very pleasant day was passed.
In the evening a main was held at the Malay School and the Resident very kindly presented the Regatta prizes.
Credit is due to Abang Bujang, Native Officer, the Court Writer, and the Tua Tua Kampong, Kabong, for their capable management of the Regatta.
Early on the 17th the Anne and Elizabeth left for Simanggang. Annual Examinations being held at that station from the 18th to the 22nd inclusive.
On the 24th I left Simanggang at 5 a.m. in the Elizabeth, arriving at Betong at 5.30. p.m.
Third Division News.
April, 1933.
Extracts from the Third Divisional Reports by Mr. C. D. Adams, Resident: -
General. -An Experimental Garden of Jelutong planted by Rev. J. M. Hoover was inspected at Bukit Lan. The jelutong originally was planted in jungle, but made no headway, but since keeping the area clean improvement in the growth has been shown. It is to be hoped that this experiment will solve the jelutong situation.
SIBU AND KANOWIT DISTRICTS.
April, 1933.
The District Officer, Mr. W. F. Dick, reports: -
Crime. -Twenty persons were sentenced in the Resident’s Court being members of an illegal society, and to be deported on expiration of their sentences; twenty-five others were required to put in pledges for their good behaviour.
Agriculture. -The padi harvest has been fairly good, the Chinese in the Igan and lower Rejang obtained far better results than the Dyaks farming alongside.
The Dyaks in the Kanowit district had poor crops generally, but the Julau had fairly good crops.
Trade: -
General. -Mr. F. L. Crossley arrived from Sarikei on 6th and left on 19th with the Resident for Kapit where he is to be stationed.
SARIKEI, BINATANG AND REJANG.
April, 1933.
The District Officer, Mr. H. E. Cutfield, reports: -
Trade: -
General. -Mr. Edwards came from Kuching to inspect the wharf here. Mr. Lamplough, the Manager of the Island Trading Company, returned from home furlough during the month.
MUKAH DISTRICT.
April, 1933.
The Acting District Officer, Mr. J. J. Hill, reports: -
Agriculture. -The harvest is now practically finished and I am glad to report that, with few exceptions, excellent crops have been reaped. In some parts the natives have already started clearing for their 1933-1934 harvests.
The weather has been fine, only little rain being experienced.
General. -I visited Balingian from 11th to 14th.
On the 21st R.A.F. Flying boats Nos. S1151, S1419 and S1420 flew over Mukah. They eventually flow on to Bintulu.
From the 26th to 27th I visited the Sarawak Oilfields, Limited, camp at Penipah.
Visitors to the station included Dr. Trumpy, Chief Geologist, Mr. J. A. Hunt, Geologist, and Mr. Dickenson of the Sarawak Oilfields, Limited, Miri, and the Rev. Father C. Epping of Dalat.
OYA AND DALAT.
April, 1933.
The Acting Assistant District Officer, Mr. N. E. Hughes, reports: -
Dyak and Native Affairs. -On 16th April, a “Kaul” ceremony was held at the kuala in order to bring prosperity to the fishing fleet. This ceremony, which was attended by many gaily-decorated boats, was excellently organized and was followed by the customary pantang.
Agriculture. -Reports from up river state that the Dyaks have almost finished harvesting, and the crops are slightly better than was anticipated.
Shipping. -No motor-schooner entered during the month, and as a result there is shortage of many commodities in the bazaars at both Oya and Dalat. Sago was shipped to Kuching and Binatang (especially the latter place) by schooners and bandongs.
General. -The month was notable for exceptionally favourable weather, no rain falling between 9th and 27th. The sea was calm during the whole of the month, and all fishing boats brought in good catches.
On 19th April a Melanau woman was taken by a crocodile while bathing in front of Oya bazaar. Fortunately there were a number of people close at hand, and the woman, who was able to cling to a ladder until help arrived, escaped with a badly wounded leg.
On 21st April three dying boats passed over Oya flying in a north-easterly direction.
Visitors to the station included Mr. N. A. Middlemas, Superintendent of Lands and Surveys, and Mr. J. J. Hill, District Officer, Mukah.
KAPIT AND SONG DISTRICT.
April, 1933.
The Acting Assistant District Officer, Mr. F. L. Crossley, reports: -
Dyak and Native Affairs. -Dyaks are still busy harvesting, and very few of the up-river tribes came down to Kapit during the month.
Mr. D. C. Hudden has been travelling up river since the middle of February.
Penghulu Manok Manchal was the only penghulu to come down this month.
Agriculture. -No reliable figures are yet available as to the Dyak padi crop, though it is feared that great mischief has been done by deer and wild pig. The Chinese report a successful harvest.
The weather was very wet up to the 10th April, after which a dry spell set in. The floods had subsided by the 12th instant.
Rainfall for April was 12.39 inches.
General. -Abang Aboi, Native Officer, travelled round Dyak houses between Kapit and Song, from the 4th to the 16th.
Visitors to the station included the Resident, Third Division, and Messrs. Banks, K. E. Parker, Gifford, and Chaplin.
MATU AND DARO DISTRICT.
April, 1933.
The Officer-in-Charge, Mr. G. F. J. Pegler, reports: -
General. -The weather having improved somewhat the fishing season has now commenced and it is reported hauls have been particularly good.
It having been decided to discontinue the Matu-Daro Telephone Service, the apparatus was dismantled on Monday the 3rd instant.
I was in Daro from the 11th April to the 13th April. Early in the morning of the 14th instant I proceeded to Sibu to attend the Examination for Government Officers and returned to Matu on the 26th instant.
Fourth Division News.
April, 1933.
Extracts from the Fourth Divisional Reports by Mr. H. D. Aplin, Resident: -
H.M.S. Suffolk appeared off Lutong on the afternoon of the 4th and, after steaming slowly towards Miri, proceeded out to sea.
Owing to the fact that the Chinese Festival Ching Ming, which is a general holiday for all Sarawak Oilfields, Limited, employees, and Hari Raya falling on 5th and 6th respectively, permission was obtained to keep the Government holiday on 5th and allow the Mohammedan Government Staff the morning off on the 6th to attend the Mosque.
The District Officer, Baram, Mr. F. H. Pollard, reported his arrival back at Marudi on the 6th, after an extended visit to the ulu Baram.
In all districts, natives have been busy harvesting and bringing in their padi. On the whole it has been a good year, but pigs caused considerable destruction.
Mr. Avery, agent for the Eastern Tanneries, visited me in Miri to make arrangements for his party of Dyaks, now in the Bintulu, to proceed to Baram to catch crocodiles. These Dyaks have been brought from the Rejang as being more dependable than local labour. Mr. Avery explained that he hopes to work the rivers between Miri and Bintulu also, and by continual visits throughout the Division to keep in touch with catches of crocodiles, thus ensuring a plentiful supply.
Government Officers examinations were hold at Miri on 17th and succeeding days. Messrs. White and Hanson sat for the Standard I and Mr. Sochon for Standard II.
Three R.A.F. Flying Boats, under the command of Wing Commander E. J. P. Burling, D.S.C., D.F.C., A.F.C., arrived on the morning of 22nd from Bintulu. Group Captain Jackson, Officer Commanding R.A.F. Far Fast, accompanied the flight. They left for Brunei on the following day.
Captain Grant Taylor, O.B.E., General Staff Officer, Singapore, arrived by the s.s. Kudat on 25th. He was accompanied by Mr. D. V. Murphy of the Sarawak Constabulary. Captain Grant Taylor left for Brunei via Kuala Belait on the 29th.
MIRI DISTRICT.
April, 1933.
The District Officer, Mr. F. G. Carpenter, reports: -
Trade: -
General. -The total rainfall was 11.14 inches.
On the 14th H.H.M.Y. Maimuna arrived from Kuching with the first cricket team to visit an outstation. A most enjoyable game was played on the 15th and 16th, when the team returned to Kuching.
On the 19th the body of P. Krishnan, clerk of Sarawak Oilfields, Limited, was found on the beach. At an inquest concluded on the 24th a verdict of death from misadventure was recorded.
BARAM DISTRICT.
April, 1933.
The Acting District Officer, Mr. F. H. Pollard, reports: -
General. -I returned from up-river, together with Mr. White and Tuanku Mohamad, Native Officer, on the 5th, Mr. C. J. Cook, of The Vamco Timber Co., Lawas, returned here on the name day and accompanied me to Miri on the 8th. I returned from Miri on 10th. Mr. H. D. Aplin, Resident, Fourth Division, visited the station from 10th to 14th. Wan Taha left for L. Lobang on the 25th in place of Galau, Native Officer, who is on leave.
BINTULU DISTRICT.
April, 1933.
The Acting District Officer, Mr. J, G. Anderson, reports: -
Dyak and Native Affairs generally. -Tuai Rumah Gruna arrived overland from Kapit, being the first of a number of Dyaks arranged to pindah to ulu Anap.
The Ninth Ceremony of blessing the sea (Semah Kuala) was held by local Milanaus.
Trade: -
General. -21st. Three Flying Boats (Royal Air Force) arrived at 12.10 a.m. under command of Wing Commander Burling, accompanied by Group-Capt. A. H. Jackson, Royal Air Force, with Secretary for Chinese Affairs, Capt. Le Gros Clark, on board.
On 22nd. I proceeded to Miri in Flying Boat by kind permission of Group-Capt. Jackson and Resident, Fourth Division, returning on 23rd by s.s. Auby.
