VOL. LXIII.
No. 963.
The Sarawak Gazette
Price
KUCHING, Friday, December 1st, 1933.
20 CENTS.
Contents.
The Sarawak Gazette	FRIDAY, DECEMBER 1st, 1933.
Birth.
BLACK. -On 29th November, 1933, at the General Hospital, Kuching, to Mr. and Mrs. K. N. Black, a daughter.
Local and Personal.
NOVEMBER.
His Highness the Rajah, accompanied by Her Highness the Ranee, Dayang Valerie and Mr. E. S. Holl, Private Secretary to His Highness, arrived at Kuching on Monday, 13th November.
Mr. and Mrs. H. A. Adams, and Miss Adams also arrived and are the guests of Their Highnesses.
By permission of His Highness the Rajah a Tuba fishing will be held in the Santubong River on December 16th.
We are informed that the Bishop of Labuan and Sarawak has appointed the Rev. Francis Septimus Hollis as Archdeacon of Sarawak in place of the Rev. A. B. Champion (resigned). The new Archdeacon was collated to his Office by the Bishop in the Cathedral Church on Sunday evening, November 19th. He will temporarily combine the duties of Headmaster of St. Thomas’ School with those of Archdeacon.
Armistice Day was observed as a public holiday and all Government Offices closed. A gun fired from Fort Margherita gave the signal for the two minutes’ silence, at the close of which buglers of the Sarawak Constabulary sounded the “last post .”
We welcome back to Sarawak Mr. and Mrs. E. Parnell who arrived at Kuching by s.s. Vyner Brooke on 27th November. Mr. G. T. Bates also returned from home leave by this same vessel.
Mr. J. M. Jacques, formerly of St. Joseph’s School, Kuching, has recently gained the “Cross and Bee” Medal at St. Xavier’s Institution, Penang. The Medal is the gift of Sir William Read and is awarded annually for “Truth, Honour and Industry.” This is the highest reward a pupil can acquire. At Penang. Mr. J. M. Jacques also passed the Junior and Senior Cambridge Examinations obtaining honours in the latter.
Mr. Polycarp Aloysius Sim who won the Medal last year was also a pupil of St. Joseph’s School, where he won the scholarship generously granted by the Government of Sarawak. This enabled him to continue his studies for three years at St. Xavier’s Institution, where he passed the Junior and Senior Cambridge Examinations.
Dr. Khalid Sheldrake arrived in Kuching on Saturday. 25th November, by s.s. Marudu. Dr. Sheldrake, who is a distinguished adherent to the Muslim faith, was accompanied by Mr. Khalid Simpson. He has visited many parts of the world and made his way to Sarawak via the Philippines, British North Borneo and Miri. During their stay in Kuching Dr. Sheldrake and Mr. Simpson were entertained by both the Malay and Indian Muslim Communities. On Tuesday, 28th November, a party was given at the house of the Datu Shahbandar at which all leading members of the Malay community were present. An address was read and presented to Dr. Sheldrake who replied in a short speech. On 29th Dr. Sheldrake gave a lecture on the Beauties of Islam, at the Malay College, to a large audience of Malays and Indian Muslims. After the lecture Dr. Sheldrake and Mr. Simpson were, entertained by the Indian Muslims and were presented with an address.
Dr. Sheldrake and Mr. Simpson left for Singapore by s.s. Vyner Brooke on Thursday, 30th November.
CHRISTMAS LETTER TELEGRAMS.
Christmas Letter Telegrams to the United Kingdom, all parts of the British Empire, and certain foreign countries, will be accepted at all Telegraph Offices in Sarawak from the 15th December, 1933, until 6th January, 1934. except for telegrams to the Irish Free State which will be accepted up to 31st December, 1933, only.
Rates. -To United Kingdom $3.05 for 10 words-35 cents each extra word Irish Free State $3.15 for 10 words-35 cents each extra word and must bear the words POST LONDON which are chargeable.
Rates to other countries will be furnished on application to the Post Office.
All telegrams must bear the prefix XLT, counted as one word, and must be in the nature of a greeting only.
Obituary.
MR. CHAN FOOK NYAN.
DEATH AND FUNERAL OF OLD RESIDENT.
The death occurred on Monday, 20th November, 1933, at his residence in Mertahan Road, Singapore, of Mr. Chan Fook Nyan.
The deceased was 74 years of age and was a highly respected member of the local Chinese Christian community. He was the father of Mr. S. J. Chan, of Messrs. Chan and Eber. and of Mr. Chan Sze Onn of the firm which bears his name.
The funeral took place yesterday at Bidadari in the presence of a very large attendance of relatives and friends, the Rev. Goh Hood Keng officiating.
The late Mr. Chan Fook Nyan was educated in Kuching, and was a staunch supporter of The Sarawak Association, Singapore. -Malaya Tribune.
WE PUBLISH THE FOLLOWING EXTRACT TAKEN FROM THE STRAITS BUDGET, CONCERNING THE REMBAU MALAYS, WHICH IS OF GREAT INTEREST.
Wilkinson’s Bouquet.
The independence of the Rembau Malays is no doubt explained by the democratic nature of their constitution, under which heads of families elect heads of tribes, heads of tribes elect the Undang (the Ruler) and the four Undang of the Negri Sembilan elect the Yam Tuan Besar.
“If any European student.” says Wilkinson, “imagines that constitutional government is alien to the Malay mind he may study the Menangkaban system with profit, for it is a genuine Malay creation and owes nothing to alien influence.” The great virtue of this system, at any rate in the days of independence, seems to have been that the peasant dealt directly with his own tribal headman, whereas in other parts of the country there were no barriers between him and the tyranny of the great territorial chiefs.
But it must be noted that Wilkinson has also expressed opinions which would be less popular with the highly conservative folk of Rembau. He says: “In Rembau and in the Kuala Pilah district the lembaga (tribal headman) still plays a part in land administration. Although there need be no question of the usefulness of the tribal system in the past, there may well be two opinions about its utility at the present time, if compared with the territorial system in force in the other Malay States and to some extent in Jelebu, Tampin, and Sungei Ujong. In Malacca it was swept away after the Naning war and a territorial classification was substituted for it. In Tampin and Jelebu it is perishing; in Sungei Ujong it never throve; Rembau is its main stronghold.”
One gathers, however, from Mr. de Moubray’s book, that the tribal and family system plays an essential part in preserving the curious form of society known as matriarchy, brought across the Malacca Straits by the Menangkaban settlers from Sumatra and found in the Malay Peninsula only in Negri Sembilan, the Naning district of Malacca and the Temerloh district of Pahang.
PUZZLES FOR THE M.C.S.
The adat of this society is most complex and may well be left to those officers of the Civil Service who have to administer it, but its main features are so remarkable that the layman should make an effort to grasp them.
Padi and orchard land is owned exclusively by the women, and also certain other forms of property. This ancestral property cannot be sold outside the family or tribe of its owner. Rubber land does not come under this custom but can be owned by men and sold without restriction. Marriage is monogamous and must be between persons of different tribes. Those appear to be fairly accurate generalizations, so far as I have been able to understand Mr. de Moubray’s book, but there are all sorts of exceptions to the rules and different interpretations of them.
The adat in Rembau is not a dead and unalterable legacy from the past, but a living thing which is adapting itself gradually to modern circumstances. The custom of monogamy is especially important, because only where it exists have the women of the Malay race any hope of attaining the position enjoyed by their sisters in Western countries. And so long as the women are backward the Malay race itself will be backward. Therefore we may be thankful that one of the points which the Malays of Rembau stressed in their address to their present Ruler some days ago was the increased attention that has been paid to the education of Malay girls since his election in 1922.
Achar.
ACHAR (V. F. NGACHAR), S. SPOON BAIT. V. TO USE THE SAME. -Bailey and Howell’s Sea Dyak Dictionary.
Few people seem to be aware that there is excellent fishing to be obtained in the Ulus of most Sarawak rivers, yet such is the case. The pools and rapids hold fish which give splendid sport, and which, as regards their lighting qualities, can compare very favourably even with the lordly salmon and trout.
There are three main species of fish in the Ulu. -juak, dungan, and semah, and all three fight like tigers. Juak and dungan are very similar and resemble a predatory roach, if one can imagine such a thing; they are silver in colour with dark transverse bars, red fins, and terrifying mouths. The semah is altogether a more elegant fish, being closer to a carp in appearance. He has large scales tinted with silver, green and bronze, and is as lovely to look at as he is exciting to catch. All three take a spinning bait, juak and dungan perhaps more readily than the semah, which seems to be slightly less predatory in its habits. The time to catch semah is during the ensurai season, when they gobble up the ripe fruits as fast as they fall into the water.
As regards one’s outfit, this must naturally vary in accordance with the water to be fished. For the ulus of large rivers such as the Balleh, heavy tackle is essential, since the fish run up to ten pounds and more in weight, and a juak of even half this size takes a lot of holding in a swift current. The proper equipment for a stream of this type would be a salmon spinning rod, a hundred yards or so of stout silk line, a selection of wire traces, and spoonbaits ranging in size from two to three inches. For the smaller streams, correspondingly lighter tackle can be used.
In the ulu with which the writer is most familiar, the fish average three-quarters of a pound, but two and three-pounders are by no means uncommon. The most suitable outfit here is a light spinning rod, a line of undressed silk, a few fine wire traces, and some 1-inch spoon-baits. Swallow-tail minnows are a good lure for the larger fish, and one of these baits accounted for a four-pound juak which gave me ten of the most exciting minutes I have ever experienced. Fortunately, he was honked in a deep, still pool which was reasonably free from snags, otherwise he would certainly have broken away. As it was, he left me with a souvenir of his prowess in the shape of a permanent kink in the top joint of my rod. On this occasion the Dyaks who were with me had brought neither a spear nor a landing-net, so the fish had to be coaxed downstream and beached on some shelving kraugan.
Almost any type of spoon or minnow is acceptable, and as a general rule it can safely be said that anything with an attractive glitter will catch fish. The Dyaks use chunks of brass with two or three hooks attached, and do quite well with these primitive spinners, though they far prefer spoons of European manufacture if they can get them. I have never tried natural baits but I imagine that these would be very effective, particularly with the monsters which lurk (or are supposed to lurk) in the depths of the big pools. It may be mentioned in passing that both juak and dungan will take a fly, but only when a definite rise is on. Fly-fishing, fascinating pastime though it is, is hardly suited to Sarawak rivers, since the ubiquitous songs would play old harry with the fine gut required for this style of angling. A wire trace will usually hold a “snagged” fish until one of the Dyaks has had time to dive overboard and free the line, but gut will snap as soon as it is subjected to a direct pull.
Few things are more delightful than a day’s fishing in the ulu. Only three conditions are essential for success: one must be on the krangan (gravel-bed), the water must be reasonably clear, and the reach on which one proposes to fish must not have been recently tuba-ed. It usually follows that one’s chances of success improve the further one goes up river; this is only natural, since in the far ulu the fish are not constantly disturbed by boats passing and re-passing, nor are they always being carried by the Dyaks. All the same, quite satisfactory sport may often be had in the down-river stretches, provided, of course, that there has not been a tuba-fishing within a month or so of one’s arrival.
The usual procedure is to squat in the bows of a Dyak boat which is poled or paddled slowly upstream. The bait is cast out to left and right and worked into every likely-looking hole and corner. The edges of fallen logs, the broken water at the bottom of rapids, the eddies behind rocks, the dead water close under the bank, -these are the best places to try, but Sarawak fish are as eccentric as their European cousins and will often rise just where you mast expect them. When casting, the spoon should be allowed to fall into the water with a loud “plop,” -the reason for this will at once be apparent to anyone who has ever seen a Dyak using a jala. The sound of anything dropping into the river attracts all fish within range, since it is possible that, the falling object may be a fruit or a beetle, or something else that is edible; in any case, the noise will wake up a sleepy fish and may cause him to take some interest in a bait which he otherwise might not have noticed.
As soon as the bait strikes the water, it should be allowed to sink a short distance and then rapidly reeled in, the faster the better. A fish will often chase a spoon and seize it at the last moment, so it is advisable never to allow the line to get slack until the cast has been fished right out. As soon as a fish is hooked, -there is usually no question of “striking,” since in nine cases out of ten they hook themselves, he should be given the butt in order to keep him off the bottom and away from the snags, and should then be played until he is tired, when he can be hoisted into the boat with a seledok.
The great charm of fishing in the ulu is that owing to the clearness of the water one can almost always see the fish take, the bait. As the spinner approaches the bows of the boat, a dark shadow glides out from behind a rock; there is a flash of silver, a tug that thrills one like an electric shock, and then-look out! A juak is fighting for its life, and the first rush of one of these fish is something to be remembered. What with the scream of the reel, the plunging of the fish, the yells of excited Dyaks, and one’s efforts to keep the rod-top from being smashed by overhanging branches, one is apt to have a breathless few seconds, especially since the boat is often caught in a nasty stretch of current just at the critical moment. I remember one such occasion when a good fish was hooked while the boat was rushing down a small rapid; the subsequent wild confusion is best left to the imagination! Suffice to say that after a terrific shouting and splashing match, the boat was safely beached, and to my undying amazement the fish was still on the end of the line. I think he must have been too frightened and flabbergasted to make any real effort to escape.
From the culinary point of view, juak and Dungan are disappointing, since their flesh, although while and tender, is rather insipid, and they are foil of those treacherous Y-shaped bones which are found in so many fresh-water fishes. The semah, however, is in a different category altogether, and provides a noble dish, being not unlike a Chinese carp in flavour.
A good-sized semah is a very welcome addition to any up-river meal; he is highly prized by the Dyaks, who rate him-and rightly, too, -as the king of all the ulu fish.
In conclusion, it only remains to be said that luck plays just as large a part in Sarawak as it does on the Test or the Wye. If you are wise, you will always take with you whenever you go fishing a Dyak who is known to be a sampi-expert. Then, while you are putting your rod together, tell him to do his stuff; this will consist of a long and loud invocation in the course of which all the spirits of the earth and the river are asked to come to your assistance, and all the fishes are called upon by name and ordered to take your bait as soon as they see it, under pain of frightful penalties. If you have a blank day after that, the fault must lie with you. -(Contributed.)
Mr. A. F. Richards.
It is with mixed feelings that we record to-day the appointment of Mr. A. F. Richards, C.M.G., to be Governor of Gambia. From the point of view of Malaya, the promotion of the present Governor of British North Borneo means a loss of one of the ablest members of the Malayan Civil Service. It would be possible, no doubt, to find in this country one or two people who do not share the very high personal regard in which Mr. Richards is held by the great majority of those with whom he has come in contact-the case would be unique if it were other-wise-but it would be an extremely difficult task to find anyone possessing a knowledge of the man and his work in Malaya who failed to recognize his outstanding intellectual capacity and administrative ability. In so far as the promotion indicates official recognition of these merits, it will he warmly welcomed and Mr. Richards will receive congratulations from a great number of all classes and communities in Malaya. He may rest assured that a liberal measure of good wishes will follow him in his new appointment from people who are convinced already that Gambia is but a stepping stone to higher things. -Straits Times.
OLD SARAWAK.
From the Sarawak Gazette 61 Years Ago.
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE
No. 53 SATURDAY, 30TH NOV., 1872. Price 5 cents.
NOTICE TO MARINERS.
The N. E. Monsoon having set in, the fair way buoy on the bar at the Santubong entrance of the Sarawak river has been removed, the channel being no longer safe for large vessels.
The open space between the front of the new houses in the bazaar and the river, which has been blocked up and littered with small atap sheds, planks, lime, and other building materials for several months, while the workmen have been busy on the houses, is now being cleared and smoothed down to the riverside. We believe there is a talk of facing the bank with stone also, to prevent the accumulation of a long sloping bed of mud on which boats have to lie at low water, and to guard against the possibility of the roadway being encroached upon by the river. It would add much to the sightliness of the bazaar were this idea to be carried into effect, and senna or other trees planted at regular intervals along the river side, but the work would be expensive and it would require a great amount of labour and time before it could be accomplished.
Sarawak Library.
November, 1933.
The following books have been purchased by the Committee: -
The following books are missing from the Library. The Hon. Secretary will be grateful for any returned.
First Division News.
DISTRICT COURT.
October, 1933.
The Acting District Officer, Mr. W. S. B. Buck, reports: -
Coroner. -On the 9th a case of drowning at sea was reported, and on 20th an inquiry was held into the death of a Dyak youth Jabang, who was accidentally killed in an explosion at Fort Margherita pengkalan.
General. -The H.M.S. Herald arrived at Kuching during the month and anchored at Pending.
UPPER SARAWAK DISTRICT.
October, 1933.
The Assistant District Officer, Mr. R. G. Aikman, reports: -
Agriculture. -The Dahan Rubber Estates harvested 30,000 lbs. of dry rubber during the month. The rainfall at Bau was 9.43 inches. The highest recorded in 24 hours was 1.32 inches and the daily average was .30 of an inch. The rainfall for the month at Dahan Rubber Estates was 15.78 inches.
General. -I proceeded to Kampong Grogo on the 20th and on the 21st. I ascended Gunong Moi so as to obtain a bird’s-eye view of the surveyed Singghi-Grogo Land Dyak farming land boundary. In this I was successful, an excellent view of the boundary being obtained.
Gold Mining. -The Nam Loong Gold Mining Company at Bidi commenced leaching on the 21st. There are now fourteen establishments mining for gold by the cyanide process. The price of gold remained high throughout the month and there has been much activity amongst prospectors in consequence. It is of interest to note that the total monthly production of gold by all the mines in the district is very nearly equal to the Borneo Company’s monthly output during the latter years of their operations in Upper Sarawak. Forty-eight General Prospecting Licences were issued during the month. Ten applications for Exclusive Prospecting Licences were received and four such licences were issued. The actual gold obtained by the following companies for the month of September, 1933, was: -
LUNDU DISTRICT.
October, 1933.
The Acting Assistant District Officer, Mr. E. H. Elam, reports: -
Trade: -
SADONG DISTRICT.
October, 1933.
The Acting Assistant District Officer, Mr. S. G. Hansom, reports: -
Trade. -There is no increase in local trade. The phenomally low price at present obtainable for copra renders the staple product of this district almost valueless.
General. -The Government Bungalow at Bukit Stebun (37th mile) is now furnished, and is intended for the use of Visitors to Serian.
Very high tides have been experienced at several times during the month, when the station has been under water.
The rainfall for the month was 10.89 inches.
Chinese Affairs.
October, 1933.
Extracts from the Report of The Secretary for Chinese Affairs, Captain C. D. Le Gros Clark: -
Labour Protection. -From figures supplied by the Kuching lodging houses, it is estimated that about 1,500 Chinese labourers have moved from the Second Division to Upper Sarawak during the past twelve months. The majority of these are probably from Engkilili district. The half-yearly return for July, 1933, gives the figures for labour in the Gold Kongsis as 1,836, mostly Chinese.
In addition to these, there are probably another 500 working individually or for contractors whose labour figures have not been included in the official returns.
Malay Football League Table.
The following are the positions in the Malay Football League Competitions up to 29th November, 1933: -
Sarawak Club Sweepstake.
Horses drawn on 23rd November, 1933, for Manchester November Handicap run in England on 25th November, 1933.
Second Division News.
SIMANGGANG DISTRICT.
October, 1933.
The District Officer, Mr. R. L. Daubeny, reports: -
Agriculture. -Apart from reports of pests in the Ulu Skrang, the farms this year promise well. Moderate rain during the month has greatly assisted the farmers.
General. -Mr. Fisher left for Kuching and Singapore on 4th instant on local leave and was still away at the end of the month. Mr. A. Macpherson, Assistant District Officer, Lubok Antu, passed through the station on 4th instant, on transfer.
Mr. Arundell arrived here on 13th instant on his way to Lubok Antu where he has been appointed Assistant District Officer.
The local sawmill (Nanyang) is reported to have obtained a contract for the supply of Gerunggang timber for export to Singapore, and an advance shipment has already been forwarded. It is hoped this will materialize, since it will mean considerable opportunities for extra labour being employed and a general increase in trade.
BETONG DISTRICT.
October, 1933.
The Acting District Officer, Mr. J. J. Hill, reports: -
Agriculture. -It would appear that the Dyak padi farms are now almost all planted up. The Malays, however, are very backward and only a few farms are finished. During the early part of the month better weather was experienced, but towards the end rain has fallen practically every day. Strong winds, almost reaching gale force, accompanied by heavy rain, have also been frequent during the latter part of the month.
LUBOK ANTU DISTRICT.
October, 1933.
The Assistant District Officer, Mr. G. R. H. Arundell, reports: -
Agriculture. -The planting is now finished and the padi is coming up. Reports on the quality of it are good in all parts. The padi in the Ulu in particular is reported as excellent.
ENGKILILI DISTRICT.
October, 1933.
The Acting Assistant District Officer, Mr. E. M. Selous, reports: -
Agriculture. -Padi planting is now over throughout the district except in some of the low-lying regions where swamp-padi is cultivated.
Pepper is still being picked, though the main crop should be finished by the end of November.
KALAKA DISTRICT.
October, 1933.
The Acting Assistant District Officer, Mr. J. C. H. Barcroft, reports: -
Agriculture. -Rainfall for the month was normal.
Dyaks have almost completed planting their padi.
General. -The Assistant Superintendent of Lands and Surveys arrived in the Rentis on 20th. On the 22nd Mr. Baron proceeded to Roban by bicycle and, having spent the night at that station, proceeded down river on the 23rd on his return to Simanggang.
I rode over to Roban on the 22nd, returning the following day.
Third Division News.
SIBU AND KANOWIT DISTRICT.
October, 1933.
The District Officer, Mr. W. F. Dick, reports: -
Agriculture. -Reports from various districts on the young padi are good but it is too soon to forecast the crop. The engkabang crop is likely to be small.
Trade: -
Miscellaneous. -H.H.M.Y. Maimuna arrived 1.40 p.m. on the 3rd and left the same afternoon at 2.45 p.m.
The Resident, Mr. P. M. Adams, the Assistant District Officer, Mr. D. C. Hudden, Mr. F. A. Moore, and Mr. B. J. C. Spurway returned from Kuching per H.H.M.Y. Maimuna on 11th. Mr. D. R. Lascelles also arrived per H.H.M.Y. Maimuna having been appointed to do duty here.
Rainfall for the month was 9.92 inches.
LOWER REJANG.
October, 1933.
The District Officer, Mr. H. E. Cutfield, reports: -
Agriculture. -Dyaks were busy planting during the month. It is noted that Chinese in this district are not planting padi this year to the extent that they did last year which seems strange considering the poor pepper season and the drop in price of this commodity.
Trade: -Sarikei and Binatang.
Very little cargo has been exported from Sarikei during the month chiefly due to the drop in price of pepper. The traders are hanging on to the stocks of pepper which they have in the hopes that the price might improve slightly.
Fourth Division News.
MIRI DISTRICT.
October, 1933.
The District Officer, Mr. F. G. Carpenter, reports: -
Agriculture. -A number of Miri Malays having deferred the burning of their new farms have been unable to proceed any further owing to rain. The majority of Natives however took advantage of the fine spell earlier in the season.
Trade: -
General. -21.34 inches of rain fell on 27 days, the maximum for any one day being 3.3 inches. The minimum temperature recorded was 72 degrees and the maximum 89.
BINTULU DISTRICT.
October, 1933.
The Acting District Officer, Mr. J. G. Anderson, reports: -
Dyak and Native Affairs generally. -Juai anak Sakong replaced his father as head of Labang Penans as from 1st.
Trade: -
Shipping. -H.H.M.Y. Maimuna entered at 12.30 p.m. on 19th with His Highness the Tuan Muda aboard. Cleared at 2 p.m. on 20th.
General. -On the 19th instant His Highness the Tuan Muda, accompanied by the Acting Government Secretary, Mr. C. D. Adams, and Mrs. Adams, visited the station in H.H.M.Y. Maimuna.
A large number of Malay and Dyak headmen arrived to welcome His Highness and a number of matters and requests were brought before His Highness.
His Highness then inspected the bazaar and was given an enthusiastic welcome by the bazaar traders and by the masters and pupils of the Chung Hua school.
His Highness then embarked on H.H.M.Y. Maimuna which sailed for Kuching at 2 p.m. on the 20th.
BARAM DISTRICT.
October, 1933.
The Acting District Officer, Mr. F. H. Pollard, reports: -
Trade: -
LIMBANG DISTRICT.
October, 1933.
The District Officer, Mr. E. O. Bruce, reports: -
Agriculture. -A further 37 bags of pepper from the Government subsidized gardens, were shipped to Kuching by s.s. Auby.
Hill padi planting has been completed, but unusually wet weather considerably interfered with the burnings in August.
Trade: -
Average local market rates: -
Travelling. -Mr. T. F. Carey, British Resident, Brunei paid a week end visit on the 21st.
Establishment. -Mr. A. Macpherson reported on the 18th for temporary duty as travelling Assistant District Officer.
Miscellaneous. -Owners of poultry have suffered severe losses owing to an epidemic of chicken cholera, or some such disease, which destroyed about 90% of the birds locally.
10.14 inches of rainfall was registered during the month.
LAWAS DISTRICT.
October, 1933.
The Acting Assistant District Officer, Mr. P. M. Scott, reports: -
Agriculture. -The Lawas (Sarawak) Rubber Estates, Limited, exported 43,456 lbs. of dry rubber during the month of September, 1933.
Rainfall. -The following rainfall was recorded: -
Trade: -
General. -On 14th a Tagal, Liaran Tamu, of Merapok, died as the result of a wound inflicted by his wife with a poisoned dart during a domestic quarrel. The woman, Yakip, immediately fled, and up to date no arrest has been made.
CORRESPONDENCE.
The Editor,
Sarawak Gazette.
Kuching,
SARAWAK TURF CLUB,
Kuching, 2nd December, 1933.
DEAR SIR,
The attached information with regard to Mr. C. D. Adams' Flying Fox may be of interest to your readers.
Yours faithfully,
R. E. LE SUEUR,
Honorary Secretary,
Sarawak Turf Club.
