VOL. LXIII.
No. 959.
The Sarawak Gazette
Price
KUCHING, Tuesday, August 1st, 1933.
20 CENTS.
Contents.
The Sarawak Gazette	TUESDAY, AUGUST 1st, 1933.
Birth.
BUCK. -On 31st July, 1933, at the General Hospital, Kuching, to Mr. and Mrs. W. S. B. Buck, a daughter.
Local and Personal.
JULY.
His Highness the Rajah is expected to sail from England for Sarawak on 20th October, 1933, by s.s. Ranpura.
With the consent of His Highness the Tuan Muda, the Autumn Race Meeting of the Sarawak Turf Club will take place on 7th and 9th October, 1933. We include a provisional programme in our columns.
Mr. C. F. C. Macaskie, Government Secretary, left for England, via Singapore on leave, by s.s. Kudat on 29th July. We take this opportunity of wishing Mr. Macaskie au revoir and a very pleasant leave. Mr. C. D. Adams has been appointed to act as Government Secretary during Mr. Macaskie’s absence.
Mr. F. O. Blagg. accompanied by Mrs. Blagg and children left, on retirement, for Singapore by s.s. Kudat on 29th July. Mr. Blagg joined the Service in 1929 as Legal Adviser to Government.
Among visitors to Kuching during the month was Mrs. H. E. L. Dyne. who was the guest of Mr. and Mrs. C. D. Adams at the Residency.
Mr. and Mrs. K. D Thomas arrived from Singapore on s.s. Vyner Brooke on 14th July. Mr. and Mrs. Thomas were recently married at Penang. We take this opportunity of tendering our hearty congratulations and wishing Mrs. Thomas welcome to Sarawak.
Sarawak Association.
Tenth Annual Dinner held at the Trocadero Restaurant on 29th June, 1933.
His Highness the Rajah (in the Chair)
Mr. H. A. Adams
,, H. C. P. Adams
,, R. Y. Ames
,, J. R. Barnes ,, J. K. Beasley ,, R. D. Binnie ,, F. F. Boult Professor W. E. Le Gros Clark Hon. T. G. Cochrane Mr. D. B. Crane Lt.-Col. sir Percy Cunynghame Mr. F. G. Day
,, R. S. Douglas ,, G. St. F. Dare ,, A. M. Forrest ,, G. C. Gillan ,, C. S. Griffiths ,, E. Hose ,, C. Willes Johnson ,, L. D. Kennedy Dr. Kusel Mr. F. H. Kortright Captain A. S. Lowe Mr. J. C. W. Mac Bryan Dr. E. M. Marjoribanks Mr. S. R. Maw Commander P. S. E. Maxwell Mr. P. Murray-Scott
,, A. H. Noble ,, C. E. Pascoe ,, R. Pawle Major H. W. V. Scott Mr. W. F. de V. Skrine
,, J. A. Smith ,, W. H. Smith ,, J. C. Swayne ,, G. J. D. Walters ,, A. B. Ward ,, E. M. Woodward Sir Gilbert Grindle Mr. F. A. W. Page-Turner.
Permanent?
Although we in Malaya are watching the rubber price with fear and trembling, delighted that it is at a paying level and yet anxious lest it may fall as quickly as it has risen, it is cheering to find that an American trade journal, the India Rubber World, thinks that this improvement may be permanent, with or without restriction. This journal says: “The minor business boom that commenced in the early part of May has continued increasingly through the past month. This marked recovery is due particularly to the stiffening of commodity prices, including crude rubber, which bid fair to become permanent; together with the possibility of controlled currency inflation and the credit expansion that is already on the way. The long delay of buyers in placing orders for goods of all sorts and the low inventories all over the country are other factors in the general upswing of business now apparent in all parts of the United States.” The italics are ours. -Straits Times.
Saved by the Durian,
A BALLAD OF THE SOUTH SEAS By CHARLES B. NORDHOFF.
High on a hill above the bay,
Where ships lay moored beside the quay, The signal-tower stood.
“A ship! A ship!” the watchman cried
As far beyond the reef he spied What seemed a floating wood.
“A ship?” he muttered. “Am I sane?
A forest came to Dunsinane,
But that was not at sea.
She moves-she trials a cloud of smoke-
Ha! This is getting past a joke!
I’ll warn the town,” said he.
From north, and south, and east, and west, The folk came running, fearing lest
They miss so strange a sight.
So dense a crowd was never seen
Upon Papeete’s village green At dance, dispute, or fight.
The ship drew near, she reached the pass,
Her funnels smoked above a mass Of vegetation strange.
Langsat and lofty Durian,
The foliage of the Rambutan, Far from its natural range.
Her anchor dropped with clanking sound.
The people whispered all around: “Look! Who is yonder man?” A savage figure strode the deck, Pierced teeth about his stalwart neck Gleamed white against the tan.
A bristling beard adorned his face.
Blue clan-marks of the Kayan race Were traced on arms and back.
They whispered as he stepped ashore: “He wears a chawat-nothing more!
Run! Fetch a copra-sack!
“In Borneo he’s spent his days-
Kayan and Dyak sing his praise In all their nursery-rhymes.
He was a friend of Raja Brooke-
Twas whispered at the court he took A head or two at times.”
The governor and all his suite
Were waiting on the dock to greet This celebrated chief.
He Said: “I’ve braved the tempest’s foam To make your sunny isle my home- Safe in its barrier-reef!
“I’m done with Borneo!” he cried;
“And every other land beside- They’re all too civilized!
Once wild headhunters lay in wait.
And savage chieftians sat in state-
That was the life I prized!
“But now headhunting’s defend- It makes me ill-it make me blue To mark the saddening change.
They’ve chopped the finest jungles down- The savages have moved to town- The monkeys have the mange!
“Tahiti’s good enough for me.
And by this distant, tranquil sea I’ll settle down for life.
Beneath these palms I’ll meditate. Forgetting jazz, and real estate, And polities, and strife.
“I’ve brought a hundred kinds of fruit,
And ornamental trees, to boot,
To plant about my door.
Not one man in this crowd, I ween, Has lasted of the Mangosteen
Or Rambutan before!
“Langsat, Jackfruit and Soursop,
You’ll all declare the last tip-top- The finest of the three.
You giant Victoria blooms in spring- From hot Sumatra’s isle I bring The curious Traveller’s Tree.
“And when my trees begin to bear
I hope one day I’ll see you there To act the jury on
The fruit which cheers, rejuvenates, And strengthens Eastern potentates- The royal Durian!”
The stranger bowed and walked away- He was not seen for many a day And many a year to boot.
A generation passed before
The noble tree beside his door Flowered and bore its fruit.
His hair was scant, his beard was snow;
He could no longer walk, and so They wheeled him in a chair. Wheeled him to watch with rheumy eyes The ripening fruit that Sultan’s prize,
The Durian hanging there.
The longed-for day arrived at last, The fruit was ripe, the waiting past, And patience had its ends.
His messengers rode forth in haste,
Without a moment’s time to waste,
To call his aged friends.
Some came in breechclouts-some in pants;
In stretchers and by ambulance They hastened to his door.
He held aloft in palsied hand
The fruit no man in all that land Had seen or smelled before.
“Twas strange to see each ancient friend Grip tight his suffering nose, “Quick, send Plates and a knife,” he cried.
A thick mephitic perfume rose-
Each dotard swore despite his nose He’d taste it ere he died.
Bananas, garlic and ice cream. Onions and chocolate would seem A horrid blend enough-
But what is this? Each palsied guest
Feels rising in his withered breast An urge to action rough!
With brightened eyes, all in amaze,
Each ancient turned a piercing gaze Upon the others there.
Each voice grew strong, each back grew straight, Fast-sprouting on each shining pate They saw a growth of hair.
Spurning his chair-on legs grown strong-
The host leaped up in gay sarong With Dyak battle-cry, “The Durian has saved our lives! Each man will need a hundred wives!
We’re off! Lets go, say I!
“Break up this chair! Discharge my nurse!
Run for my cheque-book and my purse! Cut up another fruit!
Tell all the dancing girls to come!
Send in for twenty casks of rum, And wine and beer to boot!”
That day was many months ago,
But still the man from Borneo
Makes merry in his house.
And now, throughout that sunny land. Old men are young on every hand-
Their lives one long carouse!
L’ Envoi
So man whose hair is sparse and gray Should travel east without delay, In ships, canoes, or boats-
To eat the fruit that tires the mild- The fruit that helps the growing child- The fruit that makes tame women wild, And old men skip like goats!
Day Dreams.
In tropical climes there are certain times of day.
Now do shut up I know you’re going to say
That this is a crib from Noel Coward’s verse,
But its not, because its definitely worse.
The time, I mean’s a little before one,
When your midday forty winks have just begun,
You settle down more firmly in your chair While gentle snores disturb the quivering air.
Dreams of iced beer, of gentle breezes cool,
And bathing in a clear and limpid pool Pervade the senses and all thoughts dispel Of noisy busses, shops, red heat and smell.
The office seems a long long way away,
You fancy that it must be Saturday,
You’re home in England seated ‘neath the trees,
Or sailing over smiling summer seas.
At last you kid yourself that you are free, As any little bird or bumble-bee.
But now a foreign note your senses jar At first ‘tis scarcely audible-afar.
It recalls unpleasant things, such as the damp At Reveille in November, back in camp,
Or of someone breathing salt into your ear, With “Your middle watch, cold night and not too clear.”
At last it breaks across your enfeebled brain, That the “Boy” is saying over once again The time-worn phrase that always comes too soon, “Pukol satu lebeh, Tuan bangun.”
You stumble up and grab your stud and tie, And fix it round your neck a bit cock-eye.
Then off you stagger, railing ‘gainst the powers Or others who invented office hours.
PENDEK.
Engagement.
A marriage has been arranged and will take place in August, between James Colin, Sarawak Civil Service, only surviving son of the late Major-General J. D. Swayne and the late Mrs. Swayne, and Hester, second daughter of Mr. and Mrs. H. T. Barnett, of Westwood House, Tilehurst, Reading. -The Times.
Among the Head-Hunters.
It was my own fault. I suggested a visit to the caves, and my friend became at once wildly enthusiastic. The District Officer, too, was helpful. He said he would provide guides, showed us our itinerary on a map (which I could not understand), and kissed us good-bye. “There’s just one thing I ought to tell you,” he added, “You can only get to the entrances by Dyak ladders which I cannot guarantee. They haven’t been examined for some mouths and may be a bit rotten in parts. Anyhow, see them for yourselves. I may come along myself later and meet you on your way back.” The significance of this last remark was not fully appreciated until later (curse his eyes).
I will skip over our journey to the caves, except to record my undying hatred of all Dyak bridges, whether they are pieces of wood tied on to branches by liana which sway dizzily in mid-air, or are merely felled tree-trunks, decayed and slippery, stretching from bank to bank. They are all damnable, an abomination that should be brought before the League of Nations at once.
Well, we crossed one of these tree-trunks; myself unashamedly crawling across on my stomach with my eyes shut. (Didn’t Napoleon have something to say about armies marching on their stomachs? Poor devils, they have my sympathy). Then we had a lengthy walk, part of which was accomplished by hacking our way with parangs through secondary jungle. (We didn’t really, but it sounds well in an article on Borneo).
After about an hour of this, we came to a blank wall. At least, it looked like a wall, until our guides told us it was the cliff. The caves, they added, were away up there (pointing heavenwards), but it would be quite impossible to get up to them, as the ladders were rotten. Saying which, one of them drew aside a bush, and we saw what purported to be a ladder. It consisted of two vertical poles across which were nailed pieces of wood. The ladder was about fifteen feet high. I looked up through the branches and saw that, where it ended, another ladder was balanced perilously on top. The ladders went on and on, until they disappeared into the mists. “They are rotten, Tuan,” repeated the guide, and he took hold of one of the lower rungs in his hand. The wood came away easily, and crumpled up into small slivers. Obviously, it was impossible to climb to the caves.
I heaved an inward sigh of relief, for I loathe heights and regard all climbing enthusiasts as suffering from a perverted form of inferiority complex. “Only mad dogs would attempt to climb that,” added the guide. He might just as well have included Englishmen under that category, for my companion was already disappearing up the cliff, and I could see only his shoes through the “luxuriant tropical” tree-tops. Nothing would have induced me to follow him, but for the regrettable fact that, being my guest, I felt a moral responsibility for his personal safety. The native guides (there were three of them) and I exchanged looks of resignation mingled with disgust, shrugged our shoulders, and prepared to follow the idiot, myself lending.
The next half hour was a nightmare. For about a hundred feet the ladders held fairly well. Then we came to a piece of sheer precipice. I was half, way up this when I felt a sickening crack (I am no feather-weight), and my ladder began to dissolve into its component parts. The guide on the next ladder below saw the danger, and shouted to me to get a hold on the rock.
Panic-stricken I searched feverishly for anything to grasp. Only a solitary African snail disfigured the smoothness of that damned cliff. The unmentionable part of a baby’s anatomy could scarcely have shewn a more virginly surface. A hideously painful death seemed certain, and I imagined my twisting body hurtling to a mangled end in the valley below. My past life, murky in its squalidity, rose before me,-and then I heard my friend bawling to me to “Catch hold of this, quickly!” I looked up and saw a liana swinging across the cliff-face just within reach of my hand. I grasped it and, at that moment, the entire ladder collapsed. Twenty seconds later, we could hear it crash into the undergrowth far beneath us.
I still don’t know how I reached the top and safety. My mind was drugged with terror, only dimly realizing that I owed my life to my companion, though I cursed him for his madness in ever going up the rotten thing. The return journey was accomplished only after further nerve-racking episodes, but we all got to the bottom where we found the District Officer. He seemed rather gloomy. It was then I understood the meaning of his final remark to us. Of course, a coroner gets ten dollars a corpse, and there he was, with pencil and notebook, waiting to check off our bodies as they smashed to earth! That man will go far in life, or come to a sticky end.
I am afraid this article is a little exaggerated in parts. But the Editor implored me to “give him something to fill up space, and make it snappy.” Well, I admit I’ve piled it on a bit, but after all we live in Borneo “among the Head-hunters.” and I am assured that at least one copy of this Gazette will be sent to England-to the Government Agent! -Munchausen.
Mr. A. F. Richards.
Early in the month the Straits Times published a report received from a usually reliable source that Mr. A. F. Richards, the present Governor of North Borneo, was returning to Malaya later in the year to take up the post of British Resident, Selangor, and that Mr. T. S. Adams, the present British Resident. Selangor, would succeed Mr. Richards in North Borneo. We now have it on the authority of Mr. Richards that the report of these changes is entirely without foundation. The appointment as Governor of North Borneo is for five years and Mr. Richards’s term expires in March, 1935. There is an option on the side of the holder of the post of going after three years’ resident service as Governor and in Mr. Richards’s case that period expires in October. He has not, however, up to the present proposed exercising that option. -Straits Times.
OLD SARAWAK.
From the Sarawak Gazette 46 Years Ago.
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE
1887.] THURSDAY, 12TH MAY, 1887. [Price 10 cents.
We may consider this country fortunate in the late arrival of an experienced gentleman who has come for the purpose of prospecting with the view to planting tobacco. He has already visited the left-hand branch of the Sarawak river, in which he found fairly good soil though the ground is generally too hilly and steep for to tobacco culture. He has also visited Lundu around which, and at the foot-of the Poe mountain, we understand he has found a good site with good deep soil, and we hear that in many places deep granite deposits exist, but the drawback in that part of the country is the difficulty of approach during the N.E. monsoon.
Before finally deciding, we think he should visit the Rejang river, as from what we know that will prove the most likely locality. The lower sixty miles of it is nearly all flat ground, a great portion of which about Palobohan is dry, and above high water mark, possessing a rich heavy loam soil of great depth, and any extent. Again, about thirty miles above Sibu there are hills with valleys between, some swampy, but never covered by the river, excepting in certain parts which could be avoided.
But by far the best place we think lies about twenty miles above Kanowit or one hundred and twenty miles from the mouth. Here the river is large enough for any sized vessel to anchor and always approachable throughout the year. This likely looking land commences immediately above the Poe stream on the right hand going up, land equally good on both sides, undulating, that having old jungle, grass land, and timber of almost all growths; about three miles above Poe is Kabar, a stream on the left hand, and this is the part we would specially draw attention to, for there is evidently any amount of it, and owned by no special holder, or Dyaks that would demur about its being taken up by anyone the Government liked to grant it away to. Above this again there are many more sites, such as in the Eran and other streams, but then the higher one goes the more difficulties are to be found in the rivers with freshes, which would at times retard communication.
Sarawak Library.
Kindly presented by His Highness the Tuan Muda: -
Kindly presented by Mr. J. R. Combe: -
Purchased by the Committee: -
First Division News.
UPPER SARAWAK DISTRICT.
June, 1933.
The Assistant District Officer, Mr. R. G. Aikman, reports: -
Agriculture. -The Dahan Rubber Estates harvested 29,000 lbs. of dry rubber during the month. The rainfall at Bau was 3.79 inches. The highest recorded in 24 hours was 1.90 inches and the daily average was .12 of an inch. The rainfall for the month at Dahan Rubber Estates was 3.56 inches.
General. -I left for the annual trip up the Left-Hand Branch on the 14th, returning to Bau on the 22nd. At Kampong Sennah Proper I met Mr. S. G. Hansom. Acting Assistant District Officer, Sadong, who had come over from the Ulu Sadong. He brought with him the Orang Kaya of Temah and a joint ruling was given regarding the longstanding farming land dispute between the Temah (Sadong) and Sennah (Upper Sarawak) Dyaks. Mr. Hansom accompanied me down river as far as Riam Panjang.
Telephonic communication was established with the Jebong Gold Mining Syndicate works at Pegong Tengah on the 10th. The 3rd, being the anniversary of the birthday of H.M. King George V., was kept as a public holiday and the Government Offices were closed. Visitors to the station during the month included the Acting Principal Medical Officer, Dr. W. Hutchison, Messrs. H. M. Calvert, R. E. Edwards, T. M. Griffiths and A. L. McLaine.
Gold Mining. -Two companies, The Monggak Gold Mining Company at Monggak, and The Kim Lee Gold Mining Syndicate at Jambusan, commenced leaching during the month and this brings the number of companies now operating by the cyanide process to ten. The former company, which is under Malay management, is situated in a remote spot some distance from any proper road. Their communications are by water, and the manage-ment deserve great credit for the way in which they have overcome the difficulties of distance and have transported all their materials entirely by boat and by poling up the shallow Sungei Gumbang. There is still great interest and activity in gold mining throughout the district, and this will no doubt continue so long as the price of the metal remains at its present high level. Thirty-three General Prospecting Licences were issued during the month. Six applications for Exclusive Prospecting Licences were received and nine such licences were issued.
One Mining Lease was issued. The actual gold obtained by the following Companies for the month of May, 1933, was: -
The following Gold Mining Statistics for the first half of 1933, which I have compiled, may be of interest. The complete 1932 figures are given as well for purposes of comparison.
The average price of Gold during 1931 was $38.57 per ounce.
The highest price reached was $50 in November and the lowest $34.60 in February, March and April.
The average price in 1932 was $49.46.
The highest price being $54 in December and the lowest $45.75 in March.
The average price in 1933 ending June was $50.83 1/4.
The highest price being $51.27 1/2 in June and the lowest $49 in March.
LUNDU DISTRICT.
June, 1933.
The Acting Assistant District Officer, Mr. E. H. Elam, reports: -
Obituary. -I regret to report the death of ex-Native Officer Abang Merali, which occurred on the night of the 12th after a short illness. He was a member of the Council Negri and retired on pension in April, 1931. He joined the Government service in August, 1915.
Dyak and Native Affairs generally. -Lawi was elected Pengarah of Kampong Biawak rice Badong (who died in May) and later he was confirmed in his appointment.
General. -On the 11th I left for Biawak on the frontier and after having elected a new Pengarah there, I crossed the border next day and proceeded to Sambas via Arok and District Santunoh. I arrived back at Lundu on the 19th.
Abang Zamhari, Native Officer of Sadong, paid a short visit to Lundu during the month.
SADONG DISTRICT.
June, 1933.
The Acting Assistant District Officer, Mr. S. G. Hansom, reports: -
Trade. -In consequence of the rise in prices of commodities, rubber and jelutong exports show an increase on previous months. It is noted that nearly all native and Chinese owned rubber gardens are now being tapped, a continuation of the rise of price, or even a maintenance of the present level, will produce easier conditions.
General. -On Sunday the 4th instant a very enjoyable and successful tuba fishing was held in the Ulu Simunjan. About seven piculs of tuba were used, and it was estimated that more than two hundred piculs of fish were taken. About four hundred boats, of Malays, Dyaks and Chinese, attended the fishing, and it was noted that every boat was laden with fish at the close of the day.
On the7th instant I visited Gedong in connection with a number of Court cases, meeting Abang Samsudin, Native Officer, Tebekang, there.
On the 13th instant I left Simunjan for the righthand branch of the Ulu Sadong, via Gedong and Tebekang.
Nights were spent at Kampongs Temah, Kohom, Serimut and Sennah. I crossed the boundary of this district and the Ulu Sarawak at Serimut, and proceeded to Sennah, which is one day’s journey from the boundary, where I met Mr. R. G. Aikman, the Assistant District Officer, Bau. Investigations were then made into a long-standing farming dispute between the Temah-Sennah Dyaks.
I accompanied Mr. R. G. Aikman down the Sarawak river as far as His Highness the Rajah’s bungalow at the 21st mile, and from thence proceeded overland to Kuching where two nights were spent. I later returned to Tebekang, overland, and finally reached Simunjan on the 27th instant.
It was noted that the paths and tracks of the right-hand branch of the Sadong were in exceptionally bad condition, and one might almost say, non-existent. The travelling between Temah and Sennah Tenbawang is exceptionally heavy going and most exhausting, and consists in the main of picking one’s way over densely-wooded hills without the semblance of a track.
The 3rd instant H.M. the King’s Birthday, was observed as a Public Holiday, and Government Offices closed.
The rainfall for the month was 2.70 inches.
SARAWAK TURF CLUB.
PROVISIONAL PROGRAMME FOR THE AUTUMN MEETING, 1933.
FIRST DAY, SATURDAY, 7TH OCTOBER, 1933.
RACE NO. 1 [2.30 p.m.
THE TUAN MUDA’S CUP.
Value $250. A piece of plate of the value of $100. Presented by His Highness the Tuan Muda with $150 added. Second to receive $100. Third $40.
A handicap for Division I ponies. Distance 6 furlongs. Entrance Fee $10.
RACE NO. 2 [3.0 p.m.
THE SATOK STAKES.
Value $250. Second to receive $100. Third $40.
A handicap for Division II ponies. Distance 5 furlongs. Entrance Fee $10.
RACE NO. 3 [3.30 p.m.
THE B.C.L. STAKES.
Value $200. $50 presented by The Borneo Company, Limited, with $150 added. Second to receive $75. Third $40.
A handicap for Division III ponies. Distance 6 furlongs. Entrance Fee $10.
RACE NO. 4 [4.0 p.m.
SIMPANG TIGA STAKES.
Value $250. Second to receive $100. Third $40.
A handicap for Division I ponies. Distance 3 furlongs. Entrance Fee $10.
RACE NO. 5 [4.30 p.m.
THE MATANG STAKES.
Value $250. Second to receive $100. Third $40.
A handicap for Division II ponies. Distance 4 furlongs. Entrance Fee $10.
RACE NO. 6 [5.0 p.m.
THE PENDING STAKES.
Value $200. Second to receive $75. Third $40.
A handicap for Division III ponies. Distance 3 furlongs. Entrance Fee $10.
RACE NO. 7 [5.30 p.m.
THE RANEE’S CUP.
Value $250. A piece of plate of the value of $ 100 presented by Her Highness the Ranee with $150 added. Second to receive $100. Third $40.
A handicap for ponies of any Division. Distance 1 mile. Entrance Fee $10.
SECOND DAY, MONDAY, 9TH OCTOBER, 1933.
RACE No. 1 [2.30 p.m.
THE SLUMP STAKES.
Value $250. Second to receive $100. Third $40.
A handicap for Division I ponies. Distance 5 furlongs. Entrance Fee $10.
RACE NO. 2 [3.0 p.m.
THE COUNTRY STAKES.
Value $250 presented by the Turf Club. Second to receive $100. Third $40.
A handicap for Division II ponies. Distance 6 furlongs. Entrance Fee $10.
RACE NO. 3 [3.30 p.m.
THE SARAWAK STAKES.
Value $200. Second to receive $75. Third $40.
A handicap for Division III ponies. Distance 5 furlongs. Entrance Fee $10.
RACE NO. 4 [4.0 p.m.
THE TURF CLUB STAKES.
Value $250. Second to receive $100. Third $40.
A handicap for Division I ponies. Distance 4 furlongs. Entrance Fee $10.
RACE NO. 5 [4.30 p.m.
THE STATES SPRINT.
Value $250. Second to receive $100. Third $40.
A handicap for Division II ponies. Distance 3 furlongs. Entrance Fee $10.
RACE NO. 6 [5.0 p.m.
THE TOWN STAKES.
Value $200. Second to receive $75. Third $40.
A handicap for Division III ponies. Distance 4 furlongs Entrance Fee $10.
RACE NO. 7 [5.30 p.m.
THE RAJAH’S CUP.
Value $300. A piece of plate value $150 presented by His Highness the Rajah with $150 added. Second to receive $100. Third $40.
A handicap for ponies of any Division. Distance Race-course (about 1.1/3 Miles.) Entrance Fee $10. $5 refunded to non-acceptors. Handicap published on the Course. Post Entries allowed at $20 but no refund.
REGULATIONS.
Penalties. -Winners of any race at this Meeting after publication of weights shall carry a penalty of 7 lbs. for each race with a maximum of 11 stone 7 lbs.
Allowance. -Professional Jockeys who are Sarawak subjects and have not ridden more than two winners under Sarawak Turf Club Rules, may claim an allowance of 5 lbs.
Entries. -All nominations, accompanied by Entrance Fees, description of ponies, and declaration of colours, to be made to the Honorary Secretary not later than noon, 1st September, 1933.
Scratchings. -Owners scratching ponies before 5 p.m. on October 6th for first day, and 5 p.m. on October 8th for second day, will receive back half their entrance fees.
Handicaps. -For First Day will be posted on the Notice Board at the Sarawak Club at noon on 16th September, and for the Second Day at noon on 8th October.
Course. -Will be open for training on 2nd September, at 5.30 a.m.
Ponies. -Must run on the First Day to be eligible for entry in Races on Second Day.
Owners. -Are requested to see that their syces and jockeys obtain necessary badge for entrance to Paddock.
Totalizators and Cash Sweeps as usual.
Prizes 20% reduction if under 5 entries.
Communications to be made to
R. E. LE SUEUR,
Honorary Secretary, Sarawak Turf Club.
[Members are requested to apply to the Hon. Secretary for necessary Badges or obtain them at the Grandstand.]
Kuching Association Football League Table, 1933.
The following are the positions in the K.F.A. League Competitions up to 29th July: -
Second Division News.
June, 1933.
Extracts from the Second Divisional Reports by Mr. J. B. Archer, Resident: -
At the beginning of the month I was in Pusa. Later I visited Betong, Spaoh, Stambak. Kabong, and Saratok, returning to Simanggang on the 8th.
Nothing of much importance was brought up in three places. It was satisfactory to note how the slight rise in the price of rubber has brightened up the various bazaars. Rubber gardens were being cleared rapidly and all were more cheerful than they have been for many months.
Mr. E. M. Selous was on leave in Kuching for a while. The District Officer of Simanggang, Mr. R. L. Daubeny, together with Mrs. Daubeny, returned from local leave on the 27th. Mr. J. R. Combe arrived from Betong on the 30th en route for furlough.
Mr. L. N. Reynolds, Acting Commissioner of Sarawak Constabulary, accompanied by Mr. R. G. Talbot of the Constabulary, toured the Division during the month. Mr. F. Harding visited the Division on telegraph and telephone inspection. Mr. N. Mace returned to Kuching having finished his survey work here.
SIMANGGANG DISTRICT.
June, 1933.
The District Officer, Mr. R. L. Daubeny, reports: -
General. -On 8th instant the Resident, Second Division, returned from Saratok in m.l. Rentis following the completion of his substation tour.
I returned from local leave on 27th instant, accompanied by Mrs. Daubeny, and took over the duties of the District Office from Mr. Fisher on the same day.
Mr. Selous, Acting Assistant District Officer. Engkilili, passed through the station on his way to Kuching on 8th instant.
The Government Auditor, Mr. A. G. Taylor, arrived by boat from Engkilili on 1st and left for Betong, overland via Pangkalan Jongkong, on 4th instant.
Mr. Fisher proceeded to Lingga on a visit of inspection on 21st instant and returned the same day accompanied by Messrs. Reynolds, Talbot and Harding. The m.l. Betty arrived the same evening with Messrs. T. M. Griffiths, N. Mace, and the Government Auditor, Mr. A. G. Taylor.
Messrs. Combe and Harding arrived front Betong overland on 30th instant, the former on his way to Kuching on furlough, and the latter on his return from an inspection of the telephone line from Betong to Simanggang.
LUBOK ANTU DISTRICT.
June, 1933.
The Assistant District Officer, Mr. A. Macpherson, reports: -
Dyaks and Native Affairs generally. -Dyaks are busy felling big jungle for their farms.
A meeting was held at Nanga Telaus, attended by all Penghulus and headmen.
ENGKILILI DISTRICT.
June, 1933.
The Acting Assistant District Officer, Mr. E. M. Selous, reports: -
Agriculture. -The pepper crop is not yet fully ripened and most of that brought to the bazaar during the month has been either black or third quality white. It is recorded that the price of first quality white pepper has fallen train $33 to $26.
General. -Mr. Harding arrived on the 23rd on business connected with the Posts and Telegraphs Department-he left on the 25th. The telephone line to Lubok Antu was completed on the 16th and, except for breakdowns on the 18th and 2lst, has proved satisfactory.
A tuba-fishing was held in the Lemanak on Sunday 11th, when a moderate catch was obtained.
The 3rd, being the anniversary of the birthday of His Majesty the King, was observed as a holiday.
Rain fell on ten days, the total fall being 7.44 inches.
SARIBAS-BETONG DISTRICT.
June, 1933.
The Acting Assistant District Officer, Mr. J. R. Combe, reports: -
General. -The Resident, Second Division, arrived on 1st instant in the m.s. Rentis and left for Saratok on 4th instant.
Mr. Taylor, Government Auditor, arrived from Simanggang on 4th instant. I was away visiting substations on 8th instant with the Auditor, and returned on 12th instant.
Mr. Summers. Land Officer, paid a visit on 14th instant.
KALAKA DISTRICT.
June, 1933.
The Acting Assistant District Officer. Mr. J. C. H. Barcroft, reports: -
Agriculture. -Most rubber gardens have been cleaned and were tapped during the mouth. Sago was worked regularly.
General. -On the 5th instant the Resident, Second Division, arrived in the Rentis. The Resident returned to Simanggang on the 8th. On the 11th I went down river to Kabong and the following day sent the Nellie to Pusa to fetch Mr. Taylor, the Government Auditor.
On the 14th, accompanied by Mr. Taylor, I returned to Saratok.
Mr. Taylor proceeded to Roban on the 18th and left the Kalaka District on the 21st. On the 23rd I proceeded up the Awek and attended Pengarah Nyalu’s “Begawai Batu,” in which fifteen houses took part. I returned to Saratok on the 25th.
On the 28th the Bishop of Labuan and Sarawak, accompanied by Father Sparrow, arrived overland from Debak.
Father Bradshaw arrived in the mission launch.
The Bishop and Father Sparrow returned overland to Debak on the 30th.
Third Division News.
Extracts from the Third Divisional Reports by Mr. P. M. Adams, Acting Resident: -
SIBU AND KANOWIT DISTRICT.
June, 1933.
The District Officer, Mr. W. F. Dick, reports: -
Dyak Affairs. -Wan Ibrahim, Native Officer in charge of the Constabulary patrol in the Ngemah, arrived on 23rd with Penghulu Radin and reported that many tuai in the Ngemah flatly refused to move below Wong Silau as ordered.
Trade: -
General. -The offices were closed on 3rd June, in honour of His Majesty the King’s Birthday.
An unfortunate accident, which might have had serious consequences, occurred on board the Kapit out-board motor-boat Sri Punan while tied alongside the Sibu wharf. A coolie lighted a cigarette while oil and benzine were being mixed, the petrol caught fire and one man was burnt about the face. Two drums of benzine which were on fire wore thrown into the water. No damage was done to the boat or engine.
The Resident left per m.l. Rubberneck on 10th on a visit to Binatang and Sarikei and returned on 12th.
The Assistant District Officer, Mr. D. C. Hudden, returned on 20th from a visit to the Dyaks of the Salim, Naman, Menyan, Pah, Durin, and Assan.
Mr. G. A. Farrelly, of the Land and Survey Department, arrived by m.s. Sri Mukah on 27th for duty at this station.
SARIKEI, BINATANG AND REJANG.
June, 1933.
The District Officer, Mr. H. E. Cutfield, reports: -
Dyak and Native Affairs generally. -The first batch of seventy-two Dyaks left Binatang to move to the Anap.
There seems to be no eagerness on the part of the lower Sarikei people to move however.
The Nyelong Dyaks are waiting to move next year and in the meantime are building boats suitable for their transfer.
Haji Abdul-Karim, Tua Kampong, Sarikei, left the service at the end of the month. His duties being taken over by the Native Officer.
Trade: -
General. -Saturday the 3rd being the Birthday of His Majesty the King was observed as a holiday and offices closed.
MUKAH DISTRICT.
June, 1933.
The Acting District Officer, Mr. J. J. Hill, reports: -
Obituary. -It is with regret that I have to report the death on the 29th instant of Tua Kampong Kader, of Ulu Tellian, an old and trusted Tua Kampong who has worked for Government for over thirty years.
Agriculture. -The harvest is now over and natives are busy felling for their new farms.
The weather has been exceptionally hot, hardly any rain being experienced during the month.
General. -On the 13th I left on a trip to the Ulu Balingian by m.s. Kim Chin Seng.
On my return I spent four days at the Balingian station and settled up all outstanding matters.
OYA AND DALAT.
June, 1933.
The Acting Assistant District Officer, Mr. N. E. Hughes, reports: -
Obituary. -T. R. Ambah, a respected Tuai Rumah in the Oya river, died suddenly of heart failure on 14th June. His death was much regretted by all Dyaks in the Ulu.
Dyak and Native Affairs. -On 14th June, I left Dalat for a tour of the Ulu Oya and Sungei Paku district.
On the 18th I reached Rumah Penghulu Chendang, Sungei Paku, having been able to use the outboard motor up to this point, i.e., 105 miles from the mouth of the river.
On 20th June, I arrived at Rumah Itang. The next three days were spent in visiting the up-river houses, travelling being slow owing to the water being extremely low.
I left Rumah Penghulu Untol on 24th June, and reached Dalat on the 27th.
Agriculture. -Dyaks in the Lower Oya have already started farming, but numbers of those in the Ulu have not yet finished harvesting.
Trade. -The slight rise in commodity prices has been maintained, and traders_ generally are optimistic about the future.
General. -The Oya outboard motor arrived bock un-expectedly on 11th June, and was therefore available for my up-river trip. About 220 miles were travelled.
MATU AND DARO DISTRICT.
June, 1933.
The Officer-in-Charge, Mr. G. F. J. Peglar, reports: -
Agriculture. -Consequent upon the construction of the path to Kuala Matu. the natives have begun felling the small scrub on either side of the path with a view to planting padi in the next month or two. Hitherto this land has been idle.
General. -Accompanying the Divisional Land Officer, I visited Daro on the 17th instant, returning to Matu the following morning. I again proceeded to Daro on the 26th instant and was still there at the end of the month.
Fourth Division News.
MIRI DISTRICT.
June, 1933.
The District Officer, Mr. F. G. Carpenter, reports: -
Courts. -Number of Civil cases, 49. Total value of claims, $1,586.
Trade: -
Shipping. -H.M.S. Herald arrived for the week-end on the 24th.
General. -The Resident visited Limbang on the 20th, returning to Miri on the 30th.
Visitors to the station included Messrs. Bruce and White and Mrs. F. H. Pollard.
Rainfall totalling 20.57 inches fell on nineteen days, the maximum of any one day being 5.96 inches.
BARAM DISTRICT.
June, 1933.
The Acting District Officer, Mr. F. H. Pollard, reports: -
Obituary. -I regret to report the death of Wan Sladin, the youngest son of the late Datu Sarip Hamid and a student of the Government School, on the afternoon of the 27th.
Agriculture. -Rainfall amounted to 5.98 inches in twelve days.
Shipping. -The s.s. Gladys made two trips during the month.
General. -Mr. White left for Miri on 2nd and returned on 6th. Wan Suror left for Miri on sick leave from 2nd to 9th. I returned from Bintulu on the 10th and Native Officer Galan returned from leave on the same day. On the 20th I left for Long Akah end was still away at the end of month. Mr. White left for Singapore on 15th and returned on 29th. Wan Taha arrived from Long Lobang on the 26th.
BINTULU DISTRICT.
June, 1933.
The Acting District Officer. Mr. J. G. Anderson, reports: -
Courts. -Nineteen Civil cases were heard during the month. Total value of claims $70.
Twenty-five Criminal cases were heard during the month. Total fines imposed $191.64.
Trade. -Continues to improve in output. A rise in jelutong prices caused large shipments, about half to Kuching and half direct to Singapore by s.s. Auby.
Shipping. -On 11th instant m.l. Guan Hua arrived from Labuan. M.L. Joan was towed to Miri on the 8th by H.H.M.Y. Maimunah for annual overhaul. She was still away at end of month.
General. -Mr. C. F. C. Macaskie, Government Secretary, and Mr. E. O. Bruce, called off the Kuala in H.H.M.Y. Maimunah. At the Government Secretary’s invitation I went out to the Maimunah in m.l. Joan. Mr. Macaskie was unable to come ashore owing to lack of time, and proceeded on to Miri early the following morning.
On the 15th I proceeded to Sebauh in m.l. Tiang Ann and returned to Bintulu on the 16th.
Mr. Carroll, A.F.O. Miri, who had been here since 12th May, and has completed exploration of the Simalajau and Sebiew areas, returned to Miri on the 23rd instant. A very successful regatta was held on 3rd June, the birthday His Majesty King George. This was the first regatta to be held for four years. About 1,500 Dyaks came down and in one race over forty boats entered.
The opportunity was taken to discuss a number of matters with visiting Native Officers and Penghulus from up river and Tatau.
LIMBANG DISTRICT.
June, 1933.
The District Officer, Mr. E. O. Bruce, reports: -
Dyak and Native Affairs generally. -Penghulu Wee visited Limbang and discussed several minor matters. The vanguard of 100 doors of immigrant Dyaks from Second Division, who arrived here last year, have commenced moving up river to their reserve, from their temporary location down river, where they were allowed to borrow Tabun padi land for one harvest only.
Agriculture. -Rainfall amounted to 6.23 inches.
The kongsi of subsidized pepper planters at the 8th mile Panderuan shipped a total of 48.13 piculs of white and black pepper during the month.
Preparation for next year’s padi harvest have commenced down river on the swamp areas.
Trade: -
Staff. -On the 10th I arrived from Kuching and took over charge of the district.
The Acting Assistant District Officer, Mr. Ditmas, proceeded on the 24th to Lawas to take over from Mr. Buck, who proceeded on transfer to Kuching, via Labuan, on the 28th.
Shipping: -
Instructions were given to Tua Kampong Taram of Rangau to check the position of the outermost Limbang Channel marks in Brunei Bay. S.S. Auby reported that the Channel had altered very slightly.
General. -The Resident, Fourth Division, and Mrs. Aplin, arrived via Labuan and Brunei on the 21st, returning to Miri, via Labuan, on the 29th.
LAWAS DISTRICT.
June, 1933.
The Acting Assistant District Officer, Mr. W. P. N. L. Ditmas, reports: -
Agriculture. -The Lawas (Sarawak) Rubber Estates, Ltd., exported 42,560 lbs. of dry rubber during the month.
Rainfall. -The following rainfall was recorded during the month: -
Trade: -
Staff. -Mr. W. S. B. Buck, Assistant District Officer, was transferred to Kuching on the 28th instant.
General. -Saturday the 3rd, H.M. King George’s Birthday, was observed as a holiday.
The Assistant District Officer visited Merapok on the 13th instant.
On the 26th Mr. W. P. N. L. Ditmas arrived at Trusan overland from Limbang, via Bagar, Batu Apoi and Labu. Mr. W. S. B. Buck, Assistant District Officer, then returned with Mr. Ditmas from Trusan to Lawas, calling at Sundar by m.l. Saripah. Mr. Ditmas took over the affairs of the district.
On the 28th Mr. and Mrs. Buck proceeded to Labuan on their way to Kuching.
Miri Regatta, 1933.
A Regatta will be held in the Miri River on His Highness the Rajah’s Birthday, 'Tuesday, 26th September, 1933.
There will be races for: -
30 men boats, open and local
15 ,, ,, ,,
8 ,, ,, ,,
3 ,, open
1 ,, ,,
8 ,, for boys under 14 years of age Chinese Tongkangs
,, Kotaks
,, Pemukat
15 men boats, G.C.M. vs. S.A.B.C.
There will also be walking the greasy pole, a barrel race and a flour and water dip.
Six cups have been promised and it is hoped to distribute about $1,000 in prizes.
Two totalizators will be run, selling $1 and 50 cents tickets, and place betting will also be possible. A $1 sweepstake will be run on the 30 men boat Champion Cup Race.
After the Regatta an entertainment of fireworks and dancing will be held. Owners of boats, Tua Kampongs. etc., are asked to provide teams of dancers or other performers to amuse the audience for ten minutes. A prize will be given to the best turn. It is hoped that teams of Malays, Chinese, Dyaks,
Sikhs and as many others as possible will enter.
REGATTA COMMITTEE.
W. E. Gason, Esq, G. A. C. Field, Esq., Mr. E. Yuen Kee. Awang Binjai, Mr. Yong Kwei (Contractor), Ajis (Mandor), Mohamed Seruji.
R. L. King, Esq. (Hon. Treasurer), W. B. A. Hankey, Esq. (Hon. Secretary).
CORRESPONDENCE.
[The Editor is not responsible for the opinions of Correspondents.]
St. Thomas’ School.
The Editor,	Sarawak Gazette,	Kuching.
KUCHING, SARAWAK,
Via SINGAPORE,	13th July, 1933.
DEAR SIR,
In the July issue of the Sarawak Gazette there appeared a paragraph entitled “Durian!” The accompanying short composition written by a boy of this school in the VIIth standard on the same subject may prove of interest to your readers. The subject of the composition was “A Tree” and it was left to the students to choose any tree they liked about which to write. The text is an uncorrected copy of the original.
“THE DURIAN TREE.”
“As a keen student of Nature, nothing interests me more than trees, but nothing frightens me more than their technical Latin names. Try as one will, the sobriquets they rejoice in never stick to one’s mind, and, indeed, I should prefer learning all the plays of Shakespeare by heart than to remember a tithe of them. I never come across the Latin nickname (all the trees’ Latin names are by no means their own) of a durian tree, and do not care to know. The Dyaks adore the fruit, the mouths of the Malay Water on hearing the very name, the Chinese pay any amount just to taste it, and the European wish themselves ten feet under the earth when they come within range of it.
“The durian-tree can live almost everywhere. Whether it is on a mountain top or on the bank of the river, we find it rears its branches majestically above other trees. Its wood is amazingly hard but useless for furniture. In December, when the monsoon rains me doing their worst, the durian is covered with golden yellowish blossom, very edible and absolutely free from the famous or infamous smell that the spiky fruit is guilty of. Some part of the blossom contains a large amount of honey, which accounts for the large number of flying-foxes flying to the tree at dusk during the fruit season, but, the reputation of the tree is its fruit. While perusing a book about Borneo, some years ago, I came across a passage about the virtues of the durian. The author stated that just the same as other Europeans, he hated the fruit at first sight, but feeling somewhat hungry one day, he took a durian and ate it, and though overcome by the odour he stuck to his ordeal.
“Then to his surprise, he found his old prejudice disappeared at the end of his meal, and giving way to temptation again he ate another one. ‘It is worth it’ he writes ‘to come such a long way from England to eat this fruit.’ This proves that durian is not so black as it is painted, provided that one overcomes his prejudice first. The Dyaks can eat as much ss they like without feeling its bad aftermath, and, indeed they are great Epicurians as regards this fruit. As for me I prefer a plain coconut. Durians pull one down socially.”
Yours faithfully,
F. SEPTIMUS HOLLIS.
