THURSDAY, FEBRUARY 1st, 1934. Local and Personal. JANUARY.
His Highness the Rajah left for Singapore on Monday 22nd by t.s.s. Vyner Brooke, to attend the Naval Conference, and returned to Kuching on 29th. His Highness was accompanied by Capt. R. E. Le Sueur. His Highness the Rajah presented the Long Service Decoration to the Rev. J. M. Hoover, of the American Methodist Mission, Sibu, on 30th December. Mr. Hoover has completed 31 years’ service at Sibu where, in
addition to his Missionary work, he has served Government as Headman for the large Foochow (Chinese) communities in the Third Division. He first arrived in Sibu in 1903 The good work Mr. and Mrs. Hoover have accomplished, is too well known to our readers to need describing here. We take this opportunity to tender Mr. and Mrs. Hoover our hearty congratulations, and to wish them long life and every success.
We are informed that the electors to Dr. Lee’s Chair of Human Anatomy have appointed to the chair Professor W. E. Le Gros Clark, D.Sc. Lond., F.R.S , at present Professor of Anatomy at St. Thomas’ Hospital Medical School. Dr. Lee’s chair is attached to a non-stipendiary fellowship at Hertford College.At the Annual General Meeting of members of The Sarawak Association, Singapore, held on the 24th December, 1933, the follow ing gentlemen were elected office-bearers for the ensuing year:—President, Mr. Wee Kheng Watt. Vice-Presidents. Mr. Koh Kim Loh. Mr Michael Chai, Hon. Secretary, Mr. Song Lian Siong, Hon. Assistant Secretary, Mr. Ho Hing Chow, Hou. Treasurer, Mr. Kho Thye Jin, Hon. Auditor, Mr. Kueh Ah Bee, Hon. Sports Superintendent, Mr. Sylvester Chong, Committee, Messrs. Charles William. J S. Chong, Kho Cheng Yong, Voon Shak Leong. Employment Committee, Mr. M. Lim and Mr. Bong Nyan Joon. At the Annual General Meeting of the Sarawak Union Club, held on Saturday. 27th January, 1934, the following gentlemen were elected office-bearers for the year 1934:—President. The Bishop of Labuan and Sarawak, Vice-President, The Arch deacon of Sarawak, Hon. Secretary. Mr. Tan Kui Choon, Hon. Treasurer, Mr. Wee Leong All, Committee Members. Messrs. Kuek Choo Seng, Wee Kheng Chiang, Yeo Cheng Ho and Lee Teck Hin, and Hon. Auditor, Mr. Eng Peng Teck.
Hari Raya occurred on Wednesday 17th. A salute of fourteen guns was fired from Fort Margherita at 8 a.m. The festivities of the previous evening had been somewhat spoilt owing to heavy downpours of rain, but Hari Raya was enjoyed in bright sunshine and, after the morning attendance at the Mosques, the roads were thronged with parties of Malays on their way to visit their friends. A regatta was held during the afternoon details of which occur in our columns.
We welcome back to Kuching Mrs. M. C. Austin and Miss Austin, who arrived by s.s. Darrel on the 22nd.
Mr. K. H. Gillan, Postmaster-General, accompanied by Mrs. Gillan, and Mr. H. D. Aplin, Resident, Fourth Division, accom panied by Mrs. Aplin, sailed for England via Singapore, on retirement, on 23rd December and 1st January respectively. We take this opportunity of wishing them long life and the best of luck.
The Right Reverend Monseigneur
Dunn.
The death of the Right Rev Mgr. Dunn. Prefect Apostolic of Sarawak, is a great loss to the Catholic Mission here. Although the Monseigneur was in poor health before leaving for Europe, it was hoped that he would reach Europe alive, and there obtain relief from suffering, and find a well-earned retirement.
Mgr. Dunn was born in Dublin in 1867. He was educated et Downside and at St. Joseph's College, Mill-Hill. After his ordination to the priesthood in 1881, he was appointed to work in Borneo, and arrived in Kuching on 10th July of the same year. With the exception of a few visits to Europe, and his period of service as a chaplain during the Croat War, be spent fifty-two years of his life in Sarawak.
He was a pioneer missionary, and spent the early years of his apostolate at Sarikei, Sari. Kapit and Kanowit, places which ever afterwards were dear to him In 1897 he succeeded Fr. Jackson as Prefect Apostolic of a missionary territory which nt that time consisted of Sarawak and British North Borneo. When the Holy See recently divided the Mission into the two Prefectures of Sarawak and British North Borneo, Mgr. Dunn remained Prefect Apostolic of Sarawak,
Mgr. Dunn was a devout priest who led a deeply spiritual life; a man of courage, zeal and charity. His humility was remarkable in a man who had to rule, so long over others. Although entitled to wear all the insignia of a Bishop he never availed himself of this privilege. Never was his humility more patent than in Ins relations towards the Fathers who were subject to him. and all of them can testify to that gentle humility which so commanded their respect.
He was a wise and considerate Superior to the Fathers, and a beloved father to his children in God. He was the friend of his people. Many of the Chinese, Dyak, and Tamil Catholics in Sarawak have reason to cherish his memory as their spiritual Father, and their personal friend.
May he rest in peace.—(Contributed.)
Public Farewell Dinner to His
Excellency and Mrs. Richards.
A public dinner was held in the Sandakan Hotel on 16th December at which some forty people were present.
The Honourable Mr D. R. Maxwell proposed the Health of His Excellency and Mrs Richards. The text of His Excellency's reply was as follows.
H1S EXCELLENCY'S REPLY
" Ladies and Gentlemen,
"In many Eastern communities it is customary on farewell occasions for the chief guest or guests to be garlanded with sweet smelling flowers There is a fundamental similarity in all national customs and we. substitute words for flowers. Flowers, alas, die at once but words sometimes live on in the hearts of men The proposer of this Toast has lent more than a kindly interest and a more than kindly emphasis to something more than the truth. For my wife, whom 1 have always regarded as an embodiment of the seven deadly virtues, such tributes are fitting, Her halo fits her and now that she has been convinced that haloes are being worn this evening, I am sure that, womanlike, she will wear hers with equanimity, but personally I do not feel comfortable and I do not think that I look my best in one.
"I feel somewhat disappointed in Mr. Maxwell to-night because I felt I could rely upon him to follow strictly the procedure laid down for such occasions by Mark Antony: "I come to bury Caesar not to praise him." but I would not have you to think 1 am ungrateful. I appreciate more deeply than I can tell you the kindly intentions which have prompted the proposer of this Toast to look at my best side through a magnifying glass and the equally kindly reception which you have given us.
"Like most cynics, I am a sentimentalist at heart and 1 like to laugh at the emotions which 1 am afraid of being unable to control I have not, however, discovered the carefully guarded and exclusive feminine secret of perpetual emotion. My wife contends that I am a very difficult person to live with because she says that there is nothing in heaven or earth upon which I consent to be serious This is a most unjust reflection. I believe in being serious about everything in life except oneself
WHERE IS GAMBIA ?
"During the past few weeks many people have asked me where Gambia is, and have even hinted that there is no such place. In fact, that it is a kind of Colonial Office ‘Chiltern Hundreds.' I can only assure you that it has just as real an existence as those curious localities which lawyers love to term 'a place within the meaning of the Act' and. although as you all know Governors do absolutely nothing to earn their salary, it is customary to give that nothing a local escutcheon and a name. Further than that I cannot offer to help you, but I am reminded of a story of the late Mr Joseph Chamberlain when he was Secretary of State for the Colonies. The Colonial Estimates were under discussion by the House of Commons and a determined attempt was being made to ruffle the imperturbable Secretary of State. Seiz ing upon a trivial item in the Estimates, a member rose and said 'Can the Right Honour able gentleman kindly inform the house of the exact’ location of the Virgin Islands’’ Mr. Chamberlain rose slowly to his feet, looked coldly at his questioner, and immediately replied: 'I regret that 1 should not feel justified in gratifying the natural curiosity of the honourable Member further than to state that the Colony in question is a long way from the Isle of Man ' That, Ladies and Gentlemen, is quite enough about myself, and I now propose to speak about you.
GIVE AND TAKE.
"When I compare my first arrival in Borneo with my present sensations. I cannot help thinking of the remark of Castlereagh to my Lord Hyde. Do you think" said he, ‘that 1 could understand any business in England in one month?' 'Yes, my Lord,' replied the other, but I think you would understand it better in two months.' 1 have learnt a lot during the past four years 1 propose to tell you the truth All the best authorities are agreed in attaching the foremost importance to the practice of telling the truth. An extravagant praise is awarded generally after death to individuals meritorious for the practice. As the shadows begin to lengthen, one begins to contrast intentions with achievements, and youth listens as it does to-night with what patience it may to the ramblings of retrospective age. When I came to Borneo four years ago, I was much struck by the amount of co-operation and give and take in an isolated community where most people see too much of and know too much about their neighbours. It would be easy, living here, to stress too much the comparatively small disputes and disagreements, but I have found that knowledge of the fact that we are all working together in the same boat assures consideration for other people's feelings and a realization of the ultimate advantage of compromise, tallies and Gentlemen, we cannot all have our own way all the time without a crash. The modern training of the Colonial Office aims at teaching the young administrative officer that his main business in life and his final justification after the maintenance of law and order is to understand what the other man is trying to do and then to help him to do it. The older members of this Service were sturdy men who did their job and had their day. I would not make light of them because the advantage of the study of history and of the careers of our seniors is to let us see how the game of life has been played by the best players
LOYALTY IN NORTH BORNEO.
“I would suggest that the feeling of loyalty and co-operation which exists in North Borneo is worth any sacrifice to keep and to maintain. I know the cynical motto of to-day
The doors of success are over ajar And the temple halls full, For some get in by the door marked "Push." And some by the door marked "Pull"—
but we know that that is not all the truth, and success is such a telescopic word. Ladies and Gentlemen you may get everything as a prize and you may be festooned with all the haberdashery of success and go to your grave a castaway. Loyalty such as I have found and such as has been given to me in full measure in North Borneo should be as common as salt because it is as necessary to life Not that I do not believe in a good grouse at times; it is a healthy pastime bin grousing gets you nowhere.
“We have been passing through and still are passing through exceptional times and like all the rest of the world were the victims of slump psychology We are the attenuated remnant which survived the world Disappointed, disillusioned we may be, but do not let us be despondent I heard somebody say the other day (who ought to have known better) that there is no future for North Borneo, no prosperity, no better times. I most heartily disagree with that opinion One of the gifts which an inscrutable providence has denied to me is that of prophesy, but 1 can give you my carefully considered opinion that within five years this territory will not only be prosperous but will be forging ahead with optimism and we hope to an even better future.
TRADITION IN THE PUBLIC SERVICE.
"Speaking more particularly to the Govern ment Service I do not need to remind you that the material prizes of life do not fall to the public- service. No man enters the career of Science or of Art or of the Public Service with the direct object of making money. You know that when you enter, and you prefer membership of a body with fine traditions and with objects which can- not be summed up in terms of cash. There is a tradition in the Public Service that, if you give a man more work than he can possibly do, he will still do it.' To those who have a sense of values even thing is summed up in the word 'morale' and morale is a thousand times more important than material.
“Ladies and Gentlemen, times grow old; we must all come some day to that dark tower upon which we look back upon life and if we have been lucky we shall have started with the right idea, but if you ask me what I mean by the right idea I shall have the temerity to tell you in the words of a mother's song to her baby I read them in a book of verse lent me by a Sandakan lady the oilier day—
Buckets and spades and a ship at sea
Are very Une things in their way may be
And the woods look gay when the boughs are green But the very heat things have never been seen.
Nobody ever has weighed or caught one glimpse with his eyes of your happiest thought Or walked in white where your prayers have been For the very best things have never been seen.
There is much to be said for an ark one feels And almost as much for a horse on wheels The King has a crown (and so has the Queen) But the very best things have never been seen.
And so if your luck still holds, if our luck has held, we shall go, we shall have gone, through life still bolding the right idea.
"So, Ladies and Gentlemen, I return to the point from which I started The things you have, the spirit of loyalty and co-operation and the solidarity of a common purpose, are worth many times such things as you may like. Keep them as an inner dream I have tried not to be dogmatic to-night because I know how easy and how futile it is to be dogmatic. When I first came to North Borneo I cherished two ambitions. The first one was to preach a sermon in a Church and the second was to leave this country fully restored to prosperity. Both have disappointed me although you may think I have given the sermon in a wrong place the first was denied me by a high authority and a Higher Authority still has with held the secund.
“But the time has come to say good-bye I thank you very much indeed, Ladies and Gentle men, for all your kindness to my wife and myself To the Government Service, which I have had the temporary privilege of leading and to which most of you have the honour to belong I would say ‘Keep straight on the course which you have already set I o the community, 'We cannot foresee what the future may send against us but, trusting to our instincts, we can face that future if not with a light heart at least with a steady one.'
"Ladies and Gentlemen, we thank you.”
A most enjoyable evening was spent and thanks are especially due to those ladies who decorated the hotel so tastefully and Mrs. Boyer with the St. Marys Blue Band who played throughout the evening — British North Barren Herald.
The Administration of the Mandated
Territory of New Guinea.
G. W. L. TOWNSEND.
(Continued.)
The Base Camp system was used throughout the mainland of New Guinea with the exception of the river portion of the Sepik District. Until 19'21 the Sepik river was included in Aitape District, but in that year extensive tribal fighting, led to the establishment of the new district of Sepik for the immediate purpose of putting a stop to head-hunting. The staff appointed was a District Officer, an Assistant District Officer, a Patrol Officer, and a European Medical Assistant, together with a detach ment of thirty native policemen.
For the greater part of its 500 miles the Sepik river has an average width of about a quarter of a mile. There is a dry season and a flood season, each of approximately six months, and the average depth of the river at Ambunti, 245 miles from the mouth, is 45 feet. The river is best described as the main drain of a flooded valley, for even in the dry season there are hundreds of square miles of lakes and lagoons all connected up to the river by natural channels. In flood season the river banks disappear and only the familiar villages and clumps of timber mark the course of the stream. The village coconuts, which would be adversely affected by excessive moisture, are planted on levees above flood-level. Although, in German times, there had been a number of scientific expeditions up the river, including the Dutch-German Boundary Commission, there had been no attempt to bring the natives under control. In 1918 a recruiter was attacked and wounded at Ayatip village, about 200 miles from the mouth, and though a military expedition was sent to inquire into the matter, it did nut remain long enough to have any lasting effect.
The establishment of district headquarters in 1924 was really in the nature of an expedition, and for this two vessels were used. One, a small steamer of 100 tons, carried stores and personnel, and the other, a 12-ton auxiliary ketch, named the Aloha, was for patrol purposes. Steaming during the day and anchoring at night, in four days' time the vessels arrived at the foot of a thickly-wooded spur running down from a mountain, the first piece of land encountered which would be above flood-level. The thirty odd villages which had been passed when steaming upstream were built on huge piles.
As soon as rough shelters of sago leaf had been erected for the personnel and stores the steamer returned to the coast, and the expedition began to dig in. As a mission station had been established at the mouth of the river for some years, it was possible to obtain interpreters; but these were only young men who carried no weight in village councils, which were very strictly ruled by the old men. In most villages the interpreters were told to inform the District Officer that his prohibition of head hunting would be ignored, and woe betide the Government if it attempted to interfere. Within the first month after arrival at Ambunti, a patrol to a village suspected of having just raided another led to a savage attack by a large number of spearmen, who were immediately checked by the police rifles. So early a trial of strength, with the inevitable result, had a very good and lasting effect; but though violence was never again offered to a Government
party on the river, the natives would not submit to control for some years. Strangely enough, the village concerned in the attack on the patrol had organized its recent head-hunting expedition in order to initiate two youths who had just returned from indenture with the mission.
Not one river village was willing to be friendly with the police patrols, and passive objection took the form of walking out of the villages when the Aloha was sighted. Several old men would be left to report on the movements of the visitors, but these old men would feign ignorance of village affairs and declare that their presence in the village was due to their inability to get away. This state of affairs continued until it was decided to collect these watchers and lake them to Ambunti as guests to the Government. Upon arrival there, they found themselves in a very peculiar position. They ate and slept in the company of men from villages with whom they had been at war from time immemorial; and though as free as air as far as the police were concerned, found themselves unable to return home on account of the hostile country through which they would have to pass. Before long they would approach the District Officer with a proposition. If he would guard them to their villages, they would guarantee to bring the people in for the District Officer to speak to. This would be done, and so most of the men became known to the police, at least by sight. It was not long before the police learnt to pick out the canoe from any particular village by its distinctive markings, and this also assisted in identification when trouble occurred. Within twelve months the District Officer decided , to discontinue patrolling in force, and a system of , patrols by armed constables working in pairs was instituted. A fast motor launch had by this time been provided for river work ; and natives from the lower river began to visit Ambunti either in the launch or accompanying the patrolling constables. Within eighteen months from the time of the establishment of headquarters at Ambunti, an un armed native might travel the 245 miles of river with perfect safety, passing through a population of approximately ten thousand people.
As can be imagined, the mosquitoes were a veri table plague, and sleeping baskets are in universal use. The baskets are woven from grasses and are made in the shape of a long sack, being about 15 feet long and 3 feet wide. Half-hoops of cane are stood up at intervals inside, and there is about 2 feet clearance above the sleepers' faces. A man, his wife, and possibly three children sleep in one basket, and as. once retired for the night and the mouth of the basket closed, no one leaves the basket for any reason whatsoever, the atmosphere in the morning beggars description. The police took full advantage of these baskets when raiding villages for head hunters, usually just before dawn. Each constable would be allotted a house, and, at a signal from the officer, would mount the ladder and, thrusting his drawn bayonet through the flaps of the mouth of the basket and down through the sago-palm skin flooring, would thus imprison the inmates and be free to deal with the other baskets. When the catch had been sorted out, the baskets made very effective temporary detention cells.
Appointments of village officials hung fire for a considerable time. Although from the time of the establishment of Ambunti it would have been possi ble to have appointed fulfills from among those natives who had been working at the mission and
elsewhere, it would have been a most unwise step. A tultul is not a village headman, and had any appointments been made in the beginning, "taken by crocodiles" would have been the explanations of the disappearances.
A good example of the ingrained hostility of the old men towards Europeans in general was provided at Timbonku village, some two years after the establishment of the Sepik district. The mission body long established at the mouth of the river wished to acquire land near Timbonku village for purpose of rice cultivation. Their representative made overtures to the owners and later reported to the District Officer that some were willing to sell and some were undecided. Only Government may purchase native lands, and this is the. procedure. When an applicant for land has secured the owners' consent to sell, the District Officer interviews the owners and inspects the land, in order to satisfy himself that no claimants to ownership have been overlooked, and that the land in question is not required for the use of the natives. Should the owners be willing and the District Officer satisfied that the land is in excess of both present and. as far as can be judged, future requirements. Government purchases it and leases it to the applicant, in this case the interview with the many owners took place in the "House Tamboran" or men's council house, for the reason that the procedure was new to every one, and at least two hundred men assembled. The District Officer sat near the Namun Tugut, which was a stool carved out of a block of wood with a quaintly carved figure of a man as a back-rest, The stool is used when any important matter is dismissed, and each speaker "casts his vote" by saying his say and then striking the stool with the red leaves of a certain shrub. The Tamboran or spirit carved on the back-rest ensures that he does not change his mind.
The interpreter addressed the gathering and expressed the desire of the District Officer to know what decision hail been arrived at concerning the application by the mission. When he had finished there was silence for quite a time. Abruptly an old num arose, spoke a few sentences, struck the stool with the leaves, and then strode out of the house. Without another word the gathering silently dis persed. The interpreter stood with a frightened look on his face, and, when questioned by the sergeant, replied that he had not understood what had been said. Later on, in strict privacy, his interpretation of the old man's words were: "Several days' journey up the river there is a white man, the District Officer. Several days' journey donwstream there is a white man, the missionary. That makes two. Two too many.” It was not until some years later, when a large number of young men had returned from indenture, and could appreciate the fact that material benefits would follow the advent of a European settlement, that the land, which was very much in excess of require ments, was parted with.
There was a final flicker of the old spirit when in 1927 one village on the river itself raided another and took eighteen heads; but the prompt arrest, trial, and hanging of seven of the ringleaders, together with the varying terms of imprisonment inflicted on others, has put a final stop to head hunting on the river. Patrols have been working back from the river for some years; but it will be very many years before the district has been covered entirely.
In addition to the main stream, there are several important tributaries which flow into the Sepik not for from its mouth, and in 1925 a patrol on the Keram river, the moat important of these, was met by a deputation which desired assistance.
Five days previously the luduai, with his wife and her brother, had gone to fish in the lagoons at the rear of the village, and had not relumed at nightfall. A search party next day had discovered the canoe, which had been deliberately smashed up. Blood stains in the canoe and the nearby grass left no doubt as to the fate of the fishers. Judging by signs, the raiding party had also been in canoes.
About 6 miles away, across a sea of grass, could be seen a clump of swamp timber, and the raiders were said to have their village somewhere in this. As the water in the river, and consequently in the lagoons, had fallen about 10 feet in the past few days there was practically no open water, and the patrol (the District Officer and eight native police) was unable to use canoes. Hations and light camp gear were accordingly made up in loads of about 59 lb., each loud being slung on a pole for two carriers. As they set off across the matted grass, an undulating movement underfoot led to the dis covery that a great area was floating on water. The grass mat proved to be 4 to 5 feet thick; but as the longest available pole was only about 12 feet, the depth of the water underneath was not determined. The carriers soon got into difficulties, often sinking into the grass up to their crutches, and having to flounder for some minutes before getting out. As far us possible, police and carriers advanced at intervals of not less than 10 yards, and on several occasions detours had to be made where the undu lating movement had caused the grass in weak places to split, and open water to show. However, the 6 miles were covered in eight hours, and as the patrol had set off at 5.30 a.m. there was still time to locate the village before dark. It was astonishing that the patrol had not been seen by a sentry; but it was discovered later that the village had fancied itself isolated by the falling of the flood waters. A man, his wife, and two children, who all happened to be in a house a little removed from the village, were captured; hut not before the alarm was given. The village, when reached, was found to be deserted, and nothing could be done that night. Next morning the curiosity of a constable who wondered what several kanaka fowls were picking at in a canoe lying on the tops of posts some 10 feet high, led to the discovery of the bones of the lost fishing party. A few hours later the patrol was ambushed while searching the sago swamps. Ono spear passed through a constable's arm and then fortunately broke on his leather belt. Another pass' d through the officer’s clothing and inflicted a nasty bruise. Though there was no sign of an assailant the police opened fire in several directions, but without apparent result other than that no more spears were thrown. The swamps were deserted for the next few days and the patrols did not find any fresh tracks. One morning, just before daylight, there was a hail from the bush surrounding the village clearing, and the Initial's brother was able to speak to the unknown. Tn view of the fact that only three people—the luluai, his wife, and her brother—had been killed by them, and as the police had shot seven men in the ambush, was the Government willing to call the fight off if the people all came in? The Government was very willing to do so. During the day about one hundred and fifty
all told came in, though still very fearful. In this particular area, which the District Officer's map showed as "Grass and swamp, believed to be uninhabited,” over two thousand natives were visited within the next few months. Recruiters were quick to enter the villages, every one of which is now under complete Government control.
The discovery of gold in Morobe district in 1926 forced the District Staff to abandon all prearranged plans for penetration and developmental work. Gold was discovered in virtually unknown country, and the large influx of miners and prospectors, the majority of whom had had no previous experience with natives, placed upon field officers the heavy tasks of ensuring their safety where they were working, and endeavouring to bring the inhabitants of the surrounding country under influence in anticipation of miners and prospectors pushing out farther afield. Although there were no villages within 10 miles of the actual gold find itself, the track from the beach at Salamaua to the field at Wau and Edie Creek led through a number; and it was inevitable that some thieving of field fruits from the gardens would be done by the indentured labourers carrying in supplies. This led to attacks by the garden owners, and there was continual friction until the introduction of aerial transport solved the carrying problem. Aircraft now do the trip from Salamaua to Wan in twenty- five minutes, a journey which took carriers seven days, the lowest pass over the mountains being at 55(H) feet. For some time mining activities were confined to Edie Creek and Wau. two small areas, and this gave the Field Stuff a little breathing space in which to proceed towards the spreading of Government influence in outlying villages. But in less than a year several companies were formed which took over the individual holdings, and so led to a great extension of prospecting. Men pushed down the Bulolo river and then crossed the range on to the Watut river, roughly parallel to the Bulolo. The native population was considerable and distinctly hostile from the beginning. Carriers bringing in supplies to isolated camp? were robbed and beaten, and. in several instances, killed. It was impossible to obtain interpreters; as none of the coastal natives had ever been in touch with the inlanders. A police post was established at Surprise Creek, near the head of the Watut, at an elevation of 3500 feet, and, after considerable difficulty, a landing-ground for aircraft was constructed. It was in a hollow lietween two mountain spurs winch ran down to a river gorge 80 feet deep. As the hollow was rather saucer-shaped, about 30 yards of the lip on the river side was cut away. To alight, the machine flies over the gorge and through the small gap and puts its wheels on the ground ns quickly as possible, the bottom of the saucer being only about 30 yards wide. The other side of the saucer slopes sharply uphill, and the machine very quickly pulls up. Before it stops, however, the machine is turned sideways to prevent it running backwards downhill. When taking off from this ground, natives pull back on the struts on both wings, and the pilot puts his wheel brakes hard on. The engine is then revved up fully, and at a sign from the pilot, who then takes off his brakes, the strut of the wing lying uphill is released. The machine swings at once, owing to the drag on the one wing, and at once bolts downhill. At the gap the machine, is lifted off the ground and at once swung over the ravine, thus gaining 80 feet in height. Full load of 600 lb. is
always taken in, but no more than 300 lb. can be taken out. Every landing on this ground may truthfully be described as a "forced landing” ; an average of two landings are made daily throughout the year. For over twelve months the post at Surprise Creek was fully occupied in guarding the half-dozen scattered miners and in trying to gain the confidence of the surrounding natives who came into the camps, mainly to steal. Quite recently two prospectors who ventured out without consulting the officer at the post, had travelled only 10 miles when they were ambushed and, with five of their nine carriers, clubbed to death. The task of finding the murderers in that mountain country will take at least three months.
When the District Officer considers that, unless the natives are provoked, the lives and property of miners in a certain area can reasonably be considered to be safe, a site for a new post is determined. The District and the officer whose duty it will be to establish the post make an aerial reconnaissance and select a lively looking patch of ground for a landing- ground. The pilot, who will have to land on the ground, is naturally consulted. The country between the selected spot and the nearest post or landing-ground is carefully surveyed and the inward route mapped. The route should be as short as possible: but should avoid villages. When the patrol has been out the number of days it was anticipated it would take to reach the new post, a machine flies out with tools and rations, which are dropped if the signal is received that the ground is suitable for the purpose required. The patrol then signals the number of days needed to prepare the ground for a machine, and at the agreed time the District Officer lands there. Having no worry" about supplies or reinforcements—a signal laid down will always bring a machine—he can begin the visiting of nearby villages at once.
With one exception. District Officers are pro ceeding with carefully laid plans for the development of their districts, and recruiters and missionaries are well satisfied to tread the path made by the Field Staff; but in Morobe District the task of the Field Staff is to keep one move ahead of adven turous miners, prospectors, and recruiters, who, notwithstanding the anxiety they cause, should be given full credit for their share in influencing the native to trust in the white man's Government.— (Concluded.)
The Future of Gold. The chaotic conditions of the last few weeks in the exchange markets provide a striking com mentary on criticisms of the gold standard, official and unofficial The assumption of the early post-war period that by returning to the gold standard all the great problems of economic readjustment would be solved automatically—whatever follies might be committed in the economic sphere—was unreasonably optimistic. But the present fashion of blaming the collapse, nut on human mis takes, but on the institution of the gold standard is merely to seek a scapegoat for our short comings ; while to advocate revolutionary reforms in the monetary sphere without an adequate assessment of the human and psychological factors involved is to leap out of the frying pan into the fire.The main charge brought against the gold standard by its critics is that through an insuffi cient sui ply of gold to serve as a base, it has forced deflation on the world ; and that the existing insufficiency of the gold supply has been accentuated nd the rout converted into a catas trophe by a maldistribution of gold caused by the refusal of France and America to play the game They further argue that this state of affairs cannot be expected to change in the near future; and that if the gold standard were restored another breakdown would be inevitable. Recent investi gations have failed to substantiate this charge. There is no foundation whatsoever for the state ment that an absolute scarcity of gold caused the world economic crisis. The so-called maldistri bution of gold was the outcome of the refusal of the gold standard countries—of whom few are guiltless - to undertake the internal adjustments called for by changes in the world's economic- structure.
A second argument commonly advanced against the gold standard and in favour of fluctuating exchanges is that a system of free exchange rates enables countries to make automatically and without internal friction any adjustment between their prices and those of other countries that may be rendered necessary by changes in their com- petitive position and in their international balance of payments. In the case of fixed ex changesexports can be stimulated and imports checked, or vice versa, only by a general inflation or deflation of the whole internal system, which is a slow, if cumbersome and painful, method of achieving the desired result, Under a system of free exchanges, on the other hand, prices of im ported and exported goods relatively to homer produced goods are immediately affected, thus tending to restore international equilibrium with a minimum of internal friction.
There is no doubt that English people, having experienced the agonies of deflation, must feel a good deal of sympathy with this point of view. But a further analysis shows that the beauties of the free system are not quite as flawless as the critics suggest. With fixed foreign exchanges the first shock of any readjustment is borne by a loss or gain of gold; this is followed by appropriate movements of the rate or interest, and only then does the process of income and cost readjust ment begin. In the case of movements of the exchange rates the shock is immediately transmitted to industry, both at home and abroad. A country which has a fluctuating exchange while others are forced to do all their readjust ment in the more difficult way undoubtedly enjoys an advantage. Very soon, however, this differen tial advantage leads to emulation by other countries, in which case "readjustments" tend more and more to become a race for "bigger and better" depreciation, which can only end in com plete chaos, domestic and international. The example of Anglo-American monetary relations, with first England and then America refusing to stabilise on gold, is a warning of this. It might be urged that the present abnormal conditions do not provide a basis for generalisations. But the experience of the last decade tends to show that the political resistance to any increase in the value of a currency, once a certain level of depre ciation has been reached, is as strong as the resistance to any reduction of tariffs. There can be little doubt that a system under which the ex change values of the principal currencies were free to vary would, in practice, work only one way, namely downwards, and that, if no miti gation of the fluctuations were attempted, inter national trade would be completely demoralised.
There is, moreover, not the slightest chance of reaching in this way the goal of the so-called internal stabilisation school If exchanges con tinue to fluctuate, the volume of short-term funds seeking profits from exchange speculation will undoubtedly tend to increase. Any regulation of the internal price level by appropriate banking policy would inevitably be stultified by the move ment of these funds The effects on the domestic price-level of exchange movements engendered in this way. and of the banking measures necessary to counteract them, would lie at least as uncon trollable as those caused by gold movements under the gold standard.
Any attempt to create an international mone tary system must solve three main problems. It oust not aggravate cyclical movements of business It must prevent any reaction on prices by reason of the fluctuating yield of the gold mines. Lastly, it must soften the shock to general equilibrium caused by internal changes in one country. The way to solve these problems was outlined by the monetary resolutions of the World Economic Conference, adopted under the guid ance of the Rank for International Settlements, The main principle is that the different Central Banks should co operate with each other by modifying their domestic policies in accordance with the needs of the international situation. If, for example, a general expansive movement threatens to pervade the whole world system, a deflationary bias should be exerted, and those countries which lose gold should do most of the re adjustment not those countries whose balance of payments is at the time favourable; and vice versa.
Assuming, however, that this and other princi ples of monetary control could be internationally agreed upon, the further question arises at what price level a restoration of some kind of managed stability should be attempted. One consideration is that a higher value of gold throughout the world would bring forth a greater production of gold, and thereby remove the possibility of a future shortage of supply. Again, the state of Government finances is such that a great book profit on the revaluation of existing gold stocks would be a very helpful factor both in enabling Governments to stimulate expansion by means of public works and also in improving Govern ment credit and thereby tending to lower market rates of interest Botn these arguments indicate that a higher rather than a lower level of the price of gold in terms of currencies would be more con ducive to restoration of that measure of interna tional stability which is necessary before the gold standard Can be re-established.
These considerations are purely theoretical ; what is actually likely to happen is quite another thing For the moment there is very little pros pect of a deliberate demonetisation of gold. Major Angas has recently argued that the im possibility of coming to any sort of agreement on the stabilisation rate at which the restoration of an international standard could be effected will in fact lead to a general demonetisation This conclusion is strongly suspect. It would pre suppose that the politicians will be skilful enough to make more or less of a success of free exchanges Considering the experiences of the past year, this does not seem to be very probable. What in fact is more likely is that the effects of fluctuating exchanges will be such as to make stability seem very desirable indeed-especially since in present circumstances even the possibility of internal expansion, on which political hopes are mainly based, is severely jeopardised by the instability of exchanges. So far as can be judged by the present attitude of the American and English
authorities these countries will continue in the future to buy gold, whether their Central Banks are under the legal obligation to do so or not. They will thus prevent any inconvenient apprecia tion in the international value of their currencies. If there is an early stabilisation of the dollar and the pound on a gold basis, it is unlikely to be made at a higher gold value than the present
As to the future course of the value of gold, much will depend on the order in which future events succeed one another. If the gold standard is suspended in France before it is restored in America, the sterling price of gold will fall. But the fall would be really catastrophic only if suspension of the gold standard in France were followed by the sale of gold hoards, the abandonment by the British authorities of their present control over the gold market and a renunciation by the American Government of its present policy of buying gold. The coincidence of all these factors is very unlikely. If, for example, a prior stabilisation of the dollar had provided an alternative fixed valuation of gold, a depreciation of sterling would tend to raise the price of gold in London
It must not, however, be assumed that a sus pension of the gold standard in France is sooner or later inevitable. It is true that the franc is at present over valued with respect to the dollar, but this over-valuation may be corrected without any alteration in the exchange rate by new tariffs, by inflation of prices in America, or by further deflation in France. The external strength of the franc is so strong that the only real threat to its gold convertibility lies in the possibility of an internal run on the gold reserves of the Bank of France.
Behind these temporary factors lies the more fundamental question of the future monetary system of the world So long as the unfortunate practical experience of the gold standard could be contrasted with the theoretical perfection of a system of free exchanges, the attractions of the latter were great. But experience is now exposing the fact that a system of independent currencies with exchange rates fluctuating within moderate limits about “natural" levels is a conception as far removed from actuality as the "automatic," self-equilibrating gold standard Increasing in stability will breed a demand for the return of the gold standard, if not as the economic salvation of the world, then at least as the lesser of the two evils. It is unlikely that Man's confidence in his own capacities as monetary manager will’ within any measurable space of time be so great that he will be prepared to relegate gold to the lowly role of assistant to the jeweller and the dentist. —Economist
The Paradox of the Gold Situation.
In his annual report issued the end of December, 1933, the Comptroller of the Royal Mint states that, while gold is disappearing more and more from sight— at least of ordinary mortals—its production goes on increasing year by year. The output has been stimulated of late by the premium in the terms of cash generally obtainable, but an eminent authority quoted by the Comptroller estimates that the whole of the gold produced in the last 500 years could he packed into the small space of a 40 feet cube, and would only suffice to put £5 a week in red gold into the pay envelopes of 18,000,000 men for a single year.
OLD SARAWAK.
From the Sarawak Gazette
60 Years Ago.
THE
SARAWAK GAZETTE
No. 76 WEDNESDAY. APRIL 1ST, 1874. Price 5 cent.
Kuching presented a lively scene on the 20th Jilt., the launch of a Government cargo boat was arranged to take place in the evening with the usual ceremony of christen ing. which would have been duly performed- had not the vessel refused to take to the water. Suffice it to say she was got into the river next morning after much coercion. and was christened “Itik Sirati"; the champagne bottle with which she was to have been baptized the evening before having leaked cut its contents during the night.
The attempt at a launch having failed—as if to make up for the general disappointment a distent whistle was heard, and in a moment more the new steamer built in Singapore for the Government hove in sight mid went steaming past the bazaar and up the river to the end of the town, at the rale of 10 knots an hour. Great was the enthusiasm the arrival of this new boat which is to be the pioneer of trade in Upper Rejang in which Chinese in terest is mainly concerned; they for a certainty, and we with them wish her success.
To finish the day the "Royalist" arrived at about 6 o’clock bringing a mail, and the company dispersed- let us hope to peruse good news from home.
The Java "Bode” of the 16th Feb., publishes letters from Pontianak (Borneo) to the effect that an insurrection against the Government had broken out amongst the Dyaks in the Sintang district; they constructed fortifies lions on the Hinting river, fired upon a Government steamer. and wounded the Assistant Resident, who was reconnoitering one of their forts. Troops sent forthwith to the spot came into collision with the Dyaks. on which occasion 4 European soldiers were wounded (one mortally). The fortifications of the Dyaks have been wholly destroyed and the hostile kampongs have been burned by the troops.
First Division News.
UPPER SARAWAK DISTRICT.
December, 1933.
The Assistant District Officer, Mr. R G. Aikman, reports:—
Agriculture—The Dahan Rubber Estates harvested 29,000 lbs. of dry rubber during the mouth. The rainfall at Bau was 4 17 inches. The highest recorded in 24 hours was 75 of an inch and the daily average was 13 of an inch. The rainfall for the month at Dahan Rubber Estates was 6 82 inches.
Gold Mining.—The Rumoh Gold Mining Company at Bidi and the Khin Fining Gold Mining Syndicate, Limited, at Pajiru. Krokong, commenced leaching on the 1st and 2nd respectively. There are now seventeen establishments mining for gold by the cyanide process. Those interested in the gold mining business are still extremely optimistic and a number of companies intend opening up in very inaccessible situations, and it is difficult to avoid coining to the conclusion that such enterprises are nothing more than a bold gamble. Eighty-six General Prospecting Licences were issued during the month and seventeen applications for Exclusive Prospecting Licences were received. Three Pro-visional Mining Lenses and one Final Mining Lease ware issued. The actual gold obtained by the following Companies for the month of December, 1933, was : —
The average price of Gold during 1931 was 838.57 per once.
Tim highest price reached was $5r in November and the lowest 834 60 in February, March and April.
The average price in 1932 was $49.46.
The highest price being $54 in December and the lowest $45.75 in March.
The average price in 1933 was $53.58.
The highest price reached was $55.80 ill September and the lowest in February was $49.
Sarawak Chinese Football
Association.
At the Annual General Meeting of The Sarawak Chinese Football Association, held in the office of Messrs. Tan Sum Guan & Son. on Saturday, 20th January, 1934, the following were elected office bearers for the year 1934: —President, Dr. Wong Cheong Way; Vice-President, Mr. C. P. Law; Hon. Secretary, Mr Tan Koi Choon ; Asst. Hon. Secretary, Mr Chan Weng Shoon ; Hon Treasurer, Mr. Robert Khoo; Hou. Supervisor Mr. Au Ah Lah; Hoti Auditor. Mr. Wee Leong Ah; Com mittee Members, Messrs. Choo Ah Hinn, Chau Kui Seng, and Chan Kheng Hai; Captain, Mr. Chan Weng Sheng, and Vice-Captain. Mr. Eng Jaw Joo.
St. Thomas’ School.
PRIZE DISTRIBUTION.
On St Thomas Day (December 21st) the Chief Justice presented the prizes to the successful students in the Assembly Hull, which was crowded with scholars and visitors. Mr Tan Sum Guan, an old student,, presided. After the Principal's report had been read, both the Chairman and the Chief Justice addressed the boys on the subject of Character and Character Building. The Chief Justice ended his remarks by quoting the following verses from Newbolt's poem on Clifton College:—
This is the Chapel : here, my eon,
Your father thought the thoughts of youth And heard the words that one by one
The touch of Life has turned to truth.
Here is a day that is not far
You too may speak with noble ghosts, Of manhood and the vows of war
You made before the Lord of Hosts.
To set the Cause above renown,
To love the game beyond the prize. To honour, while you strike him down.
The foe that coined with fearless eyes : To count the life of battle good,
And dear the land that gave you birth,. And dearer yet the brotherhood
That binds the brave of all the earth.
My son, the oath is yours: the end
Is His, Who built the world of strife. Who gate his children Pain for friend, And Death for surest hope of life. To-day and here the tight's begun.
Of the great fellowship you're free; Henceforth the School and you are one.
And what You are the race shall be.
After the presentation of Class Certificates and Prizes, Mr. David, the mathematical master of the school, proposed a vote of thanks to the visitors for their presence and to the Chief Justice for giving away the prizes.
SARAWAK TURF CLUB.
PROVISIONAL PROGRAMME FOR THE SPRING
MEETING, 1934.
FIRST DAY, SATURDAY, 21ST APRIL, 1931.
RACE NO. 1	[2 30 p.m.
THE TUAN MUDA'S CUP.
Value $250. A piece of plate of the value of $100. Presented by His Highness the Tuan Muda with $150 added. Second to receive $100. Third $40.
A handicap for Division I ponies. Distance 6 furlongs. Entrance Fee $10.
RACE NO. 2	[3.0 p.m.
THE BATON STAKES.
Value $250. Second to receive $100. Third $40.
A handicap for Division II ponies. Distance 6 furlongs. Entrance Feo $10.
RACE No. 3	[8.80 p.m.
THE B.C.L. STAKES.
Value $200. $50 presented by The Borneo- Company, Limited, with $150 added. Second to receive $75. Third $40.
A handicap for Division III ponies. Distance 6 furlongs. Entrance Fee $10.
RACE No. 4	[4.0 p.m.
SIMPANG TIGA STAKES.
Value $250. Second to receive $100 Third $40.
A handicap for Division I ponies. Distance 3 furlongs. Entrance Fee $10.
RACE No. 5	[ .8O p.m,
THE MATANG STAKES.
Value $250. Second to receive $100. Third $40.
A handicap for Division II ponies. Distance 4 furlongs. Entrance Fee $10.
RACE NO. 6	[5.0 p.m.
THE FENDING STAKES.
Value $200. Second to receive $75. Third' $40.
A handicap for Division TH ponies. Distance 3 furlongs. Entrance Fee $10.	1
RACE NO. 7	[5.30 p.m.
THE RANEE'S CUP.
Value $250. A piece of plate of the value of $100 presented by Her Highness the Ranee with $150 added. Second to receive $100. Third $40.
A handicap for ponies of any Division. Distance 1 mile. Entrance Fee $10. $5 refunded to non-acceptors. Handicap published on the Course. Post Entries allowed at $20 but no refund.
SECOND DAY, MONDAY, 23RD APRIL, 1934.
RACE NO. 1	[2.30 p.m..
THE SLUMP STAKES.
Value $250. Second to receive $100. Third $40. A handicap for Division I ponies. Distance 5 furlongs. Entrance Fee $10.
RACE NO. 2	[3.0 p.m.
THE COUNTRY STAKES.
Value $250 presented by the Turf Club. Second to receive $100. Third $10.
A handicap for Division II ponies. Distance 6 furlongs. Entrance Fee $10.
RACK NO. 3	[3.30 p.m.
THE SARAWAK STAKES.
Value $200. Second to receive $75. Third. $40.
A handicap for Division III ponies. Distance 5 furlongs. Entrance Fee $10.
RACE NO. 4	[4.0 p.m.
THE TURF CLUB STAKES.
Value $250. Second to receive $100. Third $40.
A handicap for Division I ponies. Distance 4 furlongs. Entrance Fee $10.
RACK NO. 5	[4.30 p.m.
THE STATES SPRINT.
Value $250. Second to receive $100. Third $40.
A handicap for Division II ponies. Distance 3 furlongs. Entrance Fee $10.
RACB NO. 6	[5.0 p.m.
THE TOWN STAKES.
Value $200. Second to receive $75. Third $40.
A handicap for Division HI ponies. Distance 4 furlongs. Entrance Fee $10
RACE NO. 7	[5.30 p.m.
THE RAJAH'S CUP.
Value $300. A piece of plate value $150 presented by His Highness the Rajah with $150 added. Second to receive $100. Third $40.
A handicap for ponies of any Division. Distance Round the Course (about 1.1/3 Males.) Entrance Fee $10. $5 refunded to non-acceptors. Handicap published on the Course. Post Entries allowed al $20 but no refund.
REGULATIONS.
Penalties.—Winners of any race at this Meeting after publication of weights shall carry a penalty of 7 Iba. for each race with a maximum of 11 stone 7 lbs.
Allowance.—Professional Jockeys who are Sara wak subjects and have not ridden more than two winners under Sarawak Turf Club Rules, may claim an allowance of 7 lbs.
Entries.—All nominations, accompanied by Entrance Fees, det .ption of ponies, and declaration of colours, to be made to the Secretaries not later than noon, 31st March, 1934.
Scratchings.—Owners scratching ponies before 5 p.m. on 20tb for first day and 5 p.m. on 22nd April for second day, will receive back half their entrance fees.
Handicaps.—For First Day will be posted on the Notice Board at the Sarawak Club at noon on 7th April, and for the Second Day at noon on 22nd April.
Course.—Will be open for training on 17th March, at 5.30 a.m.
Ponies.—Must run on the First Day to be eligible for entry in Races on Second Day.
Any raced Borneo pony may be imported from B.N.B. and shall be eligible for entry in races open to Sarawak Division I ponies provided such pony is not more than 13.2 hands and carries top weight on the first day's racing. Any ponies having imported blood in them shall only be eligible to race provided that their sires and dams were foaled in Borneo. All unraced ponies (ponies with out known form) under 13 hands, Division III, carry top weight. Ponies of 13 hands and over, Division IT, carry top weight.
Second Division News.
Simanggang DISTRICT.
December. 1933.
The District Officer. Mr. R L. Daubeny, reports:—
Gcneral —The Resident, Second Division, returned from a tour of outstations on 5th instant. The Resident left- for Kuching on Sunday 31st. by m. l. Rantis.
On Christmas Day a most successful regatta was held which was run entirely by the local members of Native Officers and Junior Service. Racing took place during the morning and afternoon and some excellent finishes were seen
The Committee and those responsible for arrange ment are to be congratulated on their efforts.
BETONG DISTRICT.
December. 1933.
The Acting District Officer, Mr. J. J. Hill, reports: —
Miscellaneous -On the 26th a regatta was successfully carried through by the S.P.G. Mission. 1 understand that, although only a week or two notice was given to the competitors, good entries were recorded and in one race alone some 13 boats lined up at the start. In the afternoon a football match between present and former pupils was played, which resulted in a win for the latter by 3 goals to 1. In the evening a Nativity play, ably produced by the Very Rev. Father W. Bradshaw, was well received by a large audience composed of practically all the local inhabitants.
Third Division News.
Sibu and KANOWIT DISTRICT
DECEMBER, 1933.
The District Officer. Mr W. F. Dick, reports:—
DECEMBER. 1933.
The District Officer, Mr. H. E. Cutfield, reports:— Agriculture- - It was noticed that slightly more rubber was exported than former months, but considering the amount of rubber in the district it seems strange that more is not being worked, considering the pepper season is at an end and the slight increase in the price of rubber. I spent a day visiting the Minus, Murutun and Roban road areas on the far side of the Sarikei and the amount of new pepper gardens being planted up in these areas was most noticeable. It is obvious that the Foochows and Cantonese still put their trust in pepper.
MUKAH DISTRICT.
December, 1933.
The Acting District Officer, Mr. L. K. Morse, reports :—
Miscellaneous.—Commencing early on the 16th and lasting until the early hours of the 18th instant, a severe gale was experienced. heavy rain coupled with extremely high tides flooded the station. It was found possible to boat from Kampong Abun Tellian to the pumping Station via the pipe-line on the 19th instant, which gives some indication of the severity of the weather.
OVA AND DALAT.
December, 1933.
The Acting Assistant District Officer, Mr. N. E. Hughes, reports:—
Miscellaneous.—The first part of the month was remarkable for continuous bad weather, heavy rain and strong winds prevailing. At one lime Dalat was flooded, the water almost reaching the 1932 mark.
Fourth Division News.
November, 1933.
Extracts from the Fourth Divisional Reports by Mr. H. D. Aplin, Resident:—
Very heavy rains were experienced on the 21st and several landslides took place on the bills at the back of Miri. The lower part of Maori Hill road subsided and cannot now be used.
Mr. Fisher, Cadet, passed through Miri on 17th to take up his duties at Baram.
Mr. Rawlings, Resident of Labuan, stayed the night of the 17th.
Dr. Khalid Sheldrake and Mr. Khalid Simpson arrived here from Brunei on 22nd and sailed for Kuching the next day.
Miri DISTRICT.
November, 1933.
The District Officer, Mr. F. G. Carpenter, reports —
Obituary.—Awang Hitam, ex.-Native Officer of Niah and Sibuti, on the 30th.
CORRESPONDENCE.
[The Editor is not responsible for the opinions of Correspondents]
The Editor,
Sarawak Gazette,	KUCHING,
Kuching.	21st January, 1934.
DEAR SIR,
We think it will possibly interest some of your readers to know that the Air France have inaugu rated a new service between Marseilles and London specially for the benefit of passengers arriving at Marseilles from the East.
This service will take place on every Friday.
The 10-seater plane ‘‘Golder Clipper” equipped with 3 engines of 480 H.P. each will come especially to lake the P&O. passengers and convey them to London via Paris at a cruise speed of 135 miles per hour.
The speed of this new plane will permit the voyage Marseilles-London in about six hours.
Yours faithfully.
For the Borneo Company, Limited,
G. T. BATES,
Manager.
