SATURDAY. DECEMBER 1st. 1934.
Birth.
RASID MORSHIDI—SITI HADIJAH.—On 11th November, 1984, at Kampong Datu, Sibu, a son.
Engagement.
The engagement is announced between Leonard Kearney Morse, Sarawak Civil Service, and Lily Frances, daughter of Mr. and Mrs. W. H. Hobbert. of Kingstown, Co. Dublin.
NOVEMBER .
At the kind invitation of Their High nesses the Rajah and Ranee, a most enjoy able entertainment took place at Astana, on Wednesday, the 28th November, in the form of a Badminton Tournament between the younger members of the Malay community. A large party of Malays, including the Datus. were invited to witness the Tournament which took place after tea had been served. In spite of the drizzle the front lawns of the Astana presented an animated scene with all four courts in action, while the Kuching Military Band rendered a selection of cheer fid tunes. The finals having been played off. Her Highness the Ranee presented prizes to the winners. After three hearty cheers for Their Highnesses, a round of refreshments wound up yet another of those informal and much appreciated entertainments which so frequently take place at Astana. The win ners were Mat bin Wahab and Yatem bin Udin and runners up, Mohd. Dahlan bin Seman and Fadil bin Jamali.
The Official opening of the Sylvia Cinema took place on Saturday, the 24th November, when Their Highnesses the Rajah and Ranee very kindly invited members of every com-munity to witness the first performance. An account of the opening appears elsewhere in our columns.
We welcome back to Kuching Mr. H. B. Crocker, who arrived on the 5th November, by m.v. Marudu. Mr. Crocker took over the duties of Government Secretary from Mr. C. F. C. Macaskie, who, after a short spell of leave, is returning to the British North Borneo Service, after having been attached to the Sarawak Civil Service since September, 1932. We take this opportunity to wish Mr. Macaskie adieu and all best wishes for the future. We trust that Mr. Macaskie will take with him many happy memories of his period of service in Sarawak, aud will not forget the many friends he leaves behind him.
Armistice Day occurred on Sunday, the 11th. A gun fired from the Fort Margherita gave the signal for the two minutes silence which was followed by buglers of the Sarawak Constabulary sounding the “last post. ’' The Ex-Service men's dinner was held, by kind permission of the Sarawak Steamship Com pany, Limited, and Capt. A. Benfield, on board t.s.s. Vyner Brooke, on Saturday, November, 10th. His Highness the Rajah attended, and the Right Reverend the Bishop of Labuan and Sarawak was in the Chair. Twenty-two people sat down to a very excel lent dinner while the Kuching Military Band gave a selection of tunes. After dinner, toasts appropriate to the occasion were drunk.
The first, performance of the Kuching Amateur Dramatic Society took place at the Sarawak Club on the 17th November. We publish an account of the performance else where in our columns.
Mr. J. P. Baird, accompanied by Mrs. Baird, left for Singapore en route for England by t.s.s. Vyner Brooke on the 21st November. As we understand that Mr. Baird is proceeding home owing to ill-health, we take this opportunity to wish him a speedy recovery and hope he will soon be amongst us again. By the same vessel Mr. D. E. Calver also sailed for England, via Singapore. Mr. Calver was formerly Conservator of Forests and retired in June 1934. We wish him bon voyage and the best of luck.
We note that white lines are being painted along the Rock Road for the guidance of traffic. It is hoped that this action on the part of the Municipal Department will help to make some of our local bus drivers realize that they are not entitled to ALL the road
Thursday, the 22nd November, seems to have been an ill-fated day for motorists.
At 3 p.m. a taxi driven by a Chinese collided with a tree at the 5th mile. Penrissen Road, one of the passengers, a. Chinese woman, being killed and the car extensively damaged.
At 5.15 p.m. a second accident occurred, this time at 5 th mile, Penrissen Road, a light car, driven by Mr. R. W. Bormond with Mr. T. N. C. Bulman as passenger, over turned while negotiating a down-hill bend. Both occupants received severe injuries neces sitating treatment at the General Hospital.
It is with deep regret we have to record the death of Mr. V. R W. Harington at Cape Town from heart trouble following a brief ill ness Mr. Harington, son of the late W. S. Harington, P.W.D., Madras, joined the Sarawak Civil Service on 21st March, 1902. He did duty at Sibu, Simanggang, Baram and was appointed Assistant Superintendent of Police and Prisons in 1906. and resigned in 1909.
SYLVIA CINEMA.
We are informed that the following films are due to be shown :—
GRETA GARBO
in
QUEEN CHRISTINA.
JACK BUCHANAN
in
THAT’S A GOOD GIRL.
GEORGE ARLISS
in
THE HOUSE OF ROTHSCHILD.
BROADWAY TO HOLLYWOOD.
DAY OF RECKONING.
JESSIE MATTHEWS
in
THE GOOD COMPANIONS
By J. B. Priestly
and
The Ever Popular
EDDIE CANTOR
in
ROMAN SCANDALS.
Sylvia Cinema.
OPENING NIGHT.
The first programme was shown at the Sylvia Cinema on Saturday, 24th November. The theatre was packed to full capacity by an audience repre-sentative of every community, who were the guests of Their Highnesses the Rajah and Rance. Few. if any, of the audience were prepared for the treat that was in store for them, and long before the show started, were in their seats listening to a marvellous programme of orchestral music, while rather dazed with the magnificent lighting effects which were slowly merging from colour to colour. Then to a murmur of suppressed excitement the curtains slowly parted shewing well produced por-traits of Their Highnesses the Rajah and Ranee, which were greeted by a roar of applause. After the News and the Ideal Sound Magazine reels came the Interval, when we retired below to a neat arid cosy bar to ’’have one,” and dash back to our seats, far too early, for the big film,“King Kong.” The film is too well known io need describing here, but to say the least it was a film worthy of the importance of the occasion. We are informed that the following night when the theatre was thrown open to the public, it was again packed to full capacity and indeed, many late comers were turned away.
It is difficult to do full justice in describing the Sylvia Cinema. The architecture is modern and the simplicity of its clear cut lines, inside and out, gives it an atmosphere of solidity combined with grace. Comfortable seats, from front rows to Balcony, with an unobstructed view of the screen, a high roof with numbers of electric fans, soft and tastefully coloured lighting, perfect sound production and very moderate prices all go to make the Sylvia Cinema an extremely important and welcome factor to the amenities of Kuching. We trust some of our more sceptical readers, who read this account with , a feeling that it is exaggerated will pay the Theatre a visit. They will be surprised.
Kuching Amateur Dramatic
Society.
The first performance of the Kuching Amateur Dramatic Society was given at the Sarawak Club on November 17th, and proved a most enjoyable entertainment. Five short plays were presented, commencing with "The Age of Compromise", a slick and sophisticated sketch in the best manner oi Mr. Frederick Lonsdale.
Excellent performances were given by Mrs. Baird and Mrs. Daubeny as the two lovelorn ladies, while Mr. Blagg achieved a polished suavity as Uncle Gilbert which was one of the features of the evening; and Mr Daubeny's performance as the butler made it easy for us to understand his attraction for Mona and Ethel. Seldom has even a stage man-servant displayed such devastating charm.
The next sketch, "Midnight Murder,” was dis-tinguished by acting of a standard which is seldom attained in amateur productions. No praise can be too high for the performance of the three actors, each of whom was perfectly cast. The atmosphere of macabre expectancy which was of such impor tance to the play was achieved from the start, and was admirably sustained until the effective. anti climax. Dr. Hutchison was delightfully sinister as Van Howden, and Mr. Le Gros Clark, who took the part of Wardour, the jeweller, first exasperated us by his airy disregard of the obvious danger be was running, and then thrilled us by the hysterical outburst of terror which followed the realization that he was a suspected murderer, and one who would find it almost impossible to prove his innocence. Mr. Gascoigne was an accomplice of Heep-like oiliness, who brought out to the full the grim possibilities of his part.
In "Buying a Haddock," the dialogue that followed. Mrs. Le Gros Clark and Mr. Le Sueur were excellent as a cockney lady and fishmonger respectivley. Mrs. Le Gros Clark’s accent and exaggerated airs and graces struck exactly the right note, and we hope that Mr. Le Sueur will not take exception to the remark that he looked the part to perfection.
After the interval, we were shown "The Cure," an amusing little play in which Mr. Park submitted himself nobly to a part which can have been nothing more nor less than martyrdom. Let anyone who has had hiccups even for a few moments try and keep them up for 20 minutes on end, and seo what happens. Mr. Park’s acting of the hiccup-afflicted young man was at times so realistic that it was almost painful to watch; and we are sure that the critic was not the only member of the audience who felt slightly sick in sympathy with him. Mrs. Black and Mr. Mitchell did very well as the Parrots, that tiresome couple, each of whose well-meant suggestions was more futile than the last, and Mrs. Hutchison give an excellent reading of Mary. John’s harassed young wife.
In "Honeymoon Hall,” which concluded the entertainment, we had a remarkable performance by the Dayang Elizabeth as Mrs. Wossop, a lady of the people on her second honeymoon. Those who are aware of the difficulty of achieving success in a difficult character part of this description will agree with the critic that this was the outstanding per formance of the evening. The significance which this accomplished actress put into each gesture— not one of which was wasted, or over-emphasized
was astonishing, and the play of expression with which site accompanied the phrase—"George, pick up them bags.” was as delightful as the melting tenderness with which she cooed—“Oh George, you do talk lovely!" Her appearance, incidentally, was a triumph of make-up.
Mrs. Gibson was excellent as the sea-side land lady, since she had ail the insincere cliches of the type at her fingers' ends and her whole bearing reeked of “Sea View,” or "Balmoral." Mrs. Le Gros Clark again shewed great ability as the down- at-heel boarding-house slavey, and Dr. Hutchison gave an amusing rendering of the husband who is just beginning to realize exactly what lies before him.
When the curtain fell for the last time, opinion was unanimous that the performance was not only a most spotting effort on the part -of the Society, but that it was also really good entertainment,— which. alas, cannot be said of all amateur dramatics. The acting everywhere showed a finish which was evidence of hard work and much rehearsal.—those two essentials which are so often neglected in shows of this nature. There is too often a tendency for members of an amateur dramatic society to take their parts in a happy-go-lucky spirit in the belief, apparently, that they have only to go on to the stage and say a few words in order to bring the bouse down. There was nothing of the sort on this occasion. We saw acting; and acting which gave every evidence of careful study under skilled direction. But this was to have been expected, for the Society was fortunate enough to have Her Highness the Ranee as one of the producers. Her Highness’ wide experience of the stage is too well-known to need comment here, and was of the greatest value to the production.
If we may venture a general criticism, it is that once or twice the tempo of the plays wits inclined to be slow,—this was particularly noticeable in "Buying a Haddock,” and "The Cure." The whole point of these brief sketches is "snap,”—their technique is that of an 0. Henry short story, and they should develop on similar lines. The action should be rapid, leading up in a steady crescendo to the denouement, which should come with a bang. It seemed to us on one or two occasions that this was not sufficiently emphasized.
In conclusion, we must congratulate all members of the society on a really excellent performance. In a small community such as Kuching activities of this nature are more than welcome, and we hope that a second show will be forthcoming before long. The difficulties involved in organizing and pro ducing entertainments such as this are well known, and the producers and the stage management deserve great credit for the able manner in which they overcame them. A special word of praise must go to Mrs. Le Gros Clark and Mrs. Daubeny for the decor, which was as effective as it was simple, and of a style admirably suited to the occasion. Mention should also be made of the Constabulary Bond, which enlivened the interval with a programme of music.
It is needless to add that without the encourage ment and assistance of Her Highness the Ranee, there would never have been a performance at all. We are not quite sure whether the word "amateur” ia really in place in describing any theatrical society which has Her Highness' patronage; Her Highness is a professional author who has had at least one play produced on the London stage, and if the word ‘‘amateur" is to be taken in its usual faintly derogatory
Untrained Officers.
With the impending arrival of a new Governor and High Commissioner, and an improvement in govern-mental finances, it is natural that people with pet schemes of one kind aud another should be in a hopeful mood. They cannot all be successful, but there is one particularly deserving group among them, namely those who believe that a training school should be created for Asiatic administrative officers in the Malay States. Institutions of this kind have long existed in the Dutch and French colonies in the Far East, and it is difficult to under stand why similar facilities have not been provided in the Malayan protectorates, at any rate since the establishment of the Malay Administrative Service. The need is urgent to-day, because the policy of “indirect rule'' has been fairly launched in the Federated States, where British officers are being replaced by Malays in minor administrative appoint ments to an extent unknown hitherto. This practice is not a new one, but it was only very occasionally adopted in the past, and not until Sir Cecil Clementi had been in this country a year or two did the growing number of Malay district officers, assistant district officers, magistrates and other officials of a similar standing attract the notice of the public. Indeed, it was not until that regime that the policy took definite shape. The first step in this direction was taken a decade ago, with the inauguration of the Malay Administrative Service by Sir George Maxwell, but it was not until the year 1932 that the Federal Government, replying to the Retrenchment Commission’s proposal to re-arrange and enlarge the areas controlled by British district officers, came out with a detailed scheme of administration by Malay officers under the supervision of British officers.
This change, took place partly because economy was necessary, and also because Sir Cecil Clementi, having been greatly impressed by administrative methods in Kedah,’ sympathised with those who wanted to see similar methods used more boldly and extensively in the Federated States. With the merits of this reform we are not concerned for the moment. The point is that the change has occurred. A number of posts formerly held by British officers of the Malayan Civil Service are now occupied by Malays, and the declared policy is to continue to increase, as far as is consistent with safety and reasonable efficiency, the appoint meats open to Malay members of the Civil service and to the Malay Administrative Service. Yet no facilities whatever exist for training such officers. They enter government service with no more knowledge than they have acquired in an ordinary school, and they have to pick up what they can by practical experience and private study. It is not surprising that the Hon. Mr. E. D. Shearn. speaking in the Federal Council some months ago, indicated very tactfully but very clearly that the qualifications possessed by junior Malay magistrates were, as a rule, not considered satisfactory by legal practitioners. It is indeed extraordinary that whereas every other branch of government gives its junior Asiatic officers a course of theoretical instruction, the most important branch of all does not do so. The Department of Agri culture trains its men at Serdang ; the Department of Co-operation conducts a training course at its headquarters in Kuala Lumpur; the Survey and Public Works departments use the technical school in Kuala Lumpur; but the administrative branch has no training school or preliminary course of any kind,
Such a position, to an administrator from the Netherlands Indies or Indo-China, would seem inexplicable. The Dutch, who began to create a separate but subordinate native civil service long before we began in Malaya, maintain six training schools for this service in Java and two in the Outer Possessions. The course includes general instruction and special subjects required by government officers, together with the rudiments of agriculture, tropical sanitation and simple construction. Up to a few years ago the course covered five years, so that a very well-grounded and capable type of native official was turned out, but we believe that the period has since been shortened. The same policy is followed by the French in Indo-China, where efficient schools exist for training government candidates in admi-nistrative methods, the elements of civil and criminal law. hygiene, tropical agriculture and other useful subjects. These schools, be it noted, are only for the administrative service and are distinct from the schools which are used to train technical subordin ates for government departments. It will be seen, then, that the Malay States are far behind other Eastern countries in the training of their native officer's, and also behind the Straits Settlements, which are to train their local civil service at Raffles College. The establishment of a central training college for all the Malay States, outside as well ns inside the Federation, would seem to be not only a desirable but a practicable reform to bring to the notice of the new High Commissioner.—Straits Times.
Foreign Greetings Telegrams.
By arrangement with the Eastern Extension Telegraph Company. CHRISTMAS AND NEW YEAR FOREIGN GREETINGS TELEGRAMS to all pieces (except Russia and the Irish Free State) with which the Daily Letter Telegram Ser vice is in operation, will be accepted at any Post aud Telegraph Office in Sarawak during, the period from the 14lb December, 1934, to the 6th January, 1935, inclusive. The minimum charge is the charge for ten words and the rate per word which varies from 25 cents to $1.10 according to the country of destina tion may be. ascertained upon application at any Post and Telegraph Office. These telegrams must bear the prefix “XLT" which is charged for as one word, and the text of the telegrams must be in the nature of greeting.
Higher Education?
UP., 30th June, 1933.
I am very highly pleased to certify that your seeds are always very very satisfactory and I have been using your seeds for the last many years. In my experience of 40 years’ gardening work and con tinuously from my Fourth Father's head gardener and Supdt. in government garden I never saw from my eyes and having no tongue to explain about your seeds germinate well. I took weight of a Tomatoe in presence of many men gathering that time in my small garden.
Three lbs of a Tomatoe.
Beet Root long 2 feet 10 inches, weight 8 lbs.
My all friends much pleased to see this things.''
SHIAMLALL.
The America's Cup in 1851.
Mr. HERBERT WELD.
As a contrast to the notion of the New York Soiling Committee in refusing to consider Mr. Sopwith's protest, on the flimsy ground that the protest flag was not hoisted in nccordnuoe with the practice of the New York Yacht Club, but in accordance with the advice of their representative on hoard the Endeavour, it is interesting to record an incident in the race for the Cup in 1851.
In this race the America went the wrong side of a buoy, which on strict interpretation of the rule would have disqualified her. My grand-father, Mr. J. Weld, who was one of the founders of the Royal Yacht Squadron, and owned one of the crack yachts, the Alarm, strongly protested against her being disqualified, on the grounds that this would not have affected the result This decision had the momentous result of the America's Cup passing to the United States and remaining there for 81 years, with the assistance, as an American paper pointed not some years ago, of the Lawyer's Clause requiring a vessel built strong enough to cross the Atlantic to compete with racing eggshells at a time of the year when winds were prevalent such as would least favour the heavier and more powerful boat. — The Timet Weekly Edition.
Malay Soldiers.
By the end of next year tin Malay Regiment will have attained a strength of nearly 400 men, and will thus emerge from the experimental phase to take its place with the Gold Coast Regiment, the. West African Rifles ami other famous colonial regiments.
With the exception of the Johore Military Forces, this is actually the first time that a Malay regiment has existed in the British Empire since a corps of Malay riflemen was used in the up-country fighting in Ceylon nearly a century ago.
Much greater interest in the Port Dickson com pany has been noticeable in the F.M.S. recently, especially since the company provided a guard of honour for the Sultans at the Federal Connell meeting last month.—Straits Budget.
Reduced Air Mail Charges by
Imperial Airways Service.
Commencing from 1st December the Air Mail charges inclusive of postage for correspondence forwarded by the Imperial Airways Service to Great Britain and Northern Ireland are reduct'd to the following:
The Weed.
He who would cultivate leisure
At peace with the world and its ends
Let him seek philosophical pleasure
In the lathe tobacco extends
So when you’re unsettled and worried
Through battling with feminine wiles
Just light your 'Havana" unhurried And Elysium will greet you with smiles For though its considered inhuman I suggest we treat love as a joke For a woman is only a woman
But a fragrant cigar—is a smoke.	THE BUTLER.
With acknowledgments to Rudyard Kipling.
Roman Stories.
Now lads I'm going to give you, some peeps al Roman Life Heart throbbing, human stories, of Love and Mortal Strife And expose the brutal scoundrel who deluded Caesar's wife And the moral is that no one really cares.
So what if Nero fiddled “Keep the Home Fires Burning Chaps"
And Dido sat on funeral pyre because of Aeneas' lapse
You know neither of these actions influenced Mercator's maps
And who cares ?
While Perseus was floating on his winged horse ’cross the sky
His composure was unruffled when Andromeda said “Hi For he'd not iced in the distance that sho wore his old school tie	(
But who cares?
Clytaemnestra was a naughty girl—It's useless to refute That her neighbours really thought her house a place ill-repute
For sue gave some nudist parties, that were really too too out
But who cares ?
Old Plate, the Philosopher, achieved no little fume By saying promiscuity was really not the game Till his "missus'' found him necking in the parlour with a damn
But who cares ?
I should awfully like to tell you. but I'm much too much afraid
Some really priceless stories ’bout the Old man of Belgrade And the girl who thought the Park Bench was the British Board of Trade	, 4
But who cares? If your best girl seems forgetful and assumes a roving eye Don't look ns if you’re dying and let loose the gustful sigh But take a good look round you and find other fish to fry
For who cares?—anyway.
THE BUTLER.
Bridge Backchat.
The time has come, the Player said, To talk of many tilings;
Of, Partner, why you took to bed Two Aces and three Kings ?
And why my bump to Two No Tramp
Produced no Answering shout ?
And why make do with a wretched Two,
When it might have been a rout?
If only you'd finessed your Queen,
And so made good my Ten!
And then played out your Ace of Hearts, And led me Spades again.
Instead of which, we're in the ditch, And Vulnerable too;
And the gloating pair beside us there Make sport of me and you.
And Partner, dear, I also fear
You did not note the score!
It's not a bluff, when One's enough.
To raise the bid to Four.
Instead of tricks, we’ve landed bricks, And a certain Slum in sight!
Whom did you claim yon learnt this game ?
Oh Partner, dear, GOODNIGHT
OLD SARAWAK.
From the Sarawak Gazette
61 Years Ago.
THE
SARAWAK GAZETTE
No. 61 MONDAY, 31sT MARCH, 1878. Price 5 cent.
ITEMS.
It may not be generally known that the bite of the little creature usually called the flying-squirrel by Europeans is sometimes attended by similar symptoms to those which follow snakebite. A gentleman in Sarawak was lately bitten in the hand by one of these animals, which he WAR trying to secure, and found his arm, throat, and face swell almost immediately to a large size, while the pain and prostration consequent upon the bite was so great that he fell down insensible by the roadside before he could reach his house. The dangerous symptoms continued for several hours; but, we are happy to say at last gave way to such treatment as could be applied to them in the jungle.
A seaman who deserted from the Italian man-of-war at finding has been apprehended and is now in custody.
He left the ship on a plank and was carried by the tide to the mouth of the river, where he was found in an exhausted state by some Malays, who gave him food and brought him to Kuching.
First Division News.
October, 1934.
The Resident, First Division. Mr. W. F. Dick, reports
On 12th and 19th, together with Mr. R. E. Edwards, I inspected the widening work now being carried out on the Pending Road, when completed, this work will fill a decided want as the traffic between Kuching and Pending has increased con siderably of late, produce and fish for the Kuching Market are often brought by road from Pending.
UPPER SARAWAK DISTRICT.
October, 1934.
The Acting District Ollicer, Mr. R. G. Aikman, reports :—
Gold Mining.—Two more companies, the Hua Kiaw Gold Mining Syndicate at Upper Knau and the Soon Ami Gold Mining Company at Bau, com menced leaching fur gold on tile 27th and 28th respectively.
Then are now twenty-four mines actually leaching for gold by the Cyanide process, nine establishments having closed down
Tim total production of gold for Upper Sarawak for the month of September, 1934. amounted to 2,190 ounces.
Fourteen Exclusive Prospecting Licences and four Mining Leases were issued during the month.
The actual gold obtained by the following com panies during the month nf September, 1934, was
Minutes of a Committee Meeting
of the Sarawak Turf Club held
at The Sarawak Club at 6.15
p.m., on Thursday, 15th
November, 1934.
Present: Mr. Tan Sum Guan (in the Chair), Datu Shahbandar, Messrs, Chan Qui Chong, E. S Holl, Capt. R E. Le Sueur and G. T. Bates. Minutes of the previous meeting were read and approved
Accounts .-—Profit and Loss Account of Autumn Meeting placed before the Committee and passed. Classification of Ponies: Mr. E. S. Holl submitted the following alterations which were approved:— Committee:—Mr. Crocker to replace Mr. Macaskie (resigned). Proposed by Mr. Bates, seconded by Datu Shahbandar. Mr. Chan Qni Chong to replace Mr. Olig Bap Leong (resigned). Proposed by Mr. Batea seconded by Mr. Tan Stun Guan. Mr. Chan Qui Chong proposed 6 new stalls. Secretaries are to obtain estimates. Mr. Tan Sum Guan suggested a platform for general spectators. Mr. Tan Sum Guan promised to obtain estimates.
November Golf.
The Caddies Championship held on Sunday, the 25th, produced some inteiesting and considering the circumstances meritorious golf, resulting in two ties for the first place with scores of 43, and three others running up with scores of 45.
On a replay over three holes the Championship was won by Ah Beng. last years champion.
An eclectic competition held during the mouth was won by Mr. C. E. Gascoigne with a score of 30 less 1 29.
Leaving the best to the last, mention is now made of the St. Andrew's Day match between Scotland and The Rest of Kuching.
Rain fell, but quite undismayed and singing bluthely "we two has paidled 'i the burn" the players swam happily round the course (probably because they knew that undiluted waler would not bo touched again that evening).
The match resulted in a draw each side registering four wins teams and results were.
OYA AND DALAT.
October, 1934.
The Officer-in-Charge, Mr. D. R. Lascelles, reports:—
Trade.—During the mouth the price of sago again soared up to 53 cents per passu in Dalat and 60 cents in Sungei Kut. At the end of the month the price fell to '57 in Sungei Kut and 50 in Dalat, but trade remains brisk and Lalat bazaar is lively. Ono house in Oya has
slatted to work sago again, after an interval of several
years; this is an encouraging sign of the times. Tho
figures relating to telegraphic transfers give some indi-
cation of how trade has improved io the Oya and Dalat
District.