THURSDAY. MARCH 1st.
Local and personal.
FEBRUARY.
Her Highness the Ranee, accompanied by Dayang Valerie, left for England, via Singa-pore, by s.s. Darrel on 24th. We take this opportunity of wishing Her Highness, and Dayang Valerie, bon voyage and au revoir.
Her Highness the Ranee’s birthday occurred on Saturday, February 24th, on the eve of which a most enjoyable dinner and dance was given by Their Highnesses, the Rajah and Ranee, at Astana. At 8 a.m. on the 24th a salute of 21 guns was fired from Fort Margherita and all ships in port were dressed. A public holiday was declared on Thursday 22nd, in honour of Her Highness' birthday. We beg to tender Her Highness our wishes for very many happy returns of the day.
We are informed that His Highness the Tuan Muda will be arriving in Kuching in June. His Highness will be accompanied by his son, Mr. Anthony Brooke, who is joining the Sarawak Civil Service. After a tour of the outstations, Mr. Brooke will be seconded to the Federated, or Unfederated Malay States Government for two years, in order to gai n experience and knowledge of the Malay language and customs. At the end of the two years, Mr. Brooke will return to Sara wak and take over the usual duties of a Cadet Officer of the Sarawak Civil Service.
The Government Secretary, Mr. C. F. C. Macaskie. returned from home leave on Tuesday 20th, by t-.s.s. Vyner Brooke. Mr. C. D. Adams, who has been Acting Govern-ment Secretary, will be returning to Sibu on 2nd March to resume his duties as Resident, Third Division.
Mr. W. F. Dick, accompanied by Mrs. Ditk, arrived from Sibu on Friday 23rd. Mr. Dick has been appointed Acting Resi dent, First Division.
The Chief Justice, Mr. T. J. L. Stirling Boyd, returned from short leave by m.v. Marudu on the 26th. The Chief Justice visited Rangoon, Calcutta and Darjeeling. During his absence on leave Mr. H. B. Crocker acted in his appointment.
Chinese New Year occurred on Wednesday 14th and the Government Offices were closed. The festivities in Kuching, in spite of the small improvement in trade, were of modest nature, but at Bau, the centre of the gold mining operations, the bazaar took on the aspect of, almost, boom times.
We are informed that Mr. and Mrs. Wee Kheng Chiang had the honour of entertain ing His Highness the Rajah, Her Highness the Ranee and Dayang Valerie to a family dinner on the 12th instant, at their residence at Mathie’s Hill. The other guests present were Mr. and Mrs. E. Parnell and Mr. Ong Tiang Swee, c.s.s.
Mr. T. Corson of the Forest Department, accompanied by Mrs. Corson, returned from home leave by t.s.s Fyner Brooke on the 20th. Mr. N. Mace of the Land and Survey Depart ment also returned from home leave by the same vessel, and the Rev. and Mrs. J. M. Hoover of the American Methodist Mission, Sibu, who have been on a visit to Singapore.
We are in receipt of another volume of Mirage which is, as usual, brimful of interesting articles and excellent photo-graphs.
Obituary.
It is with deep regret we have to record the death of Abang Haji Metair bin Abang Abdulrahman at Binatang on 1st January. 1934. Abang Haji Metair became the Ton Kampong. Binatang. in 1899. Lately he was promoted to the Native Officers’ Service and did not retire from this Service until 31st January, 1927. After retirement he again took over the duties of Tua Kampong, Binatang, until relieved by his son, Abang Hap Mohamad Barlian, who is at present Native Officer, Rejang. Abang Haji Metair was a Member of the Council Negri and received the Long Service Decoration in 1925. He took part in the Gat expedition and was specially recommended for his Services We beg to tender our sincere sympathy to his family at their sad loss.
Benevolent Coconuts?
The tragic fate of a Penang pedestrian who lost bis life through five coconuts falling on his head serves to illustrate how seldom such an accident Occurs. When one considers the millions of coco nuts that must fall on estates, kampongs and in quiet roads and lanes, the absence of accident becomes astonishing. We seem to recollect reading more reports of inquests on persons killed by foiling trees than on persons killed by falling fruit. The fruit is falling every minute of the year, while trees only come down at isolated intervals. All this leads one to understand, if not to share, the. native superstition that coconuts are sentient, and being benevolently disposed avoid falling on humans or animals! The kampong dweller always selects a site for his house under a lofty tope of coconuts, and if experience had taught him that such a spot were dangerous, surely he would avoid the immediate vicinity. As it is the coconut is looked upon As the most prolific of all trees, supplying the villager with shade, drink, food, thatch, oil and firewood. Commercially, the tree gives copra, oil. mal ting and toddy, while odd nuts, if not wanted, can be sold from a cent to five cents each.—Straits Times.
Batu Puteh.
After a depression lasting several years, the bottom has now fallen out of the diamond market and prices are but a fraction of what they were some years ago. This is particularly distrusting for Malaya where the diamond, or the bain puteh as it is descriptively known locally. Ilas been in great favour for generations, particularly among Chinese ami Malays. In days gone by. the diamond was looked upon in this country as a sort of gilt-edged security. Stacks slid shares and even land values might fluctuate, but the diamond was something tangible which would always have a value. Such was the popular idea Alas! This, along with many another economic gospel, has been proved to be false.—Straits Times.
OLD SARAWAK.
From the Sarawak Gazette
60 Years Ago.
THE
SARAWAK GAZETTE
No. 81 WEDNESDAY, JULY 1ST, 1834. Price 5 cent,.
GOLD.
Much has been said lately about COAL discoveries at Silantik, at Muka, and at other places within the territory of the Rajab. Notice has been taken also of the advent of a professional diamond digger with the intention of starting working at Sintah, Upper Sarawak. A report now reaches us of the discovery of gold in quantity at Marup on the Batang Lupar. and a probable rush of Chinese fortune- seekers to that part of the country; may the find prove to be a successful one.
But while touching upon the subject of gold, it should not be forgotten that the precious metal is existent quite near to our Capital—at Buntal and on the other side of Santubong mountain at Tambak—
Tuinbak gold workings 1 have not visited, but to the Buntal one I have been on several occasions when I have gone there with friends in quest nf curfew or larger game.
At a distance of about 2 miles from Buntal along the sands a reef of rocks runs out from the mainland for some distance into the sea; these rocks are exposed only at spring tides.
The people of a small village which is situate close by, procure a living by collecting the sand from the crevices of this reef, which sand is said to be rich in gold. Seeing that they work but on an average one week in the month, and during these few days are enabled with native applian ces to earn a subsistence, the question naturally arises is not gold existent somewhere near in considerable quantity ? I am told by these people that they frequently obtain gold by washing the sand brought up from a depth of two fathoms in the vicinity of these rocks at spring tides.
I touch upon this subject simply inasmuch as the exist-ence of the precious metal at places on both sides of San- tubong mountain- on the sea sands—leads me to entertain the idea, that the spot from whence it originally came cannot be far off, probably in the hill itself.
First Division News.
UPPER SARAWAK DISTRICT.
January. 1934
The Assistant District Officer. Mr. R. G. Aikman, reports: —
Agriculture.—The Dahan Rubber Estates, Limited, harvested 17,800 lbs. of dry rubber during the month. The rainfall at Bau was 15 52 inches. The highest recorded in 24 hours was 2 39 inches and the daily average was 50 of an inch. The rainfall for the month at Dahan Rubber Estates was 22 63 inches.
Gold Mining.— The Kim Soon Huat Gold Mining Syndicate, near Seburau, Bidi Road. and The Kee Jiu Gold Mining Company, at Bau, commenced leaching on the 10th and 11th respectively. This brings the number of companies now operating by the cyanide process to nineteen. Applications for gold mining land continue to come in steadily though the weather must have very greatly interfered with both prospecting and mining operations. As a result the January output of gold is likely to be below the average. Eighty-one General Prospect-ing Licences were issued during the month and fourteen applications for Exclusive Prospecting Licences were received. Three such licences were issued.
The actual gold obtained by the following Com panies for the month of December, 1933. was: —
SADONG DISTRICT.
January, 1934.
The Acting Assistant District Officer, Mr. S. G. Hansom, reports : —
P.IK.D. - Work is proceeding on the construction of the road from Tebakang to Serian, with the use of Land Dyak labour. About two miles of this roan have now been completed.
General.— The Kim Huat Sawmill. Simunjan, re-started work on the 15th instant, after nearly seven years of idleness. It is under the manage ment of C. C. Mult Kim, late, chief clerk at Simunjan.
It is hoped that this Mill will prove a commercial success, as it provides employment, not only for a number of local Natives, but also for numbers of lip-liver Malays and Dyaks. who are engaged in the supply of logs of timber, about 3,000 of which are now stored for cutting.
The actual rainfall recorded at Simunjan, was 30.56 inches. It should be mentioned, however, that this figure is below the correct one, as the rain-gauge was frequently found to have overflowed during the night, owing to exceptionally heavy downpours.
St. Thomas’ Cathedral. We publish for the information of our readers the following arrangements which have been announced by the Bishop of Labuan and Sarawak :—
As from 14th February, 1934 (Ash Wednesday), the pastoral care of the Cathedral, Kuching. and its congregation together with outlying stations will be entrusted to the Priests of the Community of the Resurrection, of whom the Reverend Fr. Wilfrid Shelley, C.R., is the senior.	Ths Ven. F. S Hollis, Archdeacon of Sarawak, will continue as Head-master of St. Thomas’ School, and will be Missionary-in-charge, under the Bishop, of all ths work of the Anglican Church in Kuching and districts.
We publish an explanatory note on the above announcement which has been kindly contributed.
The Community of the Resurrection is a Religious Community of Anglican Priests, founded in 1892 by the late Bishop Gore. They live some sixty in number - as all such Orders, under a common rule, ami especially set out to apply to the conditions of our modern world all that, through their history, Religious Communities have, in their particular circumstances and age, contributed to the life, work ami witness of the Church
They are, what is called, an "active" community. The Home Community House is st Mirfield in Yorkshire, while there are other branch Houses in London. Truro, Johannesburg and Southern Rho desia. Their work is evangelistic, missionary and educational. They conduct parochial missions, conventions, retreats, etc., all over the British Isles. Six priests are doing missionary work among the ‘Bantu of Southern Rhodesia. Six more run the biggest Public School in Johannes burg. and others work among the Africans on the Rand. They have a Hostel in Leeds University for some sixty undergraduates, and also maintain a College for Training Candidates for the ministry at Mirfield, in which there are always some forty students. The Community has provided the English Church with many well-known leaders mid scholars. Among the former can be named the late Dr. Gore, sometime Bishop of Worcester, Birmingham and Oxford, and the present Bishops of Truro, Llandaff and (the late co-adjutor) of Gape Town. Amongthe latter Dr. Gore himself, Dr. Frere, Dr Figgis, Dr. Rackham mid Fr. Thornton. It is of especial interest to know that Bishop Mounsey. late of this diocese, is also a member of the Community.
The services of the Community are in enormous demand all over the English Church, and we can feel ourselves fortunate in that among these many requests that of this diocese has received an affirma tive answer. In brief, the present situation is as under. The Community, at the Bishop's request, has decided to "test" the rightness of their under taking permanent work in this diocese. Two priests are already here and another is joining them from England. The "Testing period" will be of three years duration. There are many hopes and visions (e g., it is hoped that from Kuching help may be given perhaps in training priests, etc., from other dioceses in the Far South East), but—whatever these hopes may be - it has to lie re-emphasized that the venture is al present experimental in character, and the next three years will make clear what the final decision must be.
Kuching Football Association.
At the 5th Annual General Meeting of the Kuching Football Association held at the Municipal Office, on Saturday, 3rd February, 1934, the election of Council for the ensuing year resulted as follows:—
President, Mr. G. T. Bates; Honorary Secre tary, Mr. Tan Kui Choon; Honorary Treasurer, Mr. Robert Khoo; European Representative, Mr. W. J. Chater; Chinese Representative, Dr. Wong Cheong Way; Malay Representative, Haji Bol Hassan ; other representatives, Messrs. Chan Weng Sheng, Harry Brodie and John Lim.
Applications are invited from Clubs and Asso ciations for Affiliation to the Kuching Football Association for season 1934.	Full particulars may he obtained from the Hono rary Secretary.
Affiliation is for one year only: Fee $10 vide Rule No. 6.
THE RANEE'S CUP.
Value $250. A piece of plate of the value of $100 presented by Her Highness the Ranee with $150 added. Second to receive $100. Third $40.
A handicap for ponies of any Division. Distance 1 mile. Entrance Fee $10. $5 refunded to non- acceptors. Handicap published on the Course. Post Entries allowed at $20 but no refund.
THE RAJAH'S CUP.
Value $300. A piece of plate value $150 presented by His Highness the Rajah with $150 added. Second to receive $100. Third $40.
A handicap for ponies of any Division. Distance Round the Course (about 1.1/3 Miles.) Entrance Fee $10. $5 refunded to non-acceptors. Handicap published on the Course. Post Entries allowed at $20 but no refund.
REGULATIONS.
Penalties.—Winners of any race at this Meeting after publication of weights shall carry a penalty of 7 lbs. for each race with a maximum of 11 stone 7 lbs.
Allowance—Professional Jockeys who are Sara wak subjects and have not ridden more than two winners under Sarawak Turf Club Rules, may claim an allowance of 7 lbs.
Entries.—All nominations, accompanied by Entrance Fees, description of ponies, and declaration of colours, to be made to the Secretaries not later than noon, 31st March, 1934.
_ Scratchings.—Owners scratching ponies before 5 p.m. on 20th for first day and 5 p.m. on 22nd April for second day, will receive back half their entrance fees.
Handicaps.—For First Day will be posted on the Notice Board at the Sarawak Club at noon on 7th April, and for the Second Day at noon on 22nd April.
Course.—Will he open for training on 17th March, at 5.30 a.m.
Ponies.- Must run on the First Day to be eligible for entry in Races on Second Day.
Any raced Borneo pony may be imported from B.N.B. and shall be eligible for entry in races open to Sarawak Division I ponies provided such pony is not more than 13.2 hands and carries top weight on the first day's racing. Any ponies having imported blood in them shall only be eligible to race provided that their sires and dams were foaled in Borneo. All unraced ponies (ponies with out known form) under 13 hands, Division III, carry top weight. Tonies of 13 hands and over, Division II, carry top weight less 21 lbs.
Owners.—Are requested to see that their syces and jockeys obtain necessary badge for entrance to Paddock.
Totalizators and Cash Sweeps as usual.
Prizes 20% reduction if under 5 entries.
Communications to be made to
THE BORNEO COMPANY LIMITED, Secretaries, Sarawak Turf Club.
[Members are requested to apply to the Secretaries for necessary Badges or obtain them at the Grandstand.]
Second Division News.
Simanggang DISTRICT.
January, 1931.
The District Officer, Mr R L. Daubeny, reports:—
Agriculture.—Reports of padi crops from most districts are decidedly good and. provided weather conditions are normal during the next month, harvesting should start in March.
General.— Mr. J. B. Archer, Resident, Second Division, left on transfer to the Fourth Division on Tuesday 30th instant. A large gathering were assembled, representa tive of all communities, to wish him farewell.
Fourth Division News. December, 1933.
Extracts from Fourth Divisional Reports by Mr. J. B. Archer, Resident:—
I left Limbang on the 25th December overland viA Brunei for Miri to take over temporarily, on the 1st January, from the Resident, Fourth Division, Mr. H. D. Aplin.
On the 22nd December, the District Officer, Miri, Mr. F. G. Carpenter, sailed for Europe, on resignation, and Mr. Gilbert took over the District Office.
During my visit to L. Lama the caves were opened as most of the birds were moulting. Total nests collected amounted to 88.1 catties. CORRESPONDENCE.
[The Editor is not responsible for the opinion* of Correspondent*. ]
The Editor,
Sarawak Gazette,
Kuching.
Sir,
I recently heard it stated that the Sarawak Gazette once published a logical and lucid defence of Blood Sports; may I suggest that in view of the publicity given to others and kindred subjects in the English Press to-day it would lie of considerable interest to re-publish this article, more especially since it must appear to many of your readers that, however lucid the arguments in favour of their activities advanced by Blood-Sportsmen, it is likely that they will appeal as little to the logical as to the humanitarian instincts of a modern civilized community.
I am, sir, etc.,
Vox VULPIS.