TUESDAY, APRIL 3rd. 1934.
Marriages.
PARK—RAMSAY.—At the Presbyterian Church, Singapore, on 17th March, William, only son of Mr. and Mrs. W. Park, 165. Clifton Road, Aberdeen, to Elizabeth Mowat, elder daughter of Mr. P. Ramsay and the lute Mrs. Ramsay, Ven-turefair Avenue, Dunfermline.
SUMMERS—DAVIS-EVANS.—The marriage of Mr. Bowen Summers and Miss Dorothy Davies-Evans will take place at Llanfynydd Church on Wednesday, 14th March, at 11.80 a.m. — Times.
ALLMAN—ROUY.—A marriage has been arranged, and will take place on 17th April, between George Monck Allman, of La Logette, Villefranche sur Mer, France youngest son of Dr. Allman, of Westport, Ireland, and blanche de Rouy, of Villefranche sur-Mer. daughter of Gaston de Rony and niece of the late Lady Rose, of Farnham.—Times—.
Local and personal.
MARCH.
His Highness the Rajah, and party, left for a visit to the Fourth Division, by s.s. Durcel, on 5th March, and returned on 17th March.
His Highness the Rajah left Kuching on Monday, 26th March, by H.H M.Y. Maimuna, for a tour of the Third Division.
His Highness the Tuan Muda, accom panied by his son, Mr. Anthony Brooke, is expected to arrive in Singapore on 8th June, by s.s. Rajputana.
We are informed that the Countess of Inchcape gave birth to a son on 36th March, 10:14 We take this opportunity to con gratulate the Karl and Countess and wish the new arrival long life and every happiness.
News of the death of the Queen Mother of the Netherlands was received on 22nd. All flags in Kuching were flown at half-mast on Friday 23rd.
It is with deep regret we have to record the death of the Hon. Mrs. Thomas Cochrane, who was killed in a motor car accident near Cairo on 19th February. Major the Hon. Thomas Cochrane was seriously injured. We take this opportunity to tender Major Cochrane our sincere sympathies in his sad bereavement.
We are informed that on 9th January, 1934, the Rev. George Thomas Shetliffe was married to Miss Elizabeth Mary Money- Kyrle, only daughter of the late Archdeacon of Hereford and of Mrs. R. T. A. Money- Kyrle. Many of our readers will remember ‘‘Padre Shetliffe,” who was stationed in Kuching for a time, and join us in wishing him and his bride the best of luck and all happiness.
Hari Raya Haji occurred on Monday, 26th March. All Government Offices were closed. A regatta was held during the after noon.
The “Council Negri" Meeting will take place at Astana at 9 a.m. on 21st April.
The old Globe Picture Theatre, Khoo Hun Yeang Street, has been re-opened for “talkies” under a new management known as The Kuching Theatre Company.
It is with deep regret we have to record the death of Sir Gilbert Grindle, K.C.M.G., C.B., late of the Colonial Office, who was a Honorary Member of the Sarawak Asso ciation and a regular attendant at the Annual Dinners.
A London correspondent informs us that a marriage has been arranged between Mr. E. Banks, Curator of the Sarawak Museum, and Miss Reed of Newport. As yet we have received no details.
On Saturday, 3rd March, a flight of aeroplanes from H M.S. Eagle flew over Kuching. The flight first circled over Kuching in formation, then swooped down past Astana and Fort Margherita. One plane detached itself from the flight and dropped a message bag in the centre of the Fort parade ground, which contained an envelope, courteously enclosed in the Sarawak colours, and addressed to His Highness the Rajah. We arc informed that the envelope contained cards from the Ward-Room Officers, H.M.S. Eagle, Captain Lionel V. Wells, R.N., and Wing-Commander J. M. Robb R.A.F. The following message was despatched, by order of His Highness, to Captain Wells, H.M.S. Eagle'.
“Thank you and Wing-Commander Robb and Ward-Room Officers H.M.S. Eagle for your call this afternoon. Sorry that you could not make a longer visit and also sorry I cannot return it. With all good wishes.
VYNER BROOKE, Rajah, Sarawak.”
White Prestige.
Reference was made in this column a few days ago to an article by Mr. A. ,1. W. Harloff on the influence of the cinema on Eastern peoples. In that article, apart from the scheme of special films and cinemas which Mr. Harloff adumbrated, there were several expressions of opinion Which echoed what is undoubtedly the .general trend of European comment in the. East but which nevertheless merit more critical and sceptical examination than they usually receive.
Mr. Harloff is extremely perturbed about the effect of the cinema on European prestige, and he quotes an impressive list of authorities in support of his opinion. A great deal of what he says is perfectly true, especially when he is discussing the type of film in which there are love scenes and scantily clad women. And Mr. Harloff is light in Signing that that type of picture, and in fact all pictures which gave intimate and luridly unrepre sentative glimpses of European life, make the task of the European administrator in the East more difficult. He is no longer hedged about with some- thing approaching divinity, as he was when dealing with illiterate people three or four decades ago. And accordingly he loses some degree of influence and authority, But how much? Is the difference created by the cinema really important enough to Worry about?
If we apply the test of our ordinary day-to-day experiences in Malaya, it would seem that a great deal of ink is being spilt over this matter, and a great, deal of time wasted in gloomy head-shakings, without good reason. A Malay, an Indian or a Chinese is very quick to realize the difference between a flesh-and-blood British official and an insubstantial screen villain The qualities of energy, impartiality, decisiveness, leadership and initiative are as impressive in any particular officer, and as welcome and admirable to the Asiatic population, as they were a century ago. Indeed it is probable that the modern Malayan practice of moving civil servants continually from one appointment to another hns had far more to do with a decline of prestige, if such has occurred, limn any cinema travesties. All me men who made their mark in the early days of the Malay Slates, who were the uncrowned kings of their districts mid yet never quite rose into the front milk, were officials who lived continuously in the same district for a number of years. Captain Berkeley ill Upper Perak. Mr. Noel Denison at Telok Anson and Mr. Wise in Pallium may be cited as examples. Nowadays the populace of any given district never really gets to know its British officers because after a year or two—at most, three—they are whisked away to another appointment.
But even under these conditions, unfortunate but probably inevitable, it cannot really be said that the right type of British officer has any more difficult task in this country to-day than his predecessors had, and in so far as there has been a change, the cases are not the cinema but Nationalism and Communism. Towards Western civilization as a whole the Oriental attitude has no doubt undergo a profound change, and that change is attributable largely to the cinema, but towards individual officers il is substantially the same, except where. the two factors named above have been at work The difference between a gangster in an American film and a British magis trate in a Singapore police court is the difference between unreality and reality, and why on earth should we suppose that the unlettered Oriental masses of this city will be deluded by the cinema into seeing in the magistrate a gangster in disguise?
From the political point of view the revelation, , through the agency of Hollywood, of the more depraved aspects of Western civilization surely matters far less than Mr, Harloff and oilier anxious observers suppose. In a cosmopolitan country like Malaya it is recognised by all classes of the population that the British officer, administrative or professional, has .limit valuable and necessary functions to perform, and so long as he performs those functions with competence, fairness, sympathy and determina- tion, he need not worry very much about Hollywood.
True, the mystery which once surrounding such an officer, which stranded the whole of his personal life. has gone, but what does that matter so long as his personal qualities remain? Indeed, may it not be argued that the very fact that the unlettered masses have seen the professional criminals and Don Juans if Hollywood will enhance the prestige of a British civil servant when they meet him in the flesh? May not the contrast between viciousness and honour, between raffishness amd self-respect, give the administrator greater prestige than he enjoyed before these alternatives were known? It is too often and too lightly assumed that the illiterate Oriental masses take as gospel truth everything they See on the screen. Why should they do so? They dis- tinguish between ready and fiction in their own theatres and presumably they go to the cinema in the same spirit. And it is worth remembering that even Hollywood not infrequently creates dignified, wholesome, graceful and charming pictures, so that even if Oriental talkie patrons are as credulous as some people suppose, they are bound to learn that there is good as well as bad in Western civilisation. —Straits Times.
Retirement of Mr. E. Parnell from
The Sarawak Steamship
Company, Ltd.
An" At Home” was given by the Staff of the Sarawak Steamship On.. Ltd., on board the s.s Fyner Broore on the evening of 23rd March, in honour of Mr. Farnell's retirement from the Company, after 15 years' service as Managing Director. A group photo graph was taken on the promenade deck of the vessel after the reception, and an address, hearing on his past service, was also read by the Head Wharfinger on behalf of the Staff, to which Mr. Parnell replied in appropriate words.— (Contributed )
Minor Offences.
Considerable misapprehension exists among the lay public as to whether a monetary value limit is required before an offender can be charged legally. It is mistakenly thought that if the value is under ten cents a person cannot be charged. When Ali bin Hassan appeared in the Police Court a few days ago charged with the theft of two cigarettes valued at one cent, section 95 of the Penal Code was brought to the magistrate's notice and the accused was promptly acquitted. The section provides that no act becomes an offence if the harm is so slight that no person of ordinary sense and temper would complain of such harm. Circumstances, as for example the persistent repetition of such act, how ever, play an important part in arriving at a decision. —Straits Times.
OLD SARAWAK.
from His Sarawak Gazette
63 Years Ago.
THE
SARAWAK GAZETTE
No. 26 SATURDAY, 30th SEPT., 1871. Proce 5 cents.
SNAKES!! I
I read sometime back in a Java paper of a snake that had been killed by some villages there, measuring if I recollect right- 13.6 feel in length. This WAS considered by them a huge reptile. I have lately killed one longer, I hare a flock of goats of about 160 on Little Taking Talang island and sent a party of men away to catch some of the kids for eating thin come back with the news they had met a very large snake with doubtless had been living on goats for the last four years; as I have noticed they have not increased much in number, which considering the way they multiply and replenish the earth aS a rule, seemed to me odd. I went there and found the Boa had been watched into its place of abode that morning before I arrived. It was between two huge boulders of granite on the side of a hill, having only a small aperture on the lower side hardly big enough for a child to get in, but in side forming a regular cave of about 12 feet square. As we could not draw the snake, we thought fire might, so a heap of wood was set fire to, and a few pounds of sulphur thrown in, at the hole, thin was kept up all day, still no snake. Next. morning, however, the brute was found about 6 feet inside, dead, we got a pole and a noose attached, and hauled it out. It was a Boa Constrictor (or Ular Sawa) and measured 15 feet in length and 19 inches in circumference.
I shot one of a similar kind in the fowl-yard close to my house last year, length 12.6 feet that had just swallowed a large muscovy duck nearly the size of a goose. Some Dyaks told me the other day, they killed a Sawa not long ago on Sibungo mountains (near the Cinnabar Mines) that was nearly 30 inches in circumference. They cut it into lengths of about a foot, took it home and feasted on it, enjoying it as we should a middle cut of a salmon.
First Division News.
UPPER SARAWAK DISTRICT.
February, 1934.
The Assistant District Officer, Mr. R. G. Aikman, reports:—
Native Affairs.— Probationary Native Officer Abang Haji Adenan returned, on the 11th from an extended lour of the Left-Hand Branch. He super-vised the commencement of the survey of the Semah side of the Semah (Upper Sarawak)- Temah (Sadong) farming land boundary and visited a large number of Kampongs. On the 23rd a mass meeting of all Land Dyak chiefs in upper Sarawak (with me exception of those in the Left-Hand Branch) was held at Bau Court and a unified code of lines and customs was agreed upon for use amongst these Dyaks. Representatives of thirty- two Kampongs attended this meeting.
Agriculture.—The Dahan Rubber Estates, Limited. harvested 25,000 lbs. of dry rubber during the month. The rainfall at Bau was 10.05 inches. The highest recorded in 24 hours was 2.96 inches and the daily average was 35 of an inch. The rain- fall for the month at Dahan Rubber Estates was 15.67 inches.
Gold Mining.—The Nyan Shoon Gold Mining Company, at Jambusan, and the Bukit Young Gold Mining Company. Limited, at Bau, commenced leaching on the 5th and 21st respectively. The latter company have laid out by far the largest plant in the district, with a capacity for treating 6,000 tons of ore monthly, and are proposing to leach the old Borneo Company tailings of which there are an enormous quantity available near the old company works. It is to be hoped that this bold venture will prove successful. There are now twenty-one establishments mining for gold by the cyanide process. Twenty General Prospecting Licences were issued during the month and nine applications for Exclusive Prospecting Licences were received. The actual gold obtained by the following Companies for the month of January, 1934, was :—
General.— Her Highness the Ranee's Birthday was observed as a public holiday, advantage being taken of the day to hold a very successful regatta. Though prizes were small so	good racing was
seen, a number of Kuching boats competing. Kam- poug Stunggang carried away most of the prizes, and the m.l. Karting Mas WAS used as Umpires launch by courtesy of the Lundu Motor Ship Company. Great credit is due to the organizers of a most successful day.
SADONG DISTRICT.
FEBRUARY, 1934.
The Acting Assistant District Officer, Mr, S. G. Hansom, reports: —
Agriculture. General prospects for the coming path harvest remain good, although a certain amount of damage has been done by floods prevalent III the neighbourhood of Tebakang during the earlier part of the month.	General.— Exceptionally high floods were expe- rienced at Tebakang, when there was nearly two feet of water in the bazaar which is said to be higher than has been known in living memory.
Traffic Regulations.
SPRING RACE MEETING. 1934.
After the boor of II a.m. on the 21.-1 and 23rd April, 1931, all Motor Vehicles must proceed to the Race-course via Padungan Road or Ban Hok Road only, and up to tire hour of 7 p.m. on these, days, must return by the Sekama Road only.
Exceptions :— His Highness the Rajah’s Cars. The Government Secretary, The Resident, First Division, Kuching, The Principal Medical Office, The Honorary Secretary, Sarawak Turf Club. In cases of extreme urgency permission may be obtained on the Course for cars to return via Ban Hok Hoad. other After depositing passengers at the Grand stand, vehicles will line up on the extreme left hand side of the Grandstand road, .me behind the other, and within three yards of each other, facing away from the Grandstand. Rickshaws and bicycles may proceed to the Race-course at any time, and by any road, and must park on the Bandstand plot. They will not be allowed to remain on any part of the road lending to the Grandstand or roads leading to the Race-courseAll vehicles must move to their parking grounds without delay, as directed by the Consta bulary.
WARNING: The driver of any vehicle: — endeavouring to turn in Grandstand road or, stopping to pick up passengers in Grandstand road, will be prosecuted for causing an obstruction.
Second Division News.
BBTONO DISTRICT.
February, 1934.
The Acting District Officer, Mr. J. J. Hill, reports:—
Agriculture.—The early padi crop in many parts of the district is already being harvested and’ it would appear from reports that the harvest will be sufficient to meet all needs.
ENGKILILI DISTRICT.
February, 1934.
The Acting Assistant District Officer. Mr. E. M. Selous, reports:—
Agriculture.—Penghulu Suel reported that harvesting had begun in the Ulu Lemanak and that the crop was generally good. During ths visit to Peughulu Imong’s district it was seen that the great majority of the padi fields were in excellent condition.
Third Division News.
Sibu AND KANOWIT DISTRICT
January, 1914.
The District Officer, Mr. W. F. Dick, reports :—
Miscellaneous.—Abnormally high water was experienced at the end of the month, and the concrete wharf was submerged about Seven inches. This was the highest water experienced within living memory.
February, 1931.
The District Officer, Mr. E. O. Bruce, reports :—
LOWER REJANG.
January, 1934.
The District Officer, Mr. H. E. Cutfield, reports:
Obituary - I regret to announce the death on 1st January of Abang Haji Metair, of Binatang.
February, 1934.
The Assistant District Officer, Mr. F. L. Crossley, reports:—
OYA AND DALAT.
January, 1934.
The Acting Assistant District Officer, Mr. N. E. Hughes, reports: —
Miscellaneous,- Hari Raya was observed on 17th January, the customary visits being paid and received. In the afternoon a display of Malay dancing was given in the bungalow grounds.
The month was remarkable for a spell of bad Weather such as has not been experienced on the const for many years. From 18th January until the end of the month there were ceaseless storms accompanied by heavy rain,— during one period the rain never stopped for three days and nights. As a result, Dalat became a sea of mud when not completely flooded, it being impossible to go anywhere except by boat Oya was little better, the continual rain lining considerable damage to the roads and making it impossible to maintain the station in anything like a proper condition.
KAPIT AND SONG.
January, 1934.
The Acting Assistant District Officer, Mr. F. L. Crossley, reports: -
Miscellaneous.. A disastrous flood was experienced towards the end of the mouth, when the Rejang rose to mi unprecedented height, rendering necessary the evacuation of the bazaar and all Government buildings, with the exceptt in of Fort Sylvia, the Kapit prison, and the Customs quarters.
The river came over its banks during the night of the 26th-27th, and continued to rise until die early morning of the 28th, when it started to fall very slowly. On the 31st, the water had receded below the road-level and was still falling. The high-water mark was 3' 10" above tile previous flood record, established on 24th March, 1887.
The damage to Government property was surprisingly slight, chiefly owing to the very fine salvage work of die Constabulary. The Kapit boat-shed was overwhelmed and completely destroyed.
A Dyak house of some twenty doors in the Muara Balleh was entirely submerged, and was carried away, fortunately without loss of life.
The Chinese suffered considerable loss, as the water rose too swiftly to allow them to move their goods out of the shops.
Reports hove been received that the Government Best-house for Kayans at Beluga has keen carried away, but these are as yet unconfirmed.
Fourth Division News.
January, 1934.
Extracts from the Fourth Divisional Reports by Mr. E. O. Bruce, Acting Resident:—
On the 1st January, Mr. H. D. Aplin, Resident, Fourth Division, handed over the affairs of the Division to ma temporarily, and sailed by m.v. Marudu from Mui On the 5th on home leave prior to retirement.
February, 1934.
Mr. J. B Archer, Acting Resident, reports:—
I landed in Bintulu on the last day of January on my way to take charge of the Fourth Division.
On the 2nd I landed at Miri for a few hours, and, proceeding, reached Limbang on the 3rd, where I look over from Mr. E. O. Bruce at the now Divisional Headquarters, Limbang.
Miri DISTRICT.
January, 1934.
The Assistant District Officer, Mr. J. O. Gilbert, reports: —
General — During the month we have experienced very rough sear, and on 27th January, the boat was not able to be met, and all passengers and cargo wore over- carried to Singapore. Cargo was twice overcarried to Labuan, hut passengers managed to get off. Only once previously ill the history of Miri has it bean impossible IO meet the Singapore boat; the former occasion was in 1929.
February, 1934.
Agriculture,—The terrific rains experienced during the month has ruined all prospects of a good harvest ad swamp padi is ruined through being under water too long
BINTULU DISTRICT.
January, 1934,
The Acting District Officer, Mr, J. G. Anderson, reports:—
February, 1934.
Agriculture.— During my visits to Tatau and Sebauh I ascertained that considerable damage has been done to swamp padi. This has all been destroyed by abnormal high water which rose some 20 feet above normal river level in January. Most Dyak houses have 1/3 planted on hills and thus have mil lost all, but a severe shortage of padi will ensue this year, as last year's crop was not over plentiful.
BARAM DISTRICT.
January, 1934.
The Acting District Officer, Mr. F. H. Pollard, reports: —
Agriculture.—Rainfall amounted to 22 38 inches in 28 days. The bazaar was flooded towards the end of the month to a depth of three feet or more and water entered the shophouses.
February, 1934.
LIMBANG DISTRICT.
January, 1931.
The Assistant District Officer, Mr. A Macpherson, reports:—
February, 1934.
Agriculture.-Harvesting padi begin during the month. Bad floods have done much damage co padi up river, and a serious shortage may be expected.
The subsidised gardeners shipped 82.11 piculs of pepper during the mouth.
LAWAS DISTRICT.
January, 1934.
The Acting Assistant District Officer, Mr. P. M. Scott, report is:—
General — On 27th January, three days ceaseless rain continued in the worst flood for twenty years. The Lawns and Trusan Rivers rose with extraordinary rapidity between 6 pm on 27th and 2 am on 26th. by which time there was some four feet of water in the shophouses in Lawas Bazaar. This means a depth of at least six feet on the roadway. Fortunately shopkeepers had plenty of warning and were enabled to move a great deal of their stock to places of safely. Considerable damage was done, however, to heavy goods which would not be moved. The landing Steps at Lawas, and the entire binding stage at Sundar were carried away while at Trusan two or three Murut houses were also broken up. No loss of human life occurred, and loss of live stock was, on the whole, very small. The flood recoded as swiftly as it rose, and by the evening of 28th everything was normal again
A flood is an annual event at Lawns, but this year its severity took everyone by surprise.
February, 1934.
Agriculture.—The Lawas (Sarawak) Rubber Estates LUI , exported 35,840 lbs. of dry rubber during the month.
