
The Sarawak Gazette
TUESDAY. OCTOBER 1st. 1935.
DEATH
Loo See (mother of Law Ah Kui, Ah Lan, Ah Koon and Ah Ham). No. 82, Wnynna Street, Kuching, aged seventy-one, on Friday. 80th August. 1985. Deeply mourned by children, grandchildren and great grandchildren.
Law Ah Kui. Ah Lan. Ah Koon and All Ham thank all friends and relatives who sent wreaths, and letters of condolence and all those who were present at their mother's funeral which was held on the 1st September, 1935.
Local and Personal.
September.
His Highness the Rajah and Dayang
Valerie left for the North by s.s. Darvel on
September 2nd, returnin’; to Kuching on the
19th. His Highness, who visited Limbang,Labuan, and Lawas, was accompanied as far
1K0 as Miri by Mr. II. M. Calvert, Commissioner of Trade and Customs.
Her Highness the Ranee arrived at
mi Kuching on September 24th, having travelled
out from England by air. We understand that Her Highness’ journey was uneventful except for the stage between Burma and
185 ' Bangkok, when bad weather-conditions were
encountered.
His Highness the Tuan Muda left the State on September 27th. travelling to Singapore by an R.A.F. flying-boat piloted by Wing-Commander C. L. Scott, d.s.c. His Highness, who is spending a few days in Malaya on his way home, expects to sail from Penang by the President Monroe on October 8th.
We are informed that Mr. A. W. D. Brooke will shortly be transferred to Besut, in Trengganu. Besut is probably the most isolated district in Malaya, and conditions there resemble to some extent those in some of the Sarawak outstations. Mr. Brooke is at present Private Secretary to the British Adviser, Kedah.
H.M.S. Herald called at Kuching on
August 30th on her- way to Rejang, where she
will remain for some months in order to start
the hydrograhic survey of the Rejang River.
Mr. R. W. Large, who has been appointed a Probationary Assistant Commissioner in the Sarawak Constabulary, is at. present undergoing a course of training at the F.M.S. Police Depot at Kuala Lumpur. Mr. Large is expected to arrive in Sarawak towards the end of November.
Squadron Leader T. A. Langford-Sainsbury, Mr. C. E. 0. Wood and Mr. Bailey, called at Pending in in.v. Marudu on September 9th. and went on to Miri. accompanied by Mr. T. A. Reid of the Public Works Department. The object of their visit was to inspect the landing-grounds that are at present under construction at certain stations on the coast; on their return journey to Kuching they called at Bintulu. Mukah. and Oya, travelling in H.H.M .Y. Maimuna.
Mr. Wood and Mr. Bailey, who are Civil Engineers from the Air Ministry, are at present stationed at R.A.F. Headquarters, Seletar.
Mr. H. Tsuchiya, Chancellor of the Japanese Consulate General, Singapore, arrived at Kuching on September 9th in order to visit. Japanese nationals living in the First Division. He returned to Singapore on the 14th by s.s. Darnel.
There is now no doubt that the Sylvia Cinema has proved itself a most valuable addition to the amenities of Kuching. A well-equipped modern cinema showing up-to- date films is just what is required in a small town such as Kuching, where the opportunities for amusement are of necessity rather limited. For one thing, it offers the ideal solution of the problem that has before now puzzled so many hostesses : what to do with one’s guests after dinner. And again, the first house is just what is required for those who wish to go out, and yet do not feel like the club.
The average entertainment value of the films shewn has been consistently high,—not a bad record when one considers that the Sylvia Cinema has now been open for nearly a year.
A correspondent informs us that no less than seven Europeans foregathered recently at Balingian. thereby creating what is believed to be a record for that singularly unattractive station. We have no doubt that the event was celebrated in the way it deserved.
The Roman Catholic Mission, Kuching, held a mast successful sports meeting on the playing-fields of St. Joseph's School during the afternoon of September 21st. A description of the meeting appears in another column.
We welcome to Kuching Mr. K. Cargill,
1 who arrived on September 9th to join the staff
, of Messrs. The Borneo Co., Ltd.
One of the high spots of Race Week was the dance at Astana very kindly given by Their Highnesses the Rajah and Ranee on the evening of September 28th. Almost the entire European community were present, and our thanks are due to Their Highnesses for a most delightful evening’s entertainment.
During the past month the Fourth British Empire Forestry Conference has been in session in South Africa and has been attended by delegates representing the Governments of the Dominions and Colonies. ,The various Governments submitted progress reports upon forestry development and the Conference examined many questions both administrative and technical.
The Sarawak Government presented a statement of which a limited number of copies I are available for distribution on application I to the Senior Forest Officer.
Mrs. A. M. Gilbert, who is paying a visit to her son, Mr. J. 0. Gilbert, passed through Kuching on September 30th on her way to Bintulu.
A Conspicuous Bravery Medal has been presented to a Simanggang trader named Ong Keo 1’oh for overpowering a Dayak ajnok, who on August 20th attacked and wounded two persons in Simanggang bazaar. There , is no doubt that Ong Kee Poh. by his coolness i and courage, saved a number of persons from death or serious injury. A full account of , the incident appears under “Second Division News.’’
Those of our readers who are keen on boat- racing may be interested to learn that the “Visitors''event in Miri Regatta, which took [ place on September 23rd, was of particular interest this year owing to the fact that three groups of expert, paddlers competed together for the first time, namely a Brunei crew, (Naga Terbung), a crew from Awat-Awat, (Snipe 1), and a crew of Dalat Melanaus (Singa Nerais).
The Bruueis have beaten and been beaten by the Awat-Awats on more than one occasion; the Dalat Melanaus have beaten and been beaten by the Bruneis on one occasion, but until this year they had never raced the Awat- Awats. The results in the final were : First, Brunei, Second, Awat-Awat, Third. Dalat. The winners led by a short head at the finish, but two lengths separated the second boat from the third.
Mt. F. A. W. Page-Turner, who had been in Sarawak on a short visit, left for home on September 21st.
The Autumn Meeting of the Sarawak Turf
Club, which was held on September ‘26th and
28th, provided two very good days' racing, a
full account of which will be found under
“First Division News.” In spite of rather
sultry weather, attendances were above the
average, and the tote takings benefited accord-
ingly. The cash sweeps proved extremely
popular, being sold out on several occasions
within a few minutes of opening; and the
Unlimited Cash Sweep closed with the pool
standing at the record figure of 817,948.
This year, as an innovation, each prize was
split into two, but even then the winners of
each of the first prizes drew the ven satis
factory sum of f3.589.60, and the drawers of
starters received 8224.
Incidentally, we must congratulate Mr. II.
(“crocodile”) Read, late of Kuching, and now
Manager of Lok Kawi Estate, Jesselton, on
winning a share in one of the second prizes.
Visitors to Kuching for the Races in-
cluded : from the First Division. Mr. J. R.
Outram; from the Second Division, Messrs
P. M. Adams, C. E. Gascoigne. A. F. R.
Griffin, and Abang Zin, Native Officer; from
the Third Division, Mr and Mrs. C. D.
Adams, Messrs. D. C. Hudden, F. A, Moore,
and B. J. C. Spurway, Dr. A. D. Hutchison,
and Datu Abang Haji Mohideen; from the
Fourth Division. Datu Abang Suhaili.
There were no European visitors from the
North, the Miri regatta doubtless proving too
strong a counter-attraction. Mr. and Mrs.
I. S. Hammond came from Mukah for a few
days, but left before the races.
On the evening of His Highness the Rajah's
birthday a dance was given at the Residency,
Mr. R. L. Daubeny, the Acting Resident, and
Mrs. Daubeny being at home to about ninety
guests. All the arrangements were perfect,
and the party went with a swing from the
very start, carrying on the Residency tradi
tion by continuing into the small hours of the
morning. We imagine that the Public
Works Department must be wondering
whether the Residency floor will outlast two
more “Paul Jones” as “full out' as the last,
but even if the floor had collapsed it would
have made no difference,—the party would
still have gone on, for it was that kind of a
party.
Mr. and Mrs. Daubeny deserve our thanks
for a most enjoyable evening.
We extend our heartiest congratulations
to Mr. A. L. McLaine on his engagement to
Miss S. M. J. Ennion. Miss Enmon is at
present staying at Sibu with her sister. Mrs.
Spurway.
We understand that Mr. McLaine ami
Miss Ennion intend to get married next
December, and that the wedding will take
Mr. R. E. Le Sueur, who is due to arrive in Kuching on his return from furlough on October 14th. has been appointed District
Officer, Sibu, with the powers of a Resident’s Court Magistrate. Mr. Le Sueur will relieve Mr Hudden, who is to go to Baram as Acting District Officer.
As the result of what can only lie described
aS a stormy general meeting, the committee
of the Sarawak Club has at last agreed
to- provide refreshments in the club on
Saturday nights. This proposal had invari-
ably been vetoed previously on the grounds
that it had been tried some years ago and had
not proved a success; it was therefore quite
impossible ever to give it a trial again.
One would have imagined that there were
no insuperable difficulties in providing a few
plates of sausages-and-mashed or ham-and
eggs on one evening during the week, but
apparently this is not the view of the com-
mittee. Although simple refreshments of
this nature can tie obtained in almost every
other club in the Far East, we in Kuching
have so far had to go without. The news
that the committee, greatly daring, have
agreed to embark on this (to them) wild in-
novation is therefore very welcome. We hope
that their recklessness will bear fruit.
Mr. G. T. M. MacBryan arrived in Kuching on September 30tli and expects to stay about a month. Mr. MacBryan is, of course, well known in Sarawak, since he 1 spent several years in the Civil Service, retiring early in 1931.
During August, Kuching received three visits from aircraft, two from R.A.F. flyingboats engaged on navigational excercises, and one from the "Spirit of Africa.” a Sikorsky Amphibian belonging to Mr. and Mrs. Martin Johnson, the celebrated explorers and cinemelographers. Mr. and Mrs. Johnson, who will be remembered as the producers of ' “Congorilla.” and “Baboona,” two remarkable films of tropical Africa, intend to make 1 a film of the native anil animal life of Borneo. Their headquaters will be at Sandakan. where they proceeded on October 1st after spending one night in Kuching.
' On the previous evening, Mr. and Mrs. Johnson, who staved with Mr. P. Cobhold, of Messrs. The Borneo Co., Ltd., were the
1 guests of Their Highnesses the Rajah and i Ranee at Astana. After dinner they . attended the tattoo given at the depot by the Sarawak Constabulary.
We read in the Oya monthly report that a meeting was recently celled at the mosque in order to discuss how the gradual disappearance of the Malay sougkok could be arrested. The Officer-in-Charge, Oya and Dalat, states that the effect of this meeting on the younger generation was at once apparent,' and resulted in an immediate increase in the demand for the national headgear.
It seems that the leaders of the Malay commumity in Kuching might well profit from the example of the Ova Mohamedans and take similar steps to prevent the abandonment of a custom which, apart from the question of religion, had always been regarded as very closely associated with the Malay self- respect ami racial pride. It is nowadays the exception rather than the rule to see the sangkok worn by younger Malays in the Kuching Kampongs.and the present display of t rilbies, velours and other European hats does not provide an attractive spectacle.
His Highness the Rajah’s
Birthday.
PRESENTATION OF MEDALS.
The presentation of Long Service and other
decorations took place on the morning of September 26th in the District Court. Kuching, in the presence
of about 150 guests of all nationalities.
At 8.0 a.m a Royal Salute of twenty-one guns was fired from the Fort Margherita batter?:. On the conclusion of the salute His Highness the
Rajah, accompanied by Mr. N. E. Hughes. A.D.C..
left Astana steps and proceeded across river to Pengkalan Batu, where a Constabulary* Guard of !
Honour was drawn up under the command of the
Adjutant. Mr. w. H. Kelley.
His Highness the Rajah was met on landing the Government Secretary, the Commissioner of
Sarawak Constabulary, and the Datuk Shahbandar.
After inspecting the Guard of Honour, His Highness
walked to the Courthouse, which had been specially
decorated for the occasion, and proceeded to the
dais, where Their Highnesses the Ranee, the Tuan
Muda, Dayang Valerie, and European and Asiatic
members of the Council Negri and Committee of
Administration were waiting. The remainder of
the guests were accommodated in the body of the
Courthouse.
When all the medals had been bestowed by His
Highness, refreshments were served, and the
Government Secretary made a short speech at the
conclusion of which he proposed His Highness the
Rajah’ health. This was drunk by all present.
His Highness the Rajah then returned to Astana.
Tattoo by the Sarawak
Constabulary.
SPECTACULAR DISPLAY.
Race week closed on September 30th with a spectacular tattoo presented by the Sarawak Constabulary. The Orderly Room was turned into a rand-stand, and the parade-ground, which was flood-lit and edged with coloured lights, formed a most effective stage for the various items of the programme, which commenced at 9.45 pm.
"Turns" included an exhibition of physical training, a series of scenes showing the evolution of the recruit. Sikh wrestling, and Sea Dayak dancing, and the performance concluded with a march-past of all who had taken part, followed by a brilliant burst of rockets.
The tattoo, at which Their Highnesses the Rajah and Ranee were present, together with a party from Astana, attracted large crowds, and WHS attended by numerous European guests. Fortunately the weather remained fine in spite of a preliminary shower or two. so there was nothing to mar a most enjoyable evening.
The tattoo was carried through without a hitch, all movements being executed with a machine-like precision that spoke of long and careful rehearsals. a programme of all-round excellence one item, the physical trailing display, stood out by reason of the really remarkable standard of smartness achieved: mention must also be made of the clown, whose antics gave immense satisfaction to the crowd, and doubtless to himself as well.
All those responsible, from the Commissioner and the Adjutant down to the rawest recruit, are to be congratulated on a rattling good show, and one which came as a fitting end to a week of continuous
Notice.
AIR MAIL.
With effect from 3rd October, 1935, the Imperial Airways service between Singapore and London will be duplicated, therefore the air mails will be closed lit the General Post Office, Singapore, at 7 p.m. each Wednesday and Saturday.
*2. From the same date, the following air mail despatches will be closed nt the General Post Office. Singapore, at. 1.15 p.m. each Wednesday and Satur- day for conveyance by the Netherlands Air Mail Service (K.L.M.):—
Medan, Jask, Bushire, Budapest or Bratislava (alternate flights)
Halle/Leipsig, Amsterdam and London.
Important—Correspondence for inclusion in the despatches to Budapest or Bratislava, Halle/Leipsig, Amsterdam and London must be specially and clearly superscribed By K.L.M." failing which the correspondence will be forwarded by Imperial Airways.
3. The despatches by the Netherlands Air Mail to Budapest, Bratislava and Halle/Leipsig will cease as soon as the winter time-table comes into operation about 1st November, 1935.
C. Pitt Hardacre,
.A.G. Postmaster-General, Sarawak.
General, Post Office,
Kuching, 17th September, 1935.
[In view of the new service announced above, it is suggested that our readers might encourage an Imperial Service by sending all air mail communications by Imperial Airways. There is only a difference of two days between Singapore and London, and the fees are much lower than those required for air mails despatched by any other lines operating out of Singapore.—Ed.]
The Wood and the Trees.
I.—Protection.
The old saying that “one cannot see the wood because of the trees" was never truer than in Sarawak. Here we have a climate which was made for the rapid growth of vegetation of all sorts and which produced the virgin forests of yesterday and the re-growth forests of to-day. The result is a profuse flora which gives the impression of limitless forest wealth of endless endurance, and for that reason any deterioration that may be taking place - and it is taking place—is obscured
An area of virgin forest is felled tor farming purposes, and then burned over. The immediate result is the destruction of the humus layer which has provided the forest's soil fertility, and its replacement by a very inadequate and evanescent supply of wood ash. The soil that has supported a forest for centuries then produces one crop of rice and has to be abandoned. It is no longer capable of supporting crops which cannot support themselves, but fortunately for soil-protection secondary tree species which are not very exacting soon come in; in a few years the “forest" has reappeared and the land is again classified in the mind of the man in the street as timber land although in fact no timber species may be present. Hence the opening remark of this article.
It is probably true to say that because of this the majority of this country’s population regard its timber resources as inexhaustible despite the fact that many of them are already in difficulties to find old jungle suitable for their form of farming, simply because of the inability to realise that there is a vast difference between the respective capacities of high forest and secondary jungle in producing timber, and its complementary commodities such as rotans, gums and “jelutong." All apparent forest is timber-land, and that is that!
It is a pity to have to shake people out of this— to them—pleasantly satisfactory state of mind, but must be done, file area of the State is roughly 46,(MM) square miles, but of this probably not more than 15,000 square miles or 32% can lie classed to-day as merchantable forest. The remainder of the forest is either inaccessible or secondary, and relatively valueless from the aspect of timber production although of definite use as a protection against erosion. The forests which are classed as non-merchantable may be taken as non-farmable, and therefore we are entitled to assume that it is into the 15,000 square miles of merchantable forest that inroads will continue to be made by the shifting farmer and the permanent planter.
Before going further it should be made clear that it is one of the planks of forest policy that land which can produce more under cultivation than tinder trees should generally be given over to agriculture, and for that reason it is not suggested that all presently merchantable forest should be dedicated to forestry. But it must be understood that it is this land which must maintain the country’s timber and jungle produce supplies and therefore a part of it sufficient to meet requirements must be set aside for that purpose.
This brings us to the vexed question of reservation. The extremists in the case are the shifting cultivator and the forester, since there is abundant land for legitimate agriculture. The forester condemns the shifting cultivator out of hand. But while there is no reasonable argument in favour of that gentleman, Ins methods being quite unjustifiable economically, we are apt to forget that his insistence on bis own method of farming is probably quite as much due to a failure to demonstrate better methods as to his own conservatism. If we can show him a “better ole' he will probably go to it. In the meantime, however, we are forced to accept him as he is, but is it. necessary to visualise this attitude as a permanent one? Surely not.
Assuming the worst, however; since few will deny that shifting cultivation is a menace, there seems to be a strong case for putting the shifting cultivator himself into a reserve and allowing him to work his will on it. Such an action, it is true, would be' drastic and distasteful. However, it need not become necessary if proper precautions are taken now. The matter is simple. If it is admitted that adequate forest resources must lie preserved, then these can be provided by dedicating say 10% of the land to forestry. This need be no more objection-' able to the farmer than the alienation of a similar area, a process to which no umbrage would be taken. The remaining 90% would be available for agriculture of whatever kind, and there is surely something wrong if a population of half-a-million cannot find enough land for their purpose in 10,000 square miles of country.
In any case it is time that people stopped asking ‘ what has posterity done for us that we should grow trees for it?” and begin to realize that we, as yesterday's posterity, are reaping the benefits which we are evidently prepared to deny later generations. The forest is a heritage which we are in duty bound to maintain for posterity. If we do not, the future will see a country ruined by erosion and devastated by floods, a country dependent on the foresight of its neighbours for one of the most important commodities of modern life—limber.
11.—Management.
In a previous article we dealt with the need for dedicating forests to timber production, and in many minds the impression may have been left that it was a plea for putting forests into a kind of “cold storage."
This, of course, was not the case. A forest is a living thing—it is born, it grows, and it dies. This is easily visualized in the case of temperate zone
planted forests where trees are even-aged and nil .
reach maturity at the same time. The most casual
observer can see that unless these are exploited at
maturity they will degenerate and die, and so before 1
this Impious he will utilise them. The matter is not so easily visualized in a tropical rain-forest with I
its admixture of species and complexity of age- (
classes, for in a virgin forest a state of balance has
been reached whereby the loss by death of a veteran I
has been prepared for by the increase in volume of
its progeny, and no easily observed change takes 4
place. But even here there is no excuse for allowing
the veteran to die or rot. It should have been taken
and used in its prime—the balance would remain
but we should have gained the timber. It is this
which constitutes the basis of forest management,
the principle of which is the maintenance of a
sustained yield.
A tree grows by the division of a layer of cells
called the cambium whereby a layer of wood and a layer of inner bark are formed each growing
season. The amount of wood added by this pro-
bees is known as the increment and represents tl e
"crop" from that particular tree for the season.
Even if we could peel it off we could not use this
"increment,’’ but since every other tree of the
mine species in the forest is also putting on a com-
parable increment we may aggregate the individual
increments until they total the volume of one of
the trees. This one tree we may fell and utilise,
and thus procure our crop without interfering with
the balance. In this way the forester assures hie
sustained yield But if this tree, which we would
assume to be mature, is not removed for utilisation
it would become a total loss and the objects of
management would be defeated.
It is therefore the last thing a forester wants to
hold up in "cold storage" any area of forest. The
object of reservation is not to hoard but to utilise.
At the same time utilisation must be systematic, I
management must be scientific and long-sighted and not subject to constant changes. For these
reasons it is necessary to dedicate permanently
forest lands to forestry or the expenditure will be (
entirely wasted.
The simplest method of management is that
which depends on girth-limits. Here it is ascer-
tained that such and such a limit represents maturity. Whether the limit is correct or not. the theory is sound for it means that the more mature trees are being removed from a forest which we I
claim to be in volume equilibrium and therefore carrying enough younger trees to replace by their i
increment the volume fest by exploitation. it was this consideration that justified the former girth
limits in unclassified forests but at last it is only
an expedient to reduce losses caused by delay in
dedicating permanent forests. The principle, how-
ever, underlies nil forest management and serves
to show how n permanent forest is maintained
while, at the same time, it is utilised. To put the
matter simply : if an acre of forest can produce
100 tons of timber in 100 years we are entitled to
remove 1 ton annually. But if we remove more
than 1 ton we me over-cutting and cannot main-
tain a sustained yield. It is this fact, that has
been forgotten in the past in so many countries
with costly results. That is what we want to
remember here. We do not want to grab all the
forests in the State but we do want to have enough
to maintain the necessary annual yield of the types
of timber which are regarded as useful, a thing
that ran only be guaranteed by proper provision
and management.
All this sounds very easy and straight-forward,
but the practice of forestry is not quite so simple
as all that. For instance it is indicated above that
flic annual yield equals the total volume divided by the number of years taken to produce it. Now, hi
Europe trees have "annual rings" by counting
which we can determine the age of the tree, but
there is no such possibility here where trees with
true annual rings are unknown. The only alter-
native is to establish a laborious and complicated
sample-plot system in which annual measurements
am made of trees of all sizes for ten years or more
until sufficient data have been collected to con-
struct graphs and volume tables. Having worked
out the rate of growth of the various species it is
possible to determine the age or the size which is
to be regarded as maturity and to put our plans of
management on a sounder basis.
But we have still a long way to go before we are
ready to make our Working Plan which will con-
stitute the charter under which the forest will be
given stable management throughout its life, subject
only to reviews every ten years to cover unforeseen
eventualities. It is here that the forester is best
seen as a man of the future. The forester’s mind
must look half-a-century ahead all the time. If he
makes a mistake now he cannot remedy it. in the
way that a farmer can, by simply changing the crop
next year. He has to study his problem until he
is sure he has the right answer and then take an
almost irrevocable plunge. For that reason the
examination of the forest growing-stock, and the
climate and soil factors affecting it, must be
thorough. General observations are relatively use-
less where intensive management is proposed, but
pilot surveys may be sufficient to outline the
scheme of working. So far in this country we
have advanced only as far as the pilot surveys, as
anything more ambitious would be impossible with
the small staff available, but these reconnaissances
are yielding valuable data for future use.
Having determined the nature of our forest we
are in a position to decide how best to manage it.
In the first instance it is obviously necessary to get
down to details of the area which we can hardly
expect to be homogeneous. This requires its
breaking up into smaller areas convenient for
management purposes, and the confinement of
work in succeesive years to successive compart-
ments. on the basis of the sustained yield already
mentioned, in such a way that when all the sub-
areas have been worked over we can return to the
first knowing that it will be ready to produce a
further crop. This is where the growth statistics
are so absolutely necessary since without them
there is nothing to determine how much or how
little may be cut and therefore no foundation for a
plan.
It is not proposed to deal with silvicultural
methods, and so we will turn our next article to
the question of Exploitation.—(To be continued.)
A FABLE.
While flying along the river bank one morning, a kingfisher was unfortunately caught by a woodman named Haji Musa. The poor bird attempted to free himself from the man's mischievous band, but as he held it very fast, the attempt was vain.
The bird, with his brilliant blue plumage (blended with white and red colours) was of a beautiful appearance. It was a great attraction, too; and consequently Haji Musa admired him very much. "Alhamdulillah." said the woodman gladly, "I am lucky to-day to have caught such a bird as this. It is really very good for the Museum Curator. Shall I carry it to the town?”
Alas, what a terrible feeling was in the bird’s
mind on hearing the word "Museum," because it
meant to him death. Then, to the great amaze-
ment of Haji Musa, the bird, though being in a
frightful panic, suddenly said, '’My dear man, I
advise you that it is no use to carry me to the town,
for there are already many others of my species in
the museum. It is best for you to set me free, and
that is all."
Haji Musa took no interest on the bird’s sweet
words; but with a grave face he again said,—
‘The Curator will surely offer me one dollar, and
with the money I will buy cotton string and cords
for making a jaring (bird-net)."
"This is a worse thing, indeed." said the king-
fisher sorrowfully, because he thought that the
man wished to catch more birds near the river-side:
and he was afraid that there would he a disturbance
to his brothers, sisters, cousins and relatives if a
jaring were to be hung among the bakau trees.
But at last an excellent idea, came into his head,
that is, to make a promise with the woodman.
"My dear man," said the bird, tremblingly, "will
not you take pity on a little creature that has com-
mitted no sin? Now, if you will only change your
mind from bringing me to the Museum Curator, I
shall gladly present to you better things instead,
namely a valuable saying, a legend, and a good
example. These three things will anyhow lead you
to the gate of wealth and prosperity. The first will
be told when I am still in your hand, the second
when I am on a tree, and the third when I am fly-
ing in the air." Haji Musa agreed, because he was
very anxious to receive the wonderful gifts.
After the agreement was made, the bird began
thus : "Never regret what is past, and never believe
what is nonsense." Instantaneously the woodman
set the bird free, because he wished to hear the
legend.
"There is a red mark under my bill, the mystery
of which is here told," said the bird sweetly.
"Long, long ago, when Kuching was still a wild
forest, a ruler by name Dato' Merpati with his
officers in a beautiful junk chanced to pass Sungei
Siol on his way to Negri Batu Buaya (ancient name
of Santubong). Being proud of his swift ricss in
flying, one of our ancestors challenged the venerable
Dato’ to race. The winning goal was Tanjong
Empongi. A favourable wind blew and filled the
golden sail of the royal junk. The race started, and
both the junk and the kingfisher moved ahead
speedily (perhaps like a race between a modern
yacht and a seaplane). At-last the Dato’ won the
race, and three cheers were given by those who were
on board. As a penalty to the kingfisher the Dato’
recited a spell. So in a moment the poor creature
vomited blood. Consequently you now see the red
mark." Then the happy bird flew to the middle of
the river to catch a julong-julong for his breakfast,
while Haji Musa was expecting to receive the
example promised.
"The example, my dear man," said the kingfisher
smilingly, "is no other than the story of a woodman
and a kingfisher, which nobody must forget. You
are really a very unlucky fellow, because you never
knew that there is a gold bar weighing sixteen ounces
hiding in my liven You should have Killed me
yourself; and if you did so. I may say that you would
have been the luckiest man in your village. But
then, at the same time, you must not forget to
consider the weight of my body. Furthermore, my
dear man, I must tell you that you were mistaken I
to admire the beauty of my coloured plumage, You had been charmed by my sweet words of persuasion.
Now, you should also understand that, in daily life,
one must not admire another’s stylish costume before
one looks upon his or her virtue. Although you are
only a common woodman, I advise you to give good
education to your children. Because, in fact, it is
an inconvenience to the modern youths to possess no
education." On hearing these diamond-like words,
Haji Musa dropped himself on the deck of his boat,
and seemed to regret. But when he remembered the
saving given by the kingfisher he rose up again, and
attended to his usual work.
Mohammed Joe.
Racecourse Development Fund.
LIST OF SUBSCRIBERS.
Kuching,
23rd September, 1985.
The Editor,
Sarawak Gazette,
Kuching.
Sin,
I enclose herewith further lists showing actual collections towards the Racecourse Development Fund, and shall be obliged if you will publish same in the next issue of the Sarawak Gazette.
I am, Sir-.
Your obedient servant.
R. L. Daureny, Acting Resident, First Division.
A Somali Surgical Operation.
A NEW USE FOR ANTS.
He also describes a rather remarkable surgical operation which he saw performed upon a man who had received a spear thrust in the region of the epigastrium. A Somali "wizard” was the operator, and among his "tools” was a hottie containing big brown ants of the fighting kind, with homed heads as big as a grain of wheat, and "armed with mandibles which opened like threatening pincers as soon as an obstacle was presented them." These ants were put to a very ingenious and practical use during the course of the operation. The '‘surgeon." having made an incision in the abdomen, drew out the pierced stomach of the patient, and his assistant held together the two edges of the tear. The Somali then took an ant, and presented it to the edges, which it bit through with its mandibles. Immediately its head was nipped off by the surgeon and the head remained fixed. "It was the first stitch of the sewing-up, and he proceeded to place
twenty others along the tear of the stomach.” These would be absorbed like catgut. The remarkable part about the operation was the self-control of the patient, who, although conscious, made no sound. "These people found the .stoicism of this man while enduring agonies quite natural. They would have behaved in exactly the same way. I felt that I was just a poor, feeble little boy, with my sensitive nerves	One would think that
these practices, handed down to the wizard by oral tradition, formed part of the knowledge of a very old civilisation, now disappeared and forgotten."
—Henry de Monfried, quoted in Horse and Hound.
Films of the Month.
The films shown at the Sylvia Cinema during August and September maintained an exceptionally high standard of quality. Notable successes in the former month were Jack Ahoy! and The Scarlet, Pimpernel, both British productions; the latter is certainly the best British film we have yet seen in Kuching, Hinre not only was the acting far above the average, but the photography reached a strikingly high level of technical and artistic excellence. Particularly effective were the opening shots of the guillotine nt work, its sinister framework gaunt against a cloud flecked sky, the eyes of the tricotfuses following each movement of its mechanism with a horrible anticipation. And the scenes during the ball at Carlton House, though in quite a different vein, have probably never been excelled for sheer beauty in any film at all; everything was right,- the costumes, the decor, even (miraculously) the music. Nigel Bruce gave an admirable vignette of the Prince of Wales, and the famous scene in the library between Chauvelin (Raymond Massey) and Sir Percy Blakeney (Leslie Howard) was perfectly done; not a false note was struck during what must have been a most difficult few minutes for the actors. Merle Oberon looked devastatingly lovely as Lady Blakeney, and lent distinction to what would otherwise have been rather a colourless part, wearing the attractive; dresses of the period as though to the manner born. Altogether a most satisfying production.
Jack Ahoy ! was a farce built up round the plight of a British Admiral captured by Chinese pirates and rescued by one of his own sailors. It was dominated from start lb finish by Jack Hulbert, who has seldom fooled to better purpose. What a delightful clown he can be, when properly directed! The scenes on board the battleship were made in co-operation with the Admiralty, and if at times they were a trifle unconventional, they were certainly realistic,—and. far more important, they were genuinely funny. Sam Wilkinson us "Dodger," the fiddle-faced and despondent A.B., was a good foil to Jack Hulbert, and Nancy O’neill gave the story all the love-interest it required.
Early in September we saw the film for which we had all been waiting,—Lives of a Bengal Lancer,— and we were not disappointed. This picture is first- rate entertainment all the way through; there is not a dull moment from start to finish. Soldiers may perhaps scoff at the technical errors which certainly exist, but unimportant inaccuracies of detail are forgotten in the unfolding of a really exciting story among scenery of unrivalled grandeur. The shots of pig-sticking and of fighting on the North West
Frontier will live long in one’s memory; and at least one spectator had an unpleasant tingling sensation about the finger-tips after the torture episode. I am, quite prepared to believe that slips of bamboo driven slowly beneath the finger-nails and then ignited are every bit as unpleasant as Mohamed Khan, the suave border chieftain, made them out to be. and am also certain that few of as would have displayed the fortitude shown by the two British officers (Gary Cooper and Franchot Tone) under this most disheartening form of ',the question.” Other actors who st(Kid out in a cast of all-round excellence were Sir Guy Standish, who was perfectly cast as Colonel Stone. Douglas Dum brille as Mohamed Khan, and Aubrey Smith as Major Hamilton. A grand film lid one that will bear a second, and even a third, visit. Never before has Hollywood HO successful,' caught the British point of view.
Lives of a Bengal Lancer, incidentally, played to packed houses, and was just as popular with the Asiatic section of the audience as with the Europeans. It is remarkable, indeed, how seldom .Asiatic “fans" make a mistake; their reception of a film is, in nine cases out of ten, a sure barometer of its quality, and their taste can usually be relied upon. Intrinsically good films are always sure of a welcome, whereas crooners and their like are left severely alone.
In Evelyn Prentice, starring William Powell and Myrna (‘What a woman ”) Toy, of Thin Man fame, a rattling good crime story was .spoilt to some extent by the totally irrelevant introduction of the stock American Chee-ild. American taste is always an enigma, but it is really astounding that, any director in his senses should deliberately, and quite unnecessarily, pander to the lowest form of transatlantic sentimentality and thereby risk spoiling an otherwise excellent film. The sight of such an accomplished actor as William Powell unleashing rivers of treacly sentiment over a particularly unattractive brat was genuinely nauseating, the more so since it was all quite uncalled for. and had nothing whatever to do with the really ingenious plot. Apart from this, the film was all that it was cracked up to be. William Powell had a part after his own heart as H successful criminal lawyer, complete with rather doubtful hangere-on, and his acting during the trial scene was only surpassed by Isabel Jewell’s startlingly impressive performance as Judith Wilson, the blackmailer’s murderess. This is an actress to watch.
Hide-Out shewed us Robert Montgomery as a hard-boiled New York racketeer very much our of place in a country farm-house, where he is slowly converted to the rather insipid delights of love in a cottage by the farmer’s pretty (and insipid) daughter. An unlikely story well and wittily acted though we should have liked to have seen more of ”racket” and less of bliss and innocence among the chickens.
The Los! Patrol, with Victor MarLaglen. Reginald Denny and Boris Karloff, proved that it is possible to make a gripping picture, and one that will prove a draw, and yet dispense with the usually indispensable love-interest. The cast of this excellent film did not include a single woman, and Was all the better for the omission. It was interesting, incidentally, to see Reginal Denny in a serious role. Boris Karloff gave an admirably macabre interpretation of the part of the religious maniac, and Victor MacLaglen was magnificient as the Sergeant in charge of the doomed patrol.
Mainly About Nothing.
(Items marked unsuitable for children).
bloodsuckers.
The wireless Press News for August 19th stated that recent additions to the London Zoological Gardens included two vampire hats from the West Indies, The bills are a gift from a corresponding member of the Society who caught them in Trinidad, and trained them to lap defibrinated . blood from a wine-glass.
This will be interesting news for the Fabian Society, the members of which are probably the only creatures in Europe with similar habits, for . it is common knowledge that they subsist almost exclusively on a diet of hens’ blood and lukewarm dish-water. Professor Dingleberry, whom I con- suited regarding this phenomenon, tells me that- they absorb this nourishing mixture direct from shallow porcelain beakers, their lips, by a singular process of evolution, having become prolonged into a kind of snout not unlike that of the Aardvark, or African Ant Bear. It is this, he says, that gives them their peculiar and rather irritating lisp.
It would be a mistake, though, to assum'e that they never touch solid food at all, since once a year, on the anniversary of the October Revolution, the President of the Society issues to each member a ration of Poor Law statistics tastefully inscribed on wafers of rice-paper. Owing to their heady effect. however, these wafers, or Passfield-buns." as they . 'are playfully called, have to be handed out sparingly, since over-generous distributions have, in the st. been followed by really deplorable exhibitions on the part of some of the younger and less responsible members. On one occasion the author of [perhaps the best-known exegesis of Das Kapital was seen to waltz slowly across Bloomsbury square shouting aloud that Enggels was just a big bum. and that Charlie Marx was nothing but a hairy four-flusher ! who two-timed his old woman. On being arrested. he went on to make a number of extremely derogatory statements about the private lives of Lenin. Stalin and Mr. George Bernard Shaw, concluding I w'ith a ribald insinuation that Uncle Gorki's insistence on the golden-heartednes. of ladies of easy virtue was the result of a long and close association a ill, the sirens in question. When he asked the ; station sergeant, though, whether be believed in fairies, the scandalised officer had him removed at once to a padded cell, where, for all I know, he still
RESTRAINED EAGERNESS.
Letter recently received by the District Officer. Bau
Siniawan.
Dear Sir.
If you allow to pay me seventy cents ,in per month for pouring out every dung tub of the Siniawan and Buso. I am very willingly to do that job.
Thanking you in anticipation.
I am.
Dear Sir,
Your obedient servant.
PUNGENT.
"Young toad,” said the Very Senior Officer I gravely, "your opinion is of no value whatever. whereas every word I utter is charged with the most profound wisdom. I would like to remind you that I have lived in this country for Thirty- I Five Years, whereas you have hardly been here for as many minutes."
"Quite true," replied the Junior Cadet, with a gay laugh. "But then you must not forget that quantitative experience is not necessarily qualitative experience."
And knocking the old fool down, he jumped on his stomach until he died.
ICHTH YO-INTOXICAT1ON.
Can Fish Get Drunk?
Cat-fish leaping madly in the water, flopping on lo the banks of the Mississippi, and coming up to the surface Io "leer" at the spectators.
This is what the. inhabitants of Alton, Illinois, claim to have witnessed.
A fire burned down a distillery at Peoria, upstream, and the spirits flooded into the water, providing free drinks for the fish.
Several members of the. crowd, drawn by accounts of the phenomenon, caught the. fish with nets and their hands as they frolicked “under the influence,"
—Reuter, quoted in News of the world.
UP TO THE MINUTE.
Official anthem of the Committee of the S R W K Club :
"It’s never been done before, No, it's never been done before.
It’s never been
NEVER BEEN
DONE
BE-FORE!"
This anthem is sung whenever the Committee is confronted by a New Idea. Ou the Suggestion Book being produced, it is sung twice over. The Chairman gives the note on his Inning fork: the Members then rise reverently to their feet., and chant the anthem to slow music. On the conclusion of this touching little ceremony, the New Idea is buried, the Suggestion Book is carefully hidden, and everything is as it was in the beginning. The. proceedings usually close with the singing of the Doxology.
Sarawak Library.
September. 1935.
The following books nave been purchased by the Committee:—
Men Never Know Vicki Baum
The Eleventh Hour ... J. 8. Fletcher
The Cardinal’s Niece... F. Compton
Mackenzie
F-b 21 (7)
F-f 291 (8)
B in 3a
First Division News.
AUGUST.
Mr. R. L. Daubeny took over the affairs of the First Division from Mr. W. F. Dick, Resident, on August 20th. having handed over the District Office to Mr. F. H. Pollard on the 16th. Mr. Dick proceeded on furlough on August 24th.
Mr. W. P. N. L. Ditmas was attached to the District Office. Kuching, on temporary duty from August Sth to 10th, and again from the 29th to the 31st.
An enquiry was held into the death of a Chinese named Ah Sah. who was found hanging ut the Dairy Farm on the Pending Road. A verdict of suicide, was returned.
Forty-nine criminal cases came before the Kuching Courts during August. Of these eighteen were breaches of Municipal by-laws.
The. Datu Shahbandar visited Santubong on August 20th in order to enquire into the recent trouble there. As a result of his visit, everything is now quiet, and services in the mosque have been resumed. The origin of the dispute was the question of control of the mosque..
The Officer-in-Charge, Bau, reports that there has lately been a regrettable increase in the incidence of malaria in Bau district. Active steps are now being taken to oil or fill in all possible breeding spots, and the managers of gold mines situated near the Municipal area have been specially asked to co-operate in this work lo the best of their ability. The Principal Medical Officer visited the district on August 23rd, bringing with him a Sanitary Inspector; many of the gold mines were visited, and suggestions fur anti-malarial control were put forward.
443 persons were treated at the Bau Dispensary and Hospital during the month. 112 N.A.B. injections were given.
An unfortunate accident resulted in the death
of n Chinese child aged 3, who was knocked down
and killed on the tram line in Bidi bazaar by a
truck loaded with tailings. At the inquest a verdict
of accidental death was returned, and following the
recommendation of the assessors, all mines have
now been ordered to port a man with a red flag
wherever trolley lines crow or converge upon roads,
in order to warn on-coming traffic and pedestrians.
The Dahan Rubber Estates, Ltd., harvested *
23,115 lbs. of dry rubber during August. The rain-
fall at the Estate totalled 8.23 inches.
Some Land Dayaks in Upper Sarawak missed the
opportunity of burning off their padi farms afforded
by the dry spell in July. and have been finding it
difficult to get anything done since owing to the
almost continuous rain. This rain, incidentally,
has tended to hinder work on the roads, hut at the
same time it has shown that the Kuching road is
standing up to the weather better than last year, The motor-roller has been at work on the Buan-
Buso stretch of the road, and is making an
enormous improvement there.
The new Chinese school at Bau was opened at the beginning of the month and appears to be a very efficient concern indeed. There are now about six teachers and 150 pupils.
The new schools at Baku and Tundong are not yet completed, progress being hindered by shortage of funds.
Visitors to Bau will be sorry to bear of t lie recent death, at the age of about 93 years, of Pa’ Bojet. j the oldest inhabitant of Batu Kitang.
One exclusive prospecting licence was issued at Bau during the month. The total output of gold for July reached the surprisingly high figure of . 2,685.53 oz., headed by the Sarawak Mining Syndicate, Lid., with 801 oz. This company is reported to have obtained over 1,000 oz. in August, but this has not yet been confirmed.
The following table shows the gold obtained by the various companies :
At Gedong, as usual during any spell of hot
weather, a number of young children have died from
stomach trouble. Until now the Gedong people
have been too lazy to make wells, in spite of the
example of the local Chinese, with the result that
in the event of a drought the kampong people are
reduced to drinking water which can only be
described as filthy. Early in the month, the drawer
and Abang Zamhari, Native Officer, spent a few
days at Gedong and compelled the people to make
wells; it may be due to this that only 13 people
died this year instead of 91 as was the care in 1934.
It is suggested that a bazaar might be started
somewhere in the Samarahan area, preferably near
the Government station at Nanga Tuang.
Only ten of the fifteen traders who were granted
shop-lots in the new Serian bazaar last June have
paid then premium. The remainder have lost their
sites by default.
On August 18th, His Highness the Rajah and His
Highness the Tuan Muda drove from Kuching to
Serian. accompanied by Mr. H. B. Crocker, Acting
Government Secretary.
Two survey parties arrived in Sadong district during I he month, one to demarcate gardens at Sedan, the other to work on the coast at Semerah and Sebangan.
The Court Writer, Lundu, reports that only about one-tenth of the land at Tanjong Purun is being used for farming purposes this year. The rest of the land is being left fallow, since the Dayaks refuse to farm there.
About 70 acres of land at Munggu Belian near Simatan were devastated by a fire which is believed Io have been caused through the carelessness of someone dropping a burning cigarette end onto the dry grass. The lire threatened the bazaar, the Malay kampong, and also the Courthouse. A rentis was hastily cut, and endeavours were made to extinguish the fire, but fortunately the wind changed its Coin re at tlic critical moment. Had this not occured, the whole bazaar and kampong would certainly have been burnt down. The fire abated on the 7th. after burning for three days.
St. Joseph’s School Athletic Sports.
SATURDAY. SEPTEMBER 21st.
On the afternoon of September 21st a very successful sports meeting was held at the Roman Catholic Mission. Kuching. Commencing at 2.0 p.m.. twenty-four events were disposed of before the dose of the meeting four hours later, and when we say that the programme proceeded without the slightest hitch, those who are aware of the difficulties of organizing a meeting of this nature will join with us in congratulating the Reverend Fathers of the Mission and their lav helpers on their excellent staff-work.
Numerous guests were invited and were accommodated in kajang shelters, where refreshments were served almost continually. The only disappoint inent during a most pleasant afternoon was the Steadfast refusal of the Very Rev. Father Hopfgartner and the Datu Shahbandar to compete in the veterans’ race, which closed the proceedings. I heir appearance in this event would have been a fitting finale to a delightful day.
After the Rev. Father A. de Vos had made a
speech thanking all helpers for their efforts, the
prizes were kindly given away by Mrs. L. N.
Reynolds, Master Peter Reynolds assisting.
We print below a list of the winners of each
event.
1.—100 yards.
Division I.—1 Chee Choon Leong. 2 Lim Boon Kheng.
3 Osman.
Time—10 9/10 secs.
Division II.—1 Pui Khion Sip. 2 Wee Cheng Siang.
3 Osman.
Division III.—1 Suhaili. 2. Wahir. 3 John Then.
Time—13 17/40 secs.
2.—220 yards.
Division I.—1 Sahari. 2 Chea Choon Leong. 3. Kipli.
Time—27 0/10 secs.
Division IT.—1 Ling. 2 Hamdan. 3 Chong Shak Kui.
Time—28 17/20 sees.
Division ITT.—1 Suhaili. 2 Bong Ah Ang. 3 Lim Song
Liong.
Time—3-1 7/40 sera.
3.—Long jump.
1 Joseph Fung. 2 Lim Boon Khang.
Distance—17 It. 6 ins.
1 Hamdan. 2 Chong Shak Kui. 3 John
Distance—14 ft. 11 ins.
-1 Suhaili. 2 Jolin Then. 3 Simon Chon.
Distance—12 ft. 6 ins.
4.—High jump.
Division I.—1 Kuek Meng Hong. 2 Khan Chand.
8 Chee Choon Leong.
Height—4 ft. 10 ins.
Division II.—1 Hamdan. 2 John Au. 3 Sulaiman.
Height—4 ft. 7J ins.
6.—Pole jump.—Division I.
1Lucas Tan. 2 Joseph Fung. 3 Lao Ah Nui.
Height—9 ft. 2 ins.
6.—Bicycle Race.
Division I.—1st Race. 1 Abang. 2 Andrew Bong.
2nd Race. 1 Kho Chung Muk. 2 Gerald Ricketts.
Division II.— let Race. 1 Ling. 2 Jamil.
2nd Race. 1 Uni. 2 Mithli.
7.-75 yards Hurdle Race.—Division I.
1 Lucas Tan. 2 Chong Ah Pee. 3 Sahari.
Time—11 13/20 sees.
8.—Obstacle Race—Division I.
1Zen. 2 Ramzi. 8 Ishak.
9.—50 yards Sack Race.
Division I.—1 James Merrells. 2 Lucas Tan.
Division II.—1 John Au. 2 James Chong.
Division III.—1 Herbert Ricketts. 2 Suhaili.
10.—50 yards Three-legged Race.
Division II.—1 Chong Shak Kui and Wee Cheng Siang.
2 John Au and Simon Ng.
Division III.—1 Lim Seng Liong and John Then.
2 Herbert Ricketts and Suhaili.
Division TV’.—1 Michael Rong and Ah Thom. 2 Rambli
and Zamhari.
Division IV.
11.—50 yards Race,
1 Rambli. 2 Bohari.
Time—7 3/5 sees.
12.—Buns on string Competition.
1Rambli. 2 Michael Bong.
13.—Finding the Coin Competition.
1Lee Khuik Sen. 2 Rambli.
14.—Inter-class Relay Race.—292 yards.
1 Class V. 2 Class VI.
Time—37 21/40 secs.
15.—Relay Race, Boarders versus Day-scholars.
292 yards.
Winners : Dav-scholars.
Time—38 9/10 secs.
16.—Tug-O’-War, Boarders versus Day-scholars.
Winners : Day-scholars.
17.—Putting the Weight.
1 Matthew Lui. 2 Zen.
Distance- -27 ft. 5 ins.
18.—Kicking the Ball Competition.
1 Chee Choon Leong. 2 Sim Khian V’un. 8 Sim Ah
Chua.
19.-440 yards.
1 Murad. 2 Andrew Bong. 3 Moses Liu.
Time—83$ secs.
20.—Half Mile.
I Zen. 2 Murad. 3 Philip Cox.
Time—2 mins. 851/5 secs.
21.—440 yards, Old Boys and Friends.
1 Loh Hon Chong. 2 Chiok Kui. 3 Then Vun Kong.
Time—83 1/10 secs.
22.—Half Mile Bicycle Race, Old Boys and Friends.
1. Ah Lok. 2. Ng Shui Siong.
23.-100 yards Veterans.
1 Chan Kim Liong. 2 A. P. Merrells.
Cups.
Championship Division I —Chee Choon Leong.
Championship Division II.—Hamdan.
Championship Division III.—Suhaili.
Challenge Inter-elaas Relay.—Class V.
Victor Lvdvrum.—Chee Choon Leong.
Cricket.
I	The encouragement of cricket among the Asiatics in Kuching has met with such satisfactory results that on Sunday. 1st September, Mr. Phillip Soh Fu was able to’ raise an all Asiatic side to oppose a team from H.M.S. Herald on the Padungan ground.
Kuching won the toss, and put the Herald in to bat first.
The Kuching bowlers, P. Soh Fu and W. Forsyth, immediately met with success, and the Herald wickets began to fall steadily. With only one wicket remaining, however, Park joined Anderson and the partnership unexpectedly produced twenty runs, thereby almost doubling the visitors' score.
Football.
Kuching 7.	H.M.S. Herald 1.
On Sunday. 1st September, Kuching met
H.M.S. Herald on the Padungan ground.
A steady downpour of rain for an hour
immediately before the match left the pitch heavy,
and, in places. water-logged.
The Herald won the toss, and chose to defend
the goal at the Kampong Pinang end.
There was little to choose between the teams in
the opening minutes of the game, until, after about
a quarter of an hour's play, M. Juan gave Kuching I
the lead. From this stage Kuching always did i
much as they liked, and added two more goals
through Seng Chiang and M. Juan before the
interval.
Following the resumption of play Kuching went
still further ahead with four more goals, all from
M. Juan, who had the distinction of securing six
goals to his credit on this occasion.
W. Bates, who played exceptionally well on the
right wing, contributed in no small way towards
the goals obtained by Kuching.
The Herald's solitary point came in the final minutes of the game, the inside left following up a good through pass, and placing, the ball just wide of the Kuching goalkeeper.
Yaw Joo, at centre half for Kuching, effectively blocked the way down the centre of the field, and distributed the ball to advantage, while the home wing halves saw that the Herald wing-men were given very little opportunity of supporting then- remaining forwards.
The close ground passes of the latter, that might have proved effective on a dryer ground, on this occasion led to nothing, since the large pools of water lying in the vicinity of each goal-mouth invariably hindered them on the few occasions on which they looked like breaking away.
Kuching, who relied almost exclusively on their wing-men for initiating the attack, were well rewarded for their tactics.
Mr. W. H. Kelley refereed, and -the Kuching team lined up as follows : —
Abang: Cambie Chung. W. J. Chater; E. M.
Selous, Yaw Joo, Yahya: W. Bates. Seng Chiang, C. Linang, M. Juan, Weng Sheng.
—W.J.C
St. Michael's Catholic Club.
At the annual general meeting held at St. Michael’s Catholic Club on 1st September, 1935, the following gentlemen were elected office-bearers for the ensuing year :—
President : Rev. Father A. Hopfgartner; Vice- President : Mr. A. Chong; Honorary Secretary : Mr. William Tan: Honorary Treasurer: Mr. Chen Boon Chiap; Honorary Auditor : Mr. A. P. Merrells; Honorary Librarian: Mr. P. Sim; Committee : Messrs. L. K. L. Chan, Turn Teck Hoon. Tan Soon Tye. Stephen Harry and Francis Tan.
Sarawak Turf Club Autumn
Meeting.
SEPTEMBER 26th AND 23th, 1985.
( By Our Racing Correspondent.)
The Meeting was held in perfect weather. A
heavy storm passed over on the first day, shedding
only a few drops of rain, but a large section of the
public left the Course after the third race rather
i han face the downpour which looked a certainty.
The second afternoon was line and hot. The going
was on the hard side, and no less than four records
were broken on the first day. Bain between the
racing, however, steadied up the limes on the
second day.
The Meeting opened with a popular but rather
unexpected win for His Highness the Rajah, when
White Label got the better of the much-fancied
Happy Boy II by half a length. In Division I
Happy Roy II carried everything before him in
the shorter races, but Kijang ran into form again
during the Meeting, picking up both the open
races. In Division II Sintak Bulan proved him-
self a useful pony by continuing his winning
sequence of last meeting. He won all three races
he was started in. and would probably have won
the six furlong for his Division too had his owners
decided to start him. His withdrawal gave Chair-
man his chance. A good-looking newcomer in
Blue Bird shared the honours with Manis in Divi-
sion III. Both Bintang and Silver Blaze dis-
appointed. and Flamingo looks as if he has
definitely finished with racing.
Kijang secured the Champion Cup for his owners Also ran:— Search light 10.0, .Akal 8.12 (9.5'.
oiice more, and his jockey Lohor had the most ’ Mickey Mouse 9.0. Warpoth 8.0 . Timbang 7.10J
winning mounts during the Meeting.
Selling Sweeps were re-introduced on the first
three races, and the draw and auction were held in
the Sarawak Club on the evening before the first day.
As expected, these Sweeps were not popular. Only
two of the three pools filled and the auctioneer had
to work hard to drag bids out of a poor attendance.
Their Highnesses the Rajah. Ranee, Dayang Valerie and Astana party attended on both days. At the conclusion of the Meeting Her Highness very kindly distributed the prizes to the successful owners, and appreciation was duly shown with three "rousers" and a "tiger." Well done, the Sarawak Turf Club! another good Meeting on the records !—B.J.C.S.
, (7.4).
Sitak Bulan jumped oft in front, with Timbuntj,
Mickey Mouse, Bung a Api and Chairman racing
together behind and .Ika! last.
Sintak Bulan was never troubled. Bunga .Api just
caught Chairman on the post. Medin rode a bad
race on Bunga Api.
Two lengths, head.
Time—1 minute 17 2/5 seconds. Record.
Tote: $1.60.
Cash Sweep : First prize $480.00 Ticket No. 468.
Second prize $240.00 Ticket No. 754. Third prize
$120.00 Ticket No. 1174. Starters $24.00 each
Ticket Nos. 635, 822 . 419. 1113 and 795.
RESULTS.
Selling Lotteries : 1st price $61 to win $241.92 2nd price 53 to win 60.48
FIRST DAY.
Thursday, 26th September, 1935.
Race 3.—3.30 p.m. The Slump Stakes.
6 furlongs.
Race 1.—2.30 p.m. The Tuan Muda’s Cup.
DIVISION 111.
6 furlongs.
DIVISION I.
Houses. 11’cap. Owners. Jockeys.
1.White	Label	...	8.2	H.H. the Rajah	...	Wakijau i
2.Happy	Boy II	...	9.0	Datu Shahbandar	...	Medin
S. Kijang	...	10.7	Messrs. Ong Hap
Leong, Ong Eng Hin & Yong Thau Yin Kougsi	... Lohor
Also ran:—Bintang 9.9. Silver Blaze 9.5, Flying Fox 9.0.
The field got away to an excellent start with white I Label commencing slowly. Kijang was pulled in ' behind soon after the start. This probably cost him the race. After a furlong Happy Boy led from Bintang, Silver Blaze and White Label, with Kijang lying back and Flying Fox tailed off. At the four furlongs White Label had started improving and Silver Blaze dropped out. At the road Happy Boy had a good lead of five lengths, but white Label was always going well and moving up on him. Lohor now started to send Kijang after the leaders, but he had left it too late. Wakijau joined conclusions with i
Happy Boy and gained a popular and unexpected victory in spite of Medin's efforts to ride him into
the ditch.
Horses. H’cap. Owners. Jockeys.
1.Manis ... 9.4 Datu Bentara, Datu
Hakim A Datu
Amar	... Damit
2.Rurnng Laut ... 8.5 Mr. W. J. Chater ... Lundu 3. Jackson	... 8.6 Mr. Chan Qui Chong ... Awang
Besar
.Also run:—Blue Bird 10.0, Lumadin 10.0 (9.7), (truda 9.7. Ol'.Man Biver 8.12, December 8.12, September 8.10, Nightingale 8.8.
Blue Bird led Manis. Jackson. Nightingale and Burong Laut to the road, coming into the straight Manis took up the running, and was never headed.
Two lengths, half. Time—1 minute 37 seconds.
Tote : $12.70.
Cash Sweep: First prize $480.00 Ticket No. 1023. Second prize $240.00 Ticket No. 190. Third prize $120.00 Ticket No. 1095. Starters $17.10 each Ticket Nos. 1009, 578, 657. 286, 143, 406 and 71.8.
Selling Lotteries 1st price $25 to win $267.84 2nd price 37 to win 66.96
Half length, one length.
Time—1 minute 34 3/5 seconds.
Tote : $19.50.
Cash Sweep : First prize $480.00 Ticket No. 891. Second prize $240.00 Ticket No. 737. Third prize $120 Ticket No. 860. Starters $40.00 each Ticket Nos. 1226, 911 and 686.
Selling Lotteries: 1st price $ 5 to win $254.88 2nd price 105 to win 63.72
Race 2.—3.0 p.m. The Gold Miners' Purse.
5 furlongs.
DIVISION II.
Horses.	H’cap. Owners. Jockeys.
1.Sintak Bulan ... 8.7.7 Messrs. Wee Kheng Chiang Jt Ong Hap Leong	— Asin
2.Bunga Api	... 9.5 Datu Shahbandar	Medin
3Chairman	... 9.7 Mr. Wee Kheng
Chiang	Lohor
Race 4.—I p.m.
B.C.L. Stakes. 3 furlongs.
DIVISION I.
Horses. H’cap. Owners. Jockeys.
1.Happy Boy II	...	9.0	Datu	Shahbandar	... Media
2.White Isabel	...	9.1	H.H.	the Rajah	Warkijau
8. Buroug Gruda	...	9.9	Datu	Shahbandar	... Sukut
Also ran :—Silver Blaze	9.12, Flying	Fox 9.0,
Flamingo 8.5.
Flamingo gave trouble at the start and was finally left. The result was as expected, Happy Boy smothered the field to win in record time.
Six lengths, three parts.
Time—43 3/5 Record.
Tote : $1.40.
Cash Sweep : First prize $480.00 Ticket No. 355. Second prize $240.00 Ticket No. 362. Third prize $120.00 Ticket No. 418. Starters $40.00 each Ticket Nos. 628, 733 and 653.
Race 5—4.30 p.m. The Matano Stakes.
4 furlongs.
DIVISION II.
Horses. H'Cap. Owners. Jockeys.
1.Sintak Bulan ... 9.2 Messrs. Wee Kheng
Chiang 4 Ong Hap Leong	... Asin
2.Timbuig	7.12 Mr. W. Park ... Lundu
8. Warpath ... 8.5 II. IL the Rajah ... Wahap
Also ran :—Searchlight 10.2, Mickey Mouse 9.2, Khubarb 8.6
Searchlight was left after delaying the start. Sintak Bulan broke the line at once and again romped home in record time in spite of his penalty. Warpath and Timbang had a great struggle for second honours.
Lobor turned on the tab and the race was over, Kijang coming away to win easily.
Two lengths, one length.
Time—2 minutes 2 1/5 seconds. Record.
I Tote : $1.80.
Cash Sweep : First prize $274.40 Ticket No. 333.
Second prize $137.20 .Ticket No. 371. Third prize $68.60 Ticket No. 360. Starters $17.10 each Ticket Nob. 166. 358. 780 and 747.
SECOND DAY.
Five lengths, head.
Time —60 seconds. Record.
Tote : $1.10.
Saturday, 28th September, 1935.
Cash Sweep : First prize $326.40 Ticket No. 678. Second prize $163.20 Ticket No. 103. Third prize $81.60 Ticket No. 500. Starters $27.20 each Ticket Nos. 669. 612 and 742.
Race 1.—2.30 p.m. The Sarawak Steamship
Race 6.—5 p.m. The Tending Stakes.
3 furlongs.
Horses.
Stakes. 5 furlongs.
DIVISION I.
H cap. Owners.
Jockeys.
DIVISION 111.
Horses.
1.Blue Bird
2.Manis
3. King Kong
H’cap. Owners. Jockeys.
... 10.7 Mr. Phillip Soh Fu ... Sukut
... 9.12 Dutu Bentaru, Batu
Hakim and Datu
Amar	... Damir
... 10.0 Messrs. Chan Teck
Cheng & Wee- Boon
Chew	... Lohor
1. Happy Boy II 2. Silver Blaze
I 3. White Label
9.3 Data Shah band ar	... Medin
9.8 Mesara Chan Qui
Cho & Chan Qui ... Noon Chong
8.7 H.H. the Rajah ... Wakijau
Also ran :—Golden Arrow 9.7, Nightingale 9.0, Jackson 8.12, Burong Laut.8.10.
Although King Kong was much fancied, it was a two-horse race between Blue. Bird and Manis from the fell of the flag. Blue Bird found the distance more to his liking, and although Dam it rode an excellent race on Manis, the penalty for his previous win just kept him out of the picture.
ran:—Flying Fox 8.11, Bintang 9.4.
I Happy Boy 11 made all the running to win comfortably.
1 Three lengths, one length.
Time—1 minute 21 seconds.
Tote : $1.60.
Cash Sweep : First prize $480.00 Ticket No. 548. Second prize $240-00 Ticket No. 1040. Third prize $120.00 Ticket No. 1114. Starters $60.00 each Ticket Nos. 1150 and 870.
RACE 1. 2.3.0 p.m. The Sime Darby Stakes.
Half length, two lengths.
Time—43 4/5 seconds.
Tote : $7.20.
Cash Sweep : First prize $257.20 Ticket No. 176. ( Second prize $128.60 Ticket No. 422. Third prize 1 $64.30 Ticket No. 1030. Starters $16.00 each : Ticket Nas. 798. 324, 553 and 316.
Also ran :—Flying Fox 9.0. Lumadin 8.0, Chairman 8.10, Bintang 9.5, .Akal 8.3.
Lumadin started slowly, and Bunga .Api and Silver Blaze settled down in front at once and set a cracking pace. These two showed the way to the road with Kijang always in the picture. Once in the straight Lobor turned on the tab and the race was over, Kijang coming away to win easily.
Two lengths, one length.
Time—2 minutes 2 1/5 seconds. Record.
I Tote : $1.80.
Cash Sweep : First prize $274.40 Ticket No. 333.
Second prize $137.20 .Ticket No. 371. Third prize $68.60 Ticket No. 360. Starters $17.10 each Ticket Nob. 166. 358. 780 and 747.
SECOND DAY.
Saturday, 28th September, 1935.
Race 1.—2.30 p.m. The Sarawak Steamship
Cash Sweep : First prize $480.00 Ticket No. 548. Second prize $240-00 Ticket No. 1040. Third prize $120.00 Ticket No. 1114. Starters $60.00 each Ticket Nos. 1150 and 870.
Also ran Searchlight 9.5, Akal 8.10 (9.8), War- t path 8.0.
Warpath broke the line first and was joined almost at once by Mickey Mouse, Bunga Api and Chairman. Akal tailed off. Racing to the road it was anyone's money. In the straight there was a good deal of bumping, but Chairman was never seriously interfered with and drew away to win comfortably from Bunga Api.
One length, two lengths.
Time—1 minute 38 3/5 seconds.
Tote : $2.00
Cash Sweep : First prize $480.00 Ticket No. 573. Second prize $240.00 Ticket No. 266. Third prize $120.00 Ticket No. 474. Starters $40.00 each Ticket Nob. 1006, 1008 and 239.
Burong Laut was left and Blue Bird made all the running. Manis crossed Nightingale badly in the straight.
One length, one length.
Time—1 minute 23 1/5 seconds.
Tote : $3.00.
Cash Sweep : First prize $480.00 Ticket No. 643. Second prize $240.00 Ticket No. 519. Third prize $120.00 Ticket No. 630. Starters $40.00 each 'Ticket Nos. 151, 1294 and 270.
Race 4.—4.0 p.m. The Jubii.ee Stakes.
4 furlongs.
DIVISION I.
Horses. H'cap. Owners.	Jockeys.
1.Kijang 9.8 Messrs. Ong Hap Leong, Ong Eng Hin & Yong Thnu Yin Kongsi	... Lobor
2.Happy liny II ... 10.11 Datu Shahbandar ... Medin
3. Silver Blaze ... 9.8 Messrs*. Chau Qui Cho & Chan Qui Chong	... Noon
Also ran .—Burong Gruda 9.7, ll’/dte Label 9.1,
Flying Fox 8.7, Flamingo 8.0.
Flying Fox started slowly. Happy Boy estab-
lished his usual lead early in the race and was out by himself at the road. Silver Blaze and Kijang
were racing behind. Once in the straight Kijang
headed Silver Blaze and went after Happy Boy who
was beginning to feel the weight. A strong
challenge by Lohor ended in his getting up to
Happy Boy in the last few strides to get the verdict
by a neck. One of the best finishes of the Meeting.
Burong Gruda was Inst.
Neck, half length.
Time—61 4/5 seconds.
Tote : $3.90.
Cash Sweep : First prize $480.00 Ticket No.
1063. Second prize $240.00 Ticket No. 306.
’Third prize $120.00 Ticket No. 518. Starters
$80.00 each Ticket Nos. 540, 199, 198 and 168.
Cash Sweep . First prize $480.00 Ticket No. 753. Second prize $240.00 Ticket No. 196. Third prize $120.00 Ticket No. 746. Starters $40.00 each Ticket Nos. 771, 1092 and 142.
Also ran :—Blue Bird 11.0, Burong Laut 8.0, Ring Kong 9.6, Gulden Arrow 8.13J.
Blue Bird got away slowly. Nightingale showed the way tn Manis, Jackson, King Kong and Burong Laid. Once in the straight Dam it settled down on Manis and look him to the front and kept him going to resist a determined challenge from Nightingale.
Head, one length.
Time—Not taken.
Tote : $3.70.
Gash Sweep; First prize $480.00 Ticket No. 1220. Second prize $240.00 Ticket No. 738. Third prize $120.00 Ticket No. 958. Starters $30.00 each Ticket Nos. 739, 633,1124 and 631.
Also ran-:—Bunga Api 8.9, Silver Blaze 9.0,
Akal 8.0, Bintang 9.4.
Silver Blaze commenced slowly, and at the
Sekama Gate Bunga Api was showing the way to
Kijang, Flying Fox and Chairman. When the
field came to view again the order was unchanged,
but Silver Blaze had moved up. Coming into the
straight Flying Fox was in the lend from Kijang
with Silver Blaze third, Bunga Api dropping buck,
then Chairman and Bintang with Akai last. Flying
For stuck to his advantage until close home, when
Kijang challenged again successfully. Chairman
ran on into third place.
One length, 2 lengths.
Time—2 minutes 54 4/5 seconds.
Tote : $1.50.
Cash Sweep : First prize $480.00 Ticket No. 602. Second prize $240.00 Ticket No. 781. Third prize $120.00 Ticket No. 627. Starters $30.00 each Ticket Noh. 1001, 970, 1105 and 237.
CASH SWEEP—TICKETS UNCLAIMED.
First Day, Race No. 2- Third prize $120.00 drawn by Ticket No. 1174.
First Day, Race No. 3—Second prize $240.00 drawn by Ticket No. 190.
Second Division News.
August.
On August. 20th an “amok" occurred in Simang-
gang Bazaar. The man responsible was a Dayak
named Tingkau, a discharged leper who had
apparently been brooding over the fact that his relatives refused to consider him cured of his disease in spite of ample proof to the contrary. He attacked and severely wounded a Dayak and a Chinese, and then chased a Malay woman, who took refuge in a shop. The owner of the shop, a Chinese named Ong Kee Poli, was having his midday meal with his family when he heard someone shouting—“Dayak bunoh China !” He immediately sent his family into the back promises, and, arming himself with a carrying pole, waited behind the door. The Malay woman rushed in screaming, closely followed by Tingkau, who had a parang in his hand. The woman fell down, and Ong Kee Poh hit the Dayak on the head with the pole. The Dayak Hum turned on him, but Ong Kee Poh hit him on the hand and disarmed him, after which he struck the man until he collapsed. He then called the police, who took him into custody.
There is no doubt that if it had not been for Ong Kee Poh's prompt and courageous action the woman and probably several other people would have been killed or badly wounded. On the recommendation of the Resident, Second Division. Ong Kee Poh has been presented with a conspicuous bravery medal and a monetary reward, together with a complimentary address in English and Chinese.
Rubber census inspectors have completed their work except in the Skrang and Undup. which should be finished by the time the Census Officers arrived.
A policeman named Loom, who was spending his leave in Kampong Hilir. Simanggang. mot with an accident when letting off a cannon at a “main" held in connexion with the marriage of Haji Medina, a daughter of the late Datu Abang Haji Abdurasid, to Abang Mustapha, Native Officer. The cannon burst as he fired it. inflicting wounds which were fortunately superficial, except for a gash on his face. Incidentally, the marriage referred to resulted in a week of incessant “main" in the Kampong.
Mr. P. M. Adams returned to Simanggang on August 28th in order to resume duty as Resident. Second Division, after acting as Resident, Third Division, for over nine months. Mr. Adams was accompanied by Mr. F. A. W. Page-Turner who came on a short visit. Mr. Page-Turner, of course, was Resident of the Second Division for about fifteen years.
Mr. H. E. Cutfield, who had been acting as Resident, left for Sibu by the Chamois on August 30th.
The Acting District Officer, Saribas, reports that n Dayak from the Ulu Layer was killed while asleep by a tree falling on a fruit langkau occupied by himself and four others, only one of whom was injured. At the subsequent inquest a verdict of death by misadventure was returned.
Ted Foo, Court Writer. Betong, was arrested on August 20th and charged with embezzling Government money. He was sent to Simanggang under escort.
Two hundred and forty-two outpatients were
I treated at Betong dispensary during the month.
124 N.A.B. injections were administered. The
general health of the district was good.
As is to be expected at this time of year, numerous land and fruit tree disputes came up for hearing in the Saribas Courts. In one case five comparatively small engkabang trees, which were auctioned by order
of the Court, fetched no less than $60; it is doubtful whether their actual value exceeded $10, but the price was forced up by the bidding cf the two litigants.
Heavy and continual rain during the latter part of August has delayed the burning of padi farms in the Saribas district, and unless some fine weather is encountered shortly, next year's harvest may be adversely affected.
The Assistant District Officer, Lubok Antu, reports that during the month a gawai was held at Rumah Bungkong at which a Lance-Corporal and five constables were present on the oil chance that some of the outlaws might also think fit to attend. No outlaws arrived, but as it turned out, the police wore able to prevent what might otherwise have been a serious light between people from Rumah Penghulu Ramba and Rumah Abang. The actual cause of the quarrel is not clear, but in the course of it Ngindang, Rumba’s brother, succeeded in calling a Dayak from Abong's house the ulun of Abong’s family.—this being the very insult that both Ramba and Ngindang resented so bitterly a few months ago I Penghulu Ramba also managed to infuriate all the real Ulu Ai Dayaks by reminding them that he and his family were not Ulu Ai at alt but Kumpang people, and that all true Ulu Ai Dayaks were descendants of men defeated and killed by his (Bamba's) ancestors!
The engkabang crop in the Ulu Ai has not come up to expectations. Most of the Ulu Dayaks were busy planting at the end of the month, but the ones from down river bad not yet burned off their farms.
On August 3Ut a report was received nt Engkilili that a Dayak woman named lyoh had been taken by a crocodile while fishing. The body was found on the following day.
On August 28th Native Officer Lucas Chuat with 12 levies left Engkilili to patrol the Ulu Lemanak, and was still away at the end of the month.
Many of the Engkilili Chinese traders are buying engkabang hut the price is so low that the Dayaks do not benefit to any extent.
Third Division News.
August.
The Resident and Mrs. C. D. Adams arrived at Sibu on their return from furlough on August 13th. Mr. P. M. Adams, Acting Resident, left for Simanggang via Kuching on the 22nd.
Thirty-six criminal and fifty-eight civil cases came before the Sibu courts during August. The claims in the latter totalled $6,871.
The District Officer, Sibu, reports that on the last
trip of s.s. Kuranda a Foochow named Yu Suk Sung
jumped overboard between Sibu and Binatang. He
was picked up by Malays, and being later judged
menially deranged, was sent up to Sibu. He was
on his Way back to China with an elder brother, but
suddenly decided that he much preferred to remain
in Sarawak. That, apparently, is the extent of his
madness. He is now living happily in a rubber
garden with another brother.
Bidat and Bala, the murderers of the Cantonese
family near Song, were executed on the 22nd.
Some days later their property was auctioned in
Kanowit fort. Although it was known that the
proceeds would be given to the surviving child, only
two Chinese turned up, and the articles were nearly
all bought by Dayaks, realizing just over fifty dollars.
Those concerned in the concealment of the heads
taken by Bidat and Bala were moved down from the
Ngemah, and are now living in the Pasai and on
Pulau Dudong.
Work on the new Government station at Nanga I Meluan is at present at a standstill owing to lack of timber due to the fact that all Dayaks are away collecting engkabang.
be purchased. The site is the only one available, and . number of Malays have already moved down from Kanowit where houses are overcrowded and overlapping.
Piculs. Per cent.
Smoked sheet	...	3,174.55	94.39
Manufacture scrap	...	132.68	3.95
Unmanufactured scrap	...	55.97	1.66
3,363.20	100.00
There have been several reports lately of outlaws i in the vicinity of Sibu, but nothing definite was heard until an old Malay, fishing one night near Pulau Dudong, was bespoken by a boat containing seven persons. One, whom he recognized was Kendawang, got into the old man's ijoat and after a spasmodic conversation mentioned that they were all abort of provisions. He was immediately given everything the Malay had, and, after enjoining silence, the Dayaks moved off. And indeed, had not his wife, more sense than her husband, we should have heard nothing of this story, since the old man was convinced that, if the tale became known, he j would be imprisoned for feeding outlaws.
Soon after this, some Igan Dayaks, becoming suspicious of the movements of Banyang’s mother, who, with Jantieng, is farming in the Teku. a tributary of the Seduan, followed her one morning, and discovered a concealed hut in the jungle near her farm. Unfortunately, instead of leaving things untouched. they brought everything in the hut to the Police station. A bottle containing gunpowder, lead with which to make bullets, a box of re-charged cartridges, and an unfinished note from Banyang to His Highness the Rajah asking mercy for himself and his brother Kendawang, were amongst the . articles found. A subsequent search in the surrounding country and the rivers between Sibu and , Kanowit revealed nothing, but the general opinion of the natives is that some of the outlaws are hiding quite close to Sibu, subsisting on food supplied by their friends and relations.
The engkabang harvest is in full swing, and, while it lasts, Malays and other natives have, been allowed into the forbidden areas to trade.
The Assistant Superintendent of Landa and Surveys visited Kanowit during the month with the Acting District Officer. The site of the new Malay village at Panto Mali was inspected. At present all the houses, only one of which is a permanent structure, are built anywhere, with no system at all. To obtain a proper lay-out Chinese rubber will have to be purchased. The site is the only one available, and . number of Malays have already moved down from Kanowit where houses are overcrowded and overlapping.
It is not expected that the new Residency at Sibu will be finished by the end of October, since much still remains to be done, and the belian planks and joists ordered from Bintulu have not yet arrived.
The ides of the Lanang Road, in the newly repaired portion, have in various places slipped into the drains. This damage is due to the recent high water coming before the road had properly set.
Preparatory to the reconditioning of this road, beyond the Bukit Lima turning, owners of gardens bordering the road will be called in and requested to fell all trees overshadowing it. Its present bad condition is largely due to the fact that only in a few places can the sun penetrate.
The long bridge connecting Sibu island with the- mainland is in a very dilapidated state, and is not expected to last another year.
Street lighting has been installed in Kampong Nyabor. The lamps will be in use from the 1st September.
Reports of secret society activities in the area opposite Tanjong Ensurai were investigated by the- Officer Superintending Sibu Constabulary Sector and suspected houses searched, but no incriminating evidence was found, save two note-books in one house. The owner is on bail pending further enquiries
Fifty-seven men of the Constabulary were sent out travelling during August. Many of these went with search parties looking for outlaws.
The patrols and garrisons of the various blockhouses remained the same, except for a few changes due to leave and sickness.
Seventy-six persons were treated in Sibu hospital during the month. Gf this number fifty-four were new patients. There were three deaths and forty- nine discharges, and one patient absconded.
Outpatients numbered four hundred and twenty- one. One hundred and ninety-seven of these were new cases The Assistant District Officer, Kapit, reports that the crocodile which was suspected to have taken two women from Rumah Blikau during June and July, has now’ been caught. It measured just over 15 feet.
325 logs were rafted to Sibu from Kapit during August.
Chop Bian Seng exported their first trial shipment of split rattan to Singapore on August 1st. This firm employed five special cooiles from Singapore for the work of splitting the rattan.
About 800 bags of engkabang were shipped from Kapit and Song during the month. Both engkabang and fruit trees are now in flower again.
Native Officer Abang Ahmat and a squad of police returned from patrolling the Mujong and Merirai areas, and reported all well.
The Assistant District Officer, Kapit, visited all Dayak houses in the side-streams of the Batang Rejang above Song from August 19th to 21st. The Dayaks stated that these houses had never yet been visited by a European.
A long boat (temuai), 65 feet in length, was built at Kapit and despatched to Sibu at the end of the month.
The Acting District Officer, Lower Rejang, reports that there was little serious crime in his district during rhe month. Cases of illicit rubber planting, however, continue.
The Dayaks in the Lower Rejang area are all
busy on their farms. No reports of distress through
famine have been received.
885.25 piculs of rubber and 788.01 piculs of
F.A.Q. pepper were exported from Sarikei and
Binatang during August. The pepper harvest con-
tinues, but the quality is poor and the price discouraging.
The new Government Offices at Sarikei should .
be completed during September. 220 feet of con-
crete drains were laid round the new brick shop-
houses in Sarikei bazaar.
Constabulary sub-stations in the Sarikei district
still remain unoccupied. Patrol work and the
location of bad characters in the garden areas
continues.
There was a serious shortage of fresh water at Sarikei during the first week of August
The Acting District Officer. Mukah, reports that a certain amount of confusion exists in the Balingian Civil Courts owing to the deplorable habit, in the past, of making vague orders of auction against unidentified sago lands, orders which in many cases were never carried out; as a result there are, in some cases, three or four entirely different orders against the same piece of hind, which makes it look as though a good deal of money is liable to be lost in the near future. The traders, however, deserve little sympathy, since in accordance with the ‘ cut-throat” business methods
they adopt, wild credits are advanced to any Melanau on the strength of whatever sago-land he may happen to own, no deeds being made out. The inevitable result is a Court case and a demand for an auction order against any little property the native may have.
Haji Nor, a Mukah sailor of some renown, who was well-known to many past Government officers, died during the month following an ill-advised trip to Matu in order to attend a wedding.
Messrs. R. G. Aikman and C. 8. Sergei, Rubber Census Officers, visited Balingian on the 22nd and 23rd of the month, and Mukah on the 24th and 25th. About 1.000 forms were ready for their inspection. Tt is understood from the Census Officers that the information given was up to the required standard in the majority of cases.
The Acting District Officer. Mukah, visited Balingian from August 10th to 23rd. Native Officer Aha ng Mustapha paid a visit to the Ulu Mukah. and Native Officer Abang Subaimi visited the Dayaks in the Penipah area.
H.H.M.Y. Maimuna entered and cleared the Balingian river without any difficulty, this being, t is believed, her first visit to Balingian. Her arrival cause quite a stir in the kampongs and the bazaar.
Tide-marks have been erected at Mukah and Oya in accordance with a request from the Shipping Master. Readings will be taken as from September 1st.
The Officer in-Charge, Oya and Dalat, reports
that the rope of the Government flag-staff at Dalat
was again stolen during August, this being the
second time that this has occurred within one
month There is not the slightest clue to the
identity of the thief.
Penghulu Chendang arrived down from the Baku
on August 6th, bringing with him his son, who had
been badly injured in a pig-trap. After receiving
treatment for some days, the wound looked much
more healthy, and the Penghulu and his son
returned to the Ulu.
Despite the fact that extensive propaganda work
was carried out among Dayaks in the Ulu Oya
regarding the object and working of the Rubber
Census, many Dayaks are still uneasy and have the
idea that Government proposes to levy quit-rent on
their rubber-lands. Every effort has been made to
counteract this scare.
At Oya. a meeting of the chief Mohammedans was called to take place in the Mosque, Awang Lai. N.O.. presiding, and measures were discussed regarding the wearing of the songkok, and how its gradual disuse could be prevented. It is worthy of note that the effect among the younger generation was instantaneous, and a great increase in the number of Songkok worn has resulted.
On August 30th a woman was reported to have disappeared from a batang at Tanam. A crocodile was suspected, as several have been seen lately in the vicinity. The Kampong people were turned out, and later in the day the body was found, 1 untouched by crocodiles. The woman is reported to have suffered previously from fits, and presumably she was accidentally drowned after falling into the water during one of these attacks, since she was last seen having a bath off the batang. An inquiry is being held.
Only forty koyans of raw sago were exported from the Dalat district via the Kut, the Kut being , almost dry during the earlier part of the month.
Work on the new Government offices at Dalat makes good progress. The posts and main timbers are almost completed, and the at taps have already been obtained from Bintulu.
Thirty vessels cleared from Oya during the month representing 665 tons; included in the cargo were ‘2541/2 koyans of raw sago, 186.30 piculs of rubber, 2 piculs of jelutong, and 10 piculs of engkabang. Motor-schooner Kim Pah .Ann and M.L. Hea Hong both visited Oya and Dalat during August. Two sago bandongs ran aground on Oya bar during the month, but with the aid of kampong people they were refloated without any loss or damage.
On August 1st. a woman was reported missing from one of the houses behind Dalat bazaar. She was found on the morning of the following day wandering about in a sago garden by S. Anak. No reason for her disappearance was given, but she is said to be subject to nightmares.
The scheme for establishing sago factories at 8. Kut has not materialised, no bids being received for the land. This confirms rumours that have been current in the district for some time.
Fourth Division News.
July.
The Resident, Fourth Division, states that the tapping holiday was enforced satisfactorily throughout bis Division, there being no reports anywhere of convictions for illicit tapping. As a whole both dealers and natives appeared to understand the situation, and co-operated loyally.
During the tapping holiday the opportunity was
taken to disseminate propaganda regarding the
rubber census, declaration forms being distributed
with instructions to be completed and returned by
the 28th July.
There was no serious crime in the Fourth Division during .July. The attempted murder reported last month still remains unsolved. Contrary to all expectations the victim of the attack still lives, but he is unable to speak, and although he appears much more conscious of his surroundings, he is still unable to give intelligible answers to questions. His sense of vision and hearing, however, appear to be normal, and it is hoped ultimately to obtain some clue to work upon.
In Bintulu and Baram, an engkabang harvest has materialised, the reported local market price being about $6 a picul.
The landing ground at Bintulu was partially cleared of standing timber during the month, and stumping still continues.
Following the requests of several Chinese traders, it is hoped to build a new bazaar up river at Labang. in the Bintulu district.
Visitors to the Fourth Division during July included Mr. R. E. Turnbull, British Resident, Brunei, and Major C. R. W. Lamplough, Naval Intelligence Officer, Singapore.
Mr. D. L. Leach, Assistant Superintendent of Surveys. Fourth Division, continued trigonometrical work in the Baram district.
Sixteen criminal cases and nine civil cases came before, the Bintulu Courts during July.
The Acting District Officer. Bintulu, paid a visit to the Tubau and A nap districts during the month and states that in both these areas the natives seemed contented and prosperous. The only real complaint emanated from the Tubau Kayans, who said that Foocbows were working belian everywhere, so much so, in fact, that soon there would be none left for the natives. Arrangements have been made with the Forest Department to stop the issue to Chinese of permits to work belian in certain areas.
There Still remains quite a good demand for
belian attaps, logs and damar, and so the up-river
natives of the Bintulu district have no difficulty in
finding work. Toward the end of the month,
many Malays, Dayaks and Kayans started to
collect engkabang. the bazaar price being attractive.
The major part of the felling of the Bintulu
landing ground was completed in one day at an
average cost of about $55 per lambong (eight odd
acres). The Acting District Officer tried in the
first place to obtain about 150 Dayaks for this work,
hut since everyone was busy fanning, the Penghulu
insisted on bringing down every tax-payer, in
order to avoid any grumbling about unfair discri-
mination. Consequently about 1,000 Dayaks
arrived, hence the remarkably short time in which
I he work was accomplished.
On July 17th, a flying-boat arrived at Bintulu.
bringing as a passenger Air-Commodore S. W.
Smith, Officer Commanding Royal Air Force. Far
East, accompanied by Squadron-Leader K. B.
Lloyd and Flying Officer Mitchell. Also on board
were Messrs. P. M. Adams, Resident, Third Divi-
sion, N. A. Middleman. Superintendent of Lands
and Surveys, R. E. Edwards, Acting Director of Public Works, D. C. Hudden, Acting District Officer, Sibu, and Dr. A. D. Hutchison, Divisional Medical Officer, Sibu.
Two inquests were held at Miri during July, both deceased being Chinese. Verdicts of “found drowned” and “accidental death” were returned.
The Acting District Officer, Limbang. reports that twenty-five Dayaks from the Second Division arrived on July 27th and joined Sanggol Labong's house at 8. Agong.
Some 50 piculs of pepper were harvested by the end of the month by Panderuan and Kubong planters. Owing to the present low price of pepper, subsidised planters do not like handing over their pepper to Government but wish to keep it locally until the price rises. The situation has been explained to them, however, and the pepper is being brought in and stored in the Customs shed.
The Up-river Agent spent some two weeks at. Ukong during the month distributing and assisting to compile the Rubber Census Forms.
During the tapping holiday some 1.300 census forms were completed, thus leaving approximately fifty forms to be accounted for. The average number of trees was lower than anticipated. being 170 odd trees to the acre. Distributing and receiving stations were constituted at Limbang, Panderuan. Lubai and Ukong.
The Assistant District Officer, Lawns. paid a short visit to the Murute living near Gunong Briwan, and states that the most noteworthy thing about any Murut long-house is the scarcity of children, while the adults continue to die at an extraordinary rate. This, it is behoved, may be partly accounted for by the Murata’ propensity for turning a large proportion of their padi harvest into liquor. At Murut feasts, every soul in the house, including small children, is usually drunk, sometimes for days on end. In these circumstances it is hardly surprising that the death rate is unusually high.’
The Lawas (Sarawak) Estates, Ltd., exported 22.400 lbs. of dry rubber during the month.
Severe erosion of the river bank at Lawas continues to take place. The rite of the Customs Wharf is now affected, while the wharf itself started to break up about the middle of the month. It has been rendered safe for two or three months, but it is obvious that it cannot last, much longer.
The Officer-in-Charge, Baram, reports with great regret the death of Balu Pays, widow of Tama Bulan, which occurred near Long Akah on July 10th. Balu Paya, who leaves three daughters, was approximately 70 years of age, and had been in failing health for some years. Her late husband was. of course, one of the most celebrated native chiefs in the history of Sarawak.
1,236 persons were vaccinated during the month’ at Baram, 46 out-patients being treated at the hospital. 26 out-patients were treated under the Professor Harrison Smith Fund.
Sudden gusts of wind of gale force were experienced in the middle of July at Baram; the Government Bangsal, in fact, collapsed and smashed the Tinjar and Tutoh boats.
AUGUST.
The Resident, Fourth Division, states that health reports for his Division during August were satisfactory. l.07n persons were vaccinated in the Ulu Baram.
A newly installed occulting light was put into operation at Lutong for the first lime during the night of August 8th. This comparatively powerful light will be of great assistance to coastal shipping, and to oil tankers approaching the refinery sea pipeline.
On August 10th His Excellency the British Agent for Sarawak, accompanied by Lady Thomas. Miss Thomas and party arrived by 8.Y. 'Sea Belle. II. After the usual formal courtesies. His Excellency and party toured the Oilfields and then proceeded overland to Kuala Beloit.
Fourth Divisional statistics for the first half year 1935 show :—
Immigrants, adults and children ... 98(1
Emigrants, adults and children ... 525
A cursory examination of Miri Municipal revenue and expenditure statements for this year shows that revenue from licences end assessment, etc., amounts to $45,000 and expenditure to $23,000.
Arrangements were made at Limbang for the export ef about 20 buffaloes for the purpose of instructional padi-farming in the Third Division by Kanowit Dayaks.
Twentv-three criminal and twenty-four civil cases came before the Miri Courts during August. There was no serious crime in the district.
On August 5th Mr. K. H. Digby, Cadet, made a lour of the Niah and Sibuti districts during which he was accompanied by Probationary Native Officer Abang Haji Abdulrahim. who was in course of transfer to Bintulu. The tour was a routine one, hut particular attention was paid to the Census of Rubber in the district.
Messrs. R. G. Aikman and C. S. Sergei, Census Officers, visited Niah and Sibuti on August 10th. accompanied hy their staff, and proceeded via Suai to Bintulu.
On August 13th Mr. F. I.. Mansel, .Assistant Treasurer, arrived at Miri to take over the Divisional Treasury from Mr. B. A. Trechman, who proceeded to Kuching on temporary transfer.
The Senior Forest Officer, Mr. T. Corson, arrived at Mini by m.v. Manidu on August 20th and proceeded direct to Limbang via Labuan. in company with the Resident, Fourth Division.
Sixty-four out-patients and two in-patients were treated at Limbang Hospital during the month.
Visitors to Limbang during August included Mr. E. 0. Bruce, Acting Resident, Fourth Division; Mr. T. Corson, Senior Forest Officer: Mr. R. E. Turnbull. British Resident. Brunei; Dr. and Mrs. Evans. Mr. and Mrs. Montgomery, Miss Lomas, and Messrs. Coghill and Bomphrey.
The Lawas (Sarawak) Estates. Ltd., exported 36,736 lbs. of dry rubber during the month.
Eighty-three persons were treated at Baram Hospital during the month, eight of these receiving treatment under the Professor Harrison Smith Fund.
The Officer-in-Charge, Baram, reports that during August there were a number of prosecutions against focal Dayaks for planting rubber. The plants have all been pulled up and destroyed
CORRESPONDENCE.
The Editor is not responsible for the opinions of Correspondent*
“English as She is Writ.”
The Editor.
The Sarawak Gazette.. Kuching, 27th August.
Dear Sir.
If you will kindly allow me a little space I think the enclosed copy of a letter is a gem of "English as she is spoke*' or rather writ, and might be worth publishing.
The writer is doubtless of the genus Bengalee Babu and it is to be hoped that it is not to him or his like that it has been decided to practically hand over the Government of India.
I am,
Yours faithfully,
O. F. Ricketts.
To	Esq., Madras. April 14,1930.
Honoured and Illustrious Six-, -You will please remember me as 5th Grade Clerk in this Office, for which there is no scope to inflate, and after all my education in Madras University, where I passed B.A. in two sittings.
Now this mental effort demands greater area for abilities, but forsooth am doomed with unlucky star in firmament, and still serve unceasingly in grade 33-50, less income-tax. This, Honoured Sir, can never be with qualifications, which are unbounded, must flow into mid-stream, where brains are measured by Rs. a. p.
I have learned much, August Sir, and with tribulation, acquired arts knowing in sciences, such as "the apple must fall to the ground" (Isaac Newton). I am also sitting this long time in spare evening vacation acquiring the glorious defunct languages in Latin, viz., Abba Father and so forth.
Now, Reverend Sir, I am, what dog says to rat, in tight corner, for domestic troubles come in plural and sometimes triplicate, causing slight earthquakes in Heavenly household when there is shortage of coin, and to add to this my wife doth bring me in annual incremental successions, to the ramification of this general ion. and by the Lord there's no end to this mischief.
You will therefore take notice. Noble Sir, and give me appointment in your office, where I shall show all things, including my abilities, which are drooping, and which will wither like fragile plant unless watered by your kind patronage in better job carrying more lucre.
Reply favourably to your humble petitioner, who is straining on beam end, and in duty bound I shall ever pray for long life on your honour's head.
I have the honour to remain, Honoured and Illustrious Sir. vour most obedient servant,.Jumping Jehoshephat!
The Editor.
Sarawak Gazette.	14th September, 1935.
Dear Str,
You will no doubt be concerned to hear that according to an official circular the Post Office of British India has absolutely forbidden the importation by post of "Mexican Jumping Beans” (Sebastionio Palmeri de la famille des Euphor- biaceae).
Yours, etc.,
F. Harding.
“Big Districts.”
21st September, 1935. The Editor,
Sarawak Gazette,
Kuching.
Dear Sir,
I beg to point out that the population of Kapit district is about 23,887 and not 17,133 as mentioned in the Sarawak Gazette of 2nd September, 1935.
I enclose a copy of the latest census, the original of which was sent to the Resident, Third Division, on 23rd April.
