Sarawak Gazette
KUCHING, Friday, March 1st, 1935
The Sarawak Gazette.
FRIDAY. MARCH 1st. 1935.
Contain and personal
February.
His Highness the Rajah, accompanied by Captain K. E. Le Sueur, sailed for Simanggang in H.H.M.Y. Maimuna on the 2nd. transhipping to M.L. Rentis at Lingga, where Mr. E. O. Bruce, Acting Resident, Second Division, was awaiting His Highness. Simanggang was reached the same day. While at Simanggang, His Highness witnessed a very amusing farcical play presented by the Simanggang Recreation Club, in honour of His Highness' visit. After paying a short visit to Lingga. His Highness returned to Kuching on Friday, the 8th.Her Highness the Ranee, accompanied byDayang Elizabeth, left for Singapore by T.s'.s. Vyner Brooke on the 13th, to meet the
Earl and Countess of Inchcape, who arrived in Singapore on the 15th by s.s. Carthage.her Highness the Ranee, Lord and Lady
Inchcape, Lady Patricia Mackay and Dayang Elizabeth arrived at Pending by m.v. Maruduon the 19th. where they were met by His Highness the Rajah, Dayang Valerie and the Government Secretary, Mr. H. B. Crocker, is The party transhipped to H. H. M. Y Maimuna
' and proceeded to Kuching. Near Tanah Puteh, three launches, which had been decorated and manned by Malays in varied
an costumes, accompanied the Maimuna up the river. The river presented a gay appearance. The Maimuna, with her escort of
launches, steamed slowly up the river to the beat of drums, the sound of gongs and crackers, and the reports of numbers of small
cannon. Opposite Astana, scores of decorated boats were moored, and from there came further strains of music, while hundreds
of coloured handkerchiefs fluttered a welcome. The Siamese State Barge conveyed the party to Astana. The same evening,
Their Highnesses invited representatives of every community to a garden party at Astana where they were presented to Lord and Lady
Inchcape and Lady Patricia Mackay. On behalf of our readers and ourselves, we take this opportunity to wish Lord and Lady
Inchcape and Lady Patricia Mackay, a hearty welcome to Sarawak, and to express our sincere hope that this visit will be the
forerunner of many more to come.All Government Offices were closed on Monday, the 25th, in honour of Her Highness the Ranee’s birthday. All ships in port weredressed, and at 8 a.m. a salute of twenty-one guns was fired from Fort Margherita. During
the morning, starting at 8.30 a.m., a regatta was held. The weather was fine and the river.was thronged with boats of every sort, shape and size. There were races for all, from the thirty man boat to the small, fast bandony ikan. The number of entries, the crowds lining the banks, and wharves, as well as boats from Kampongs as far off as Sungei Moyan and Sambir, were ample proof of the popularity of this occasion. This report would not be complete without our mentioning the event of the morning, when Her Highness j the Ranee, accompanied by Lord Inchcape, ami Lady Inchcape with Lady Patricia I Mackay, ventured out in two of the largest racing’boats, which, after slowly paddling: up river through the crowds of watching ! boats, were seen to turn and race each other to the winning post. At 9.30 p.m. Their ' Highnesses the Rajah and Ranee, Lord and Lady Inchcape, Lady Patricia Mackay and a large number of Europeans were the guests of the Commissioner and Officers of the Sarawak Constabulary, at Fort Margherita The office verandah formed an admirable grandstand giving a good view of the parade i ground which had been tastefully decorated ' with long lines of coloured lights. Arter the I Band had played a few selections, the enter tainment opened with a short display of physical drill which was done to music. This drill was carried out with the smartness and precision that can only be attained by careful instruction and much practice. Then followed an interesting and varied programme which included Sikh wrestling, Malay and Dyak dancing and a demonstration on a machine called a Gymnoframe, by one who is obviouslv ' an expert. This machine appears to revolve in any direction the exerciser wishes, and at considerable speed. It must be thrilling for those that, like it. Other items included selections by the Drum and Fife Band, march ing in slow’ and quick time, a demonstration of Lhe various stages a recruit gbes through from the time he joins up until he becomes the' finished article. Two short but very humorous sketches, one of how not to behave on point duty and the other, a village constable with a minor offender in front of a rather opulent looking Magistrate..
Finally the "fall in" was sounded, and the . whole strength of the Depot paraded with ' drum and fife Baud. Three cheers were , called for Her Highness the Ranee, following which the parade marched off with the sound of the drums and fifes fading softly into the distance. After last post had been sounded, the Baud played the Sarawak Anthem. We must add that rain fell all the evening which . reduced the parade ground to an area of slippery mud, but in spite of this the smartness of the drill movements was in no way impaired. All those responsible for the organization and carrying out of the display are to be congratulated on a splendid performance under far from normal conditions. We take this opportunity to wish Her Highness the Ranee very many happy returns of the day.On the 20th, the Data Shahbandar. Abang Haji Abdillah, entertained at his residence, “Darul Kurnia,” Their Highnesses the Rajah and Ranee, laird and Lady Inchcape, Lady Patricia Mackay, Davang Elizabeth and Dayang Valerie, Mr. ,1. (’. V. C. Brooke, Mr. II. B. Crookcr, Mr. and Mrs. E. Parnell, Mr. and Mrs W. F. Dick, and Mr. R. E. Le Sueur. On their arrival, the Datu Shahbandar and his wife, Dayang Rabiah, sprinkled yellow rice over Lord and Lady Inchcape and rubbed their foreheads with gold, wishing them long life, happiness and prosperity. The Datu, in a short speech, welcomed Lord and Lady Inchcape and Lady Patricia Mackay, and expressed the hope that, their visit to Sarawak would be often repeated. Lord Inchcape replied, thanking the Datu for his welcome. Copies of both” speeches we include elsewhere in our columns. After dinner, during which the Kuching Military Ba nil rendered a programme of music, a performance showing various kinds of Malay dancing took place in the grounds, which hail been beautifully decorated with coloured lights.
On the 27th, the Chinese Community of Kuching gave a dinner party, in honour of Lord and Lady Inchcape and Lady Patricia Mackay, at Mr. Ong Tiang Swce’s residence, at the 2nd mile Rock Road. Among those present were Their Highnesses the Rajah and Ranee. Dayang Elizabeth, Dayang Valerie, Mr. H. B. Crooker, Mr. and Mrs. E. I’arnell, Mr. and Mrs. W. F. Dick and a large number of European guests Mr. Tan Sum ' Guan addressed Lord and Ladv Inchcape in a short speech to which Lord Inchcape replied. Copies of the speeches we publish in our columns. After a most excellent dinner, at which special Chinese dishes were served, the guests were entertained by a performance of singing and dancing by pupils of the Hokkien School ami Kong Min School and a magnificent fire work display. This entertainment was not en joyed by the guests alone, but. by huge crowds that had gathered in the grounds round Mr. Ong Tiang Swee’s residence, and which had been streaming along the roads from the bazaar since early in the evening.
H.M.S. Falmouth, Commander H. A. Rowley. R.N., arrived at. Pending on 4th February, in the evening, with His Excellency the Commander-in-Chief, China Station, Admiral Sir Frederic C. Dreyer, k.c.b., c.b.e., on board. His Excellency was met by the Government Secretary, Mr. H. B. Crocker, and the Assistant Government Secretary, Mr. X. E. Hughes. Transhipping to H.H.M.Y. Maimuna His Excellency and a number of other officers proceeded to Kuching, where His Excellency was the guest of Their Highnesses the Rajah and Ranee at Astana. Other officers were the guests of a number of Kuching residents. H.M.S. Falmouth remained at Pending until February, the 7th, sailing for Singapore at dawn. During the visit, His Excellency visited I he Eld mines nt Bau. Football was played
tween H.M.S. Falmouth and local Teams on the evenings of the 5th and 6th. accounts of which appear in our columns, and each evening after football, parties of the crew were the guests of Government at supper, at the Rest House, followed by a performance at the “Sylvia Cinema.” On the 6th February. His Excellency, accompanied by Her Highness the Ranee, Dayang Elizabeth, Dayang Valerie, Lieutenant Commander F. B. Tours, R.N., and Mr. X. E. Hughes, called on the Datu Shahbandar. Abnng Ha ji Abdillah, the Datu Imam, Abang Haji Mohd. Morshidi, and the Datu Amar. Abnng Suleiman. It is of particular interest to record that during a conversation with the Datus. one of the most- prominent characters connected with the history of Sarawak was mentioned, Admiral Sir Harry Keppel, who happens to be a connection of His Excellency.
On the evening of 6th. His Excellency gave a. dinner to a number of Kuching residents on board H.M.S. Falmouth. The guests included Iler Highness the Rance, Dayang Elizabeth'and Dayang Valerie, The Government Secretary, Mr. II. B. Crocker, and the Trea surer, Mr. E. Parnell.Amongst others the following telegrams passed- between H.M.S. Falmouth and the Government Secretary : —
His Excellency Commander -in-Chief Warship Falmouth All officers of the Sarawak Service join me in wishing Your Excellency a pleasant voyage and in saying how greatly your visit was appreciated fullstop Our only regret is that your stay was short
Government Secretary
His Excellency
Commander-in-Chicf Warship Falmouth
Malay chiefs wish to convey all best wishes to Your Excellency' both personally and as re presenting H. M. Navy whose close association with Sarawak’s "early history is remembered by them all with gratitude
Government Secretary
To Govsec
Kuching
Please convey to Malay chiefs an expression of the great pleasure which their message has given me fullstop As a naval officer it was a special gratification to meet and to recall long-standing association between their fore fathers and H. M. Navy fullstop I wish them continued success and happiness fullstop
Admiral Dreyer
I I
i
I
I
I
29
To Govsec
Kuching
Addressed Government Secretary fullstop Thank you and all Sarawak Service very much for your charming message fullstop Owing to friendliness and most hospitable reception accorded to us I and all my staff enjoyed our visit very greatly and we are all much looking forward to our next meeting fullstop We wish you all continued success and happiness fullstop
Admiral Dreyer
The President of the British North Borneo Company, Major General Sir Neill Malcolm K.c.B.D.S.O paid a short visit to Kuching, arriving at Pending by m.V. Marudu on 19th February and leaving for British North Borneo the same afternoon. We trust that he will pay ns another, and longer, visit in the near future.
The second performance of the Kuching Amateur Dramatic Society took place, by kind permission of the Committee, at the Sarawak Club, on Saturday the 23rd. The previous evening, a number of senior clerks and representatives of every Department and Office witnessed the dress rehearsal. We publish a full account elsewhere in our columns.
It is with deep regret we have to record the death of the Rev. .Tames M. Hoover of Sibu, an obituary notice of whom appears in this issue. By order of His Highness the Rajah, all Hags were flown at half-mast on Tuesday, the 12th, February, as token of respect for his memory. We take this opportunity to tender Mrs. Hoover our very sincere sympathies in her great loss.
We are informed that, the air mail, that left Kuching on Saturday 19th January by R.A.F Flying boat, was delivered in London ten days later
List of Films due to be Screened at the
SYLVIA CINEMA
During March, I935.
Charles Laughton in
“Private Life of Henry VIII.”
“Avalanche.”
Jean Harlow & Lee Tracy in
“Bombshell.”
Fredric March. Elissa Landi. Claudette
Colbert & Charles Laughton in
“Sign of the Cross.”
“Samarang.”
Frank Buck's
“Bring 'Em Back Alive.”
Nonna Shearer, Robert Montgomery &
Herbert Marshall in
“Riptide.”
Stanly Lupino in
“King of the Rity.”
Bing Crosby & Marion Davies in
"Going Hollywood.”
We publish below the speech of welcome to Lord and Lady Inchcape by Mr. Tan Sum Guan on behalf of the Chinese Community of Kuching on 27th February, 1935, and Lord fnchcajre's reply thereto.
Iord and Lady Inchcape, Ladies and Gentlemen :
On behalf of the Chinese Community of Kuching 1 have to thank you one amt all for the honour you have done us by your presence here to-night,
As yon all know, this function is held in honour of the Earl and Countess of Inchcape, to whom we now extend a most sincere and cordial welcome.
To most new-comers Sarawak may appear a small country in comparison to other large cities, but to those of us who are domiciled here it is a real home, as assuredly it is a place of peace and comfort. For all the protection and benefit we have thus enjoyed we are indeed most grateful to Their Highnesses The Rajah and Ranee, who have always treated us not merely as their humble subjects but as their personal friends.
It is our earnest hope that on this Your Lordship's first visit to this country, you will find many things to interest you, and that the present visit may be the forerunner of many more to come. We also hope that our old friend, Lady Inchcape, will avail herself of every opportunity to visit us in the future, although we know quite well that her time will be fully occupied in England.
1 will now ask you all to join me in drinking to the health of Lord and Lady Inchcape, and in wishing them good hick, long life and every happiness.
MR TlANG SWEE AND GENTLEMEN OF THE'. Chinese Community
1 feel singularly honoured at being invited to attend this entertainment and at hearing the kind words of welcome you have addressed to the Dayang Leonora and myself.
I have spent a week now under your Rajah's hospitable roof, and everywhere I have gone I have been delighted to see the smiles of greeting extended to my wife by members of the Chinese Community on her return to her Father's country: in which greetings I have had a share through being her fortunate husband, and 1 thank you from the bottom of my heart.
To-night I have pleasure in addressing members of a great race who have brought their culture, their brains and their brawn into practically every country in the world in the cause of civilization. You are members of a pioneer nation like ourselves, and history shows us whenever a new colony has to be founded, or a new industry developed, the help of the Chinese is almost invariably called in and as invariably found available in return for an honest livelihood.
You are not content to remain in obscurity at home, you are always looking for adventure in foreign lands ami for fresh outlets for your talents and industry, yet you have a deep-rooted love for your own country. This I remember was brought home to me many years ago when I saw a coffin being put on board a B.I. steamer on the Indian Coast, and on inquiry was informed that it belonged to the Chinese ship's carpenter. He had just transferred from another ship and he always took his coffin about with him so that if he died his body would be sent back to China Io be buried amongst his ancestors. I remember being very- much impressed by this incident.
The Chinese community in any foreign country I have visited is always law-abiding, hard-working and ready to take an honest commercial risk in the course of business. In fact, I think I may say, speaking generally, that Great Britain owes as big a debt of gratitude to the Chinese as she does even to her own nationals, for their help in managing and developing the commercial interests of her dependencies abroad.
My firm has many business interests in Rangoon, Penang. Singapore, Hong Kong and Shanghai, in all of which ports we are dependent very largely on the goodwill, solvency and business abilities of the Chinese merchants. In this connection the only 'l have against you—if I may say so without being taken too seriously—is the long time you lake to celebrate the advent of your New Year. Amongst my letters from my various partners, I liave had some lately complaining that business had been slack that particular week owing to Chinese New Year. The first of January may be a had day for some of my partners, but it does not take them a rule, a whole week to get over their New ! Year's Eve celebrations.
Joking apart, you and ourselves arc both foreigners in a strange land. We work side by side for our mutual benefit and for the benefit of the natives of the country in which we live. We grow to love the land of our adoption, especially when it is one like this, thriving under the beneficient and unselfish rule, of your Rajah.
May 1 thank you again. Gentlemen, for your kind reception of my wife and myself to-night.
Obituary.
It is with feelings of deep regret that we have to record the death of the. Bev. J. M. Hoover of Sibo, who died at the Kuching hospital in the evening of February 11th after a brief illness.
Mr. Hoover passed through Kuching on his way I from Singapore to Sibil on the 4th February and was then apparently in good health. He was taken ill suddenly on the 7th and brought to Kuching on the !lth m the s.t. Chamois, accompanied by Mrs. Hoover and the Divisional Medical Officer, Dr. A. D. Hutchison. Ha was found to be suffering from a severe attack of cerebral malaria and was in a stalo of collapse from which ho never recovered.
The funeral took place at 9 a.m. on Tuesday, 12th February. A large number of old friends were gathered to attend the ceremony and followed the bier to the grave-side. After the service the Bev. W. Shelley C.R. gave a short address. He said I that they ail regretted that neither the Bishop nor the Archdeacon were there to perform this last office for a distinguished fellow missionary. He ventured to prophecy that whenever in the future the story of Sarawak came to be told, there would be found an honourable place for the work done for 1 the Christian civilization of the country by one who was a great missionary and a great Christian. The ‘ secret of Mr. Hoover’s influence lay in his whole hearted devotion to the Saviour in whom he trusted. The Bev. Shelley felt sure that they would all desire to express to the devoted partner of his life and labours their deep sympathy in this hour of her great grief. She would, they felt sure, find her abiding comfort in that sure and certain hope of the resurrection to a fuller and more perfect life, which had always sustained him whom they now committed into the hands of his Risen Lord.
After the funeral the grave was covered with many wreaths sent by friends as a mark of their respect and sympathy'. Among the many of those present were Mrs. J. M. Hoover. The Government Secretary, Mr. H. B. Crocker, The Treasure Mr. E. Parnell. Me. and Mrs. W. F. Dick, Mr. O. F. Jiickotts. Mr. E. S. Holl, Mr. N. A. Middleman. Dr. W. Hutchison, Dr. A. D. ITiikliison, Gapt. C. I’. Lowe and Mrs. Lowe, Mrs. C. D. I.e Gros Clark, Mr. G. T. Bates, Mr R. E. Edwards. Mr. C. F. Birt, Mr. X. E. Hughes, Mr. R. E. Le Sueur, Capt. A, Benfield, Mr. H. L. Daubeny, Mr. C. E. L. Blagg, Mr. W. H. Jacques, Mr. T. Corson, Mr. F. L.Mansel, Mr. T. E. Parker and Mr. 1,. D. Kennedy.
The following short account of Mr. Hoover's activities in Sarawak is taken from the Straits Times X friend who has visited Mr. Hoover’s Chinese colony in Sarawak contributes the following appreciation :
The Rev. James M. Hoover, of Sarawak, came to Malaya in 1899 and was one of the pioneers of the Methodist Mission. He had begun life on a farm in the State of Pennsylvania, U.S.A, and there received Hie knowledge and essential background that was later to be so useful in his work in Borneo. He was assigned to teach in the Anglo-Chinese School in Penang but when the opportunity came to go to Borneo, then a brand- new field, lie volunteered to go. Since March, 1903, his name has been synonymous with Methodist work in Sarawak. The following year he took back with him Mary Young as his bride and they have worked together there ever since.
, Rajah Brooke had offered free land to a thousand Foochow Chinese colonists who settled about Sibu, some sixty miles up the great Rejang River. These indomitable colonists cut down the virgin jungle and planted rubber. Jim Hoover, their missionary and friend, having brought the seeds with him from Singapore. With his wife lie made his fust home on the little river Egan, some eight miles from the present town of Sibu. Here in an attap house he taught school, ministered to the people, and on Sunday helped the Chinese pastors with the services of worship.
The Hoovers found their days full, helping in every sort of way— as adviser, as doctor, as judge, as go-between to the Sarawak Government, as farmer, as carpenter, as teacher, and as preacher. As the years went on the first small church and school increased to 43 preaching and teaching centres scattered for miles up and down the Rejang River.
And the day came when the Rajah honoured him as no other foreigner was ever honoured there; even bis note was good at the Government offices in Sibu at any time up to $50,000 or more: when the Rajah trusted him with State matters and honoured him with a special good Service medal; when his American University alma mater gave him an honorary doctor's degree which he modestly refused to let anyone use in addressing him. Hoover was not the man to talk about his work.
The First Ice Plint.
On one of his furloughs in America he happened to call on an old school friend of his, a manufacturer of artificial ice plants. This man asked him if they hud ice in Borneo and Hoover replied : “Of course not, on the equator." “Well, will you use one if I give it to you?” In due time it arrived in Sibu. The people scoffed at an ice plant—who had ever heard of ice—who ever wanted any? But Jim Hoover got busy with a machine he hail never seen or worked, and finally after six months of tinkering produced a ton of ice daily ' At first no one would buy it, but to-day in its place is a machine producing 20 tons daily.
All the boats on the Rejang were hand-propelled. Hoover sent for an engine and rigged up a boat with it. At first all laughed at him. but to-day' the Rejang is full of motor launches of all sizes.
When he first came, all the lumber was sawed by the old laborious hand method still used in some of our jungles. I stood with him one day watching a great saw eat its way through a huge log and then we walked into the engine room to see a 100 h.p. Diesel engine easily pulling the load.
Jim Hoover then told me the storv of this mill. Many years before he had brought out a 6 h.p. "mail-order" engine with an 18 in. saw. They used that engine until it fell to pieces. Then he bought a 15 h.p. engine and a 3 ft. saw ; then a 4-2 h.p., and now the plant as I saw it. Thus he was the father of modern saw mills—and rubber machinery, as well—in that part of Borneo. He did the same thing with the introduction of rice mills—showing the Chinese what could be done by machine methods, financing them until they were on their own feet, ami not once, so he told, did he ever lose the money thus advanced !
The time came when Sarawak was to be connected with the outside world by wireless and a station was to be put up in Sibu. Hoover at once ordered a book on “wireless" and studied it and then daily visited this new station as it was being 1 built. When the Rajah came over to open it the engineer in charge made some mistake and burnt out the machinery. The Rajah did not know what 1 to do, for he needed an expert, and Jim Hoover offered to care for the station and keep it running until the Rajah could get another engineer. He did his work so well that he was left in charge of this station for three years.
The passing of Jim Hoover marks the end of an era. not only in the work of the missions in Malaysia, but in the development of this region as "ell. Head-hunting, so common in his early days, ; lias been practically wiped out—the Dyak is as docile and gentle as the present-day Malay and as hospitable to visitors. Thousands of square miles of excellently cared-for rubber and rice fields have taken the place of the jungle. Ocean-going steam- I ships go 150 miles up the river and modern concr erete wharfs are loaded with rubber, pepper and other exports and imports. Beautiful new Sibu has taken the place of the old, destroved bv fire in 1.5128.
In all of this Jim Hoover lias played a genuine part. One thinks of him uot simply as a Methodist missionary hut as one of the pioneers of all the ages who have seen visions and dared to see them to Imition, who have been daunted by no obstacles, who have been utterly fearless and daring, and most of all, who have trusted their fellow men and encouraged the best which was in them.
“TUAN HOOVER”
AN APPRECIATION.
Those of us who were privileged to know “Tuan” Hoover, us he was always known, and who, only a few short weeks ago. saw him in the full vigour of robust middle age. find it hard to believe that he is gumi from us for ever. Death seems the more tragic when it robs us of such a dynamic personality, for at first it is almost impossible to realize that the energy and enthusiasm which we knew so well are for ever stilled. Men of the stamp of Tuan Hoover are not often to be found, and the gap that he leaves behind him will bo bard to fill. It is difficult fully to assess the debt that the laud of his adoption owes him. but we can at least say with certainty that the debt is everywhere acknowledged. There'are probably few people in Sarawak who have not, at one time or another, heard of Tuan Hoover, and the spontaneous tributes that flowed in at his death from all communities are sufficient evidence of the respect and love in which he was everywhere held. He has gone from us, but his memory' will live for ever in our hearts; and it will live, too, in his achievements, and in the enduring work which is his greatest monument.
Tuan Hoover was that rarissima avis, a truly happy man. From an early age he knew exactly what he wanted to do, and to the end he kept on doing it. undismayed by difficulties which might well have daunted' braver men than he,—if such
could be found. To the end he kept his faith, his
hope, and his charitable love of bis fellow-men;
and surely that is happiness, perhaps the truest and
most enduring happiness to which mankind can
aspire.
He had Iris aim in life, and be let nothing deflect
him from its achievement, or from the course which
he had mapped out for himself. Discouragements,
failures, disappointments,'—he had his full share of
these during his long career, but never for a moment
did he allow them to stand in his way. For him.
obstacles existed only to be overcome; by sheer
determination and force of character he successfully
tackled every problem that came before him. His
was the supreme satisfaction of seeing his life’s
work brought to fruition in his own time. Before
he died, he knew that he bad not lived in vain; he
knew that long years of endeavour had born abun-
dant fruit, and that success had crowned the task to
which he had turned his hand thirty-five years
earlier; and this is a reward that is granted to
few.
If ever a man can be said to have devoted his life
to the service of humanity, that man is Tuan
Hoover. His was a practical Christianity which
was not satisfied with purely spiritual progress,
but which set itself to secure the happiness of his
flock by combining spiritual ideals with physical
welfare. He set himself to improve the lot on this
earth of several thousands of his fellow-creatures,
and lie succeeded. What greater memorial could
any man desire?
The 'history of Tuan Hoover's work in Sarawak
is the history, to a great extent of the Rejang river,
which'Owes its present development very largely to
his efforts. He transplanted thousands of Chinese,
who, in their native Fukien, lived wretched lives
on the border-line of starvation, to a new country,
fertile and friendly, where, under a benevolent
Governiment, they could settle and prosper, and
where their standard of living could be enormously
improved. From the moment of arrival of his
first thousand colonists, he devoted himself heart
and soul to their welfare and progress. As the
Foochow colony increased, hie labours grew, hut he
was equal to every demand upon his time and good-
nature. He was here, there, and everywhere,
guiding, instructing, and safeguarding bis people.
His amazing energy never flagged for a moment.
One day he might set out on a twenty-mile walk to
visit settlers in the rubber-growing areas; he
would sleep perhaps in a Chinese coolie-hut, and
the next morning he would set out on another
arduous round, over hills, rough clearings, and
jungle. And then perhaps he would dash off down-
river in a motor-launch to advise one of his friends
regarding a scheme for communal padi-planting,
or the installation of a travelling rice-mill, or a
better method of manufacturing jelutong. Here,
n Church might be falling into disrepair through
lack of funds; somewhere else, the attendance at a
school might be falling off as a result of the slump.
Titan Hoover was off like a shot to advise,
encourage, and re-organize. Every detail of his
mission had his personal attention. Nothing was
too big for him, and nothing too small. Even
while he was busy planning the spiritual and It was his gift to bring fresh hope to all around
him. His buoyant optimism was infectious, and
was one of his most charming characteristics. A
visit from Tuan Hoover when one was sick or de-
pressed was like a breath of fresh air on a sultry day,
—reviving and stimulating. He had that happy
knack of being able to dissipate the blackest clouds
with a few well-chosen words, and knew how to
inspire in others that confidence that he always felt
in himself.
Sibu without Tuan Hoover is somehow unthink-
able, and yet we have got to accustom ourselves to
it. The Island is filled with memories of him, and
I is stamped indelibly with bis personality. Tuan
Hoover in his khaki suit and khaki topee was a
familiar figure, and one which will everywhere be
deeply missed. Sibu's roads will somehow seem
empty without, him : and there is probably not a
house on the island that does not shelter someone
who at one time or another baa experienced his
kindness, and who will therefore feel that in Tuan
Hoover he has lost, n real friend. He had a cheery
won! [or everyone, European, Chinese., Malay or
Dyak, and there is no race or section of the com-
munity but will feel his loss.
For more than thirty years of his labours Tuan
Hoover had the devoted assistance of Mrs. Hoover,
to whom we offer our deepest sympathy, and it was
to her whole-hearted co-operation and encouragement
that In-owed much of his unspoiled enthusiasm. Mrs.
Hoover's school for Chinese girls at Sibu is, and has
been for many years, a model of what such an
i institution should lie and in her own sphere the de-
parture of Mrs. Hoover will be reckoned as great a
I calamity as the loss of Mr. Hoover in his. We fear
j that it is inevitable that before long Mrs. Hoover
will give up her work in Sibu, and we shall thus un-
I fortunately lose the benefit of her services, which
have been, and are. of incalculable vallue to the com-
munity. We can only say that we share in the
- sorrow that her departure will cause to all those who
have been in any way associated with her.—(Con-
' tributed.)
Kuching Amateur Dramatic Society.
A SPARKLING PERFORMANCE.
On the evening of February 23rd Kuching was
privileged to see the first performance of "Persecuted
Parents," a play written and partly produced by
1 Her Highness the Ranee. The play was performed
by the members of the Kuching Amateur Dramatic
i Society, who deserve the more credit on account
of the comparatively short period which was avail-
able for rehearsals. Only hard work and competent
organization could have prialueed such a polished
performance in so short a time, and all who con-
tributed towards the success of the evening deserve
high praise for their efforts.
Briefly, the play is concerned with the gap between parents and children that so often widens when the latter approach maturity. Ladv Balfour (Her Highness the Ranee) is that familiar and rather tragic figure, the mother whose children have grown up into beings whom she does not understand, and who, half unconciously, lias allowed the advancing years to sweep them for ever away from her. After years of self-sacrifice and devotion, she suddenly finds that she has nothing left. Her children, who have been her whole life, return her none of the affection which she has lavished upon them since infancy. To her. they hove been everything; and she now discovers Hint to them, she means nothing at all. She is just someone about the house, an ageing and rather irritating woman to whom custom has assigned a certain place in their lives. She is completely out of touch with her children, and she does not know whv. She cannot understand. She is continually seeking an answer, and finding none. What has happened? What spell has turned her adored and adoring babies into these self-assured and cold-hearted young women? Two of her children look on home only as a place to which they can bring their men friends,—a necessary roof over their heads. They openly ignore their mother; they are just not interested in her. The remaining daughter only continues to live at home because she has to. She has nowhere else to go. All her life she has been so sheltered and protected by her mother's love that it has almost smothered her. Now, at the age of thirty, she begins to understand all that she has lost. And the realization turns her love, for her mother into resentment that is none the less bitter for being usually so carefully repressed. When at lust it flames into life, her mother is shocked and puzzled lieyond expression. What has happened to her? What has become of the loving and attentive child that used to be her daughter? She has given her everything,—affect ion, a home and	herself, and it seems that she
wants none of these. She regards her home as a prison, and her mother as the gaoler. Lady Balfour’s world dissolves into dust and ashes at her feet, and in her despair and pathetic bewilderment she takes a lover. Her children have failed her, and she goes elsewhere in search of the affection to which she always thought she had a right, but which it appears she can no longer command.
That, briefly, is the theme of the play,—the blindness and essential selfishness of a mother's love, and the unthinking cruelty of youth, fl is the old story of the incompatibility of the older and younger generations, but it is a story winch is given a fresh savour by highly original treatment, and one which holds one's attention from first to last.
The first act opens with a doulogue between Lady Balfour and Constance, her eldest daughter (Madeline Daubeny). Lady Balfour is expecting her two younger daughters back from school, and is busy with preparations for their reception. Constance hints to her that she may find them changed, and that anticipation of their arrival may prove more agreeable than the reality, but Lady Balfour will not listen. It is not so much that she cannot, as that she will not, understand. Constance touches on the futility of her own life, and warns her mother of the danger of trying to mould the lives of her two younger children on the lines that have shaped—and mined—hers. Her words are wasted. The children arrive, and her worst predictions are fulfilled. They are noisy, intolerant, and inconsiderate. They think of no one but themselves. They turn, the house into a bear-garden to the intense disgust of the butler (Mr. R. L. Daubeny). They bring with them two men friends who show as little consideration for their hostess as they do themselves. Puzzled and hurt, Lady Balfour again turns for consolation to her lover. Complications are introduced by the fact that Constance falls in love with Keith Roscoe (Mr. W. H. Kelley) who has come to the house only because of his love for Vivian (Dayang Elizabeth), a fact which he passes on to the unhappy Constance with unconscious callousness. Then, in the third act,Sir Alec Balfour returns unexpectedly from the East, where he is one of the leading lights of the Medical world, to find that he is a stranger in his own house, which is apparently being run for the benefit of two young men whom he has never met in his life. One is Keith, the other his friend the Hon. Lotus Fay, a spineless young idiot of the Bertie Wooster type, whose ideas do not reach further than the next cocktail. Even his wife has fled. He calls her back, and asks for an explanation, which she is unable to give him. The younger generation has been too much for her, that is all, and after a very few minutes Sir Alec decides that they are too much for him, too. In a flash he and Lady Balfour decide on flight. Whatever has happened to their children? They feel that at their age they have earned n little peace and leisure, and they mean to have it. A few moments after making up their minds, they escape hurriedly and furtively by way of the french-windows through which Sir Alec made his surprise entry only a short while before. The children come downstairs and find that for once it is their parents who have rebelled,—an unusual and dramatic finale.
Her Highness the Ranee, who had only taken ' on the part at short notice, gave a splendid performance as the harassed and bewildered Lady Balfour. She managed to convey most successfully the underlying pathos of the character, so that although we were exasperated by her blindness, we ' could not help sympathising with her. Technically, her performance was flawless. Every word she -poke was clearly audible, and her every gesture was
I significant.
As Con-lance, Lady Balfour's embittered eldest daughter. Mrs. Daubeny had fine material of which -he made remarkably good use. This practised actress gave its a study of resentful spinsterhood, which will live long in our memories. In particular, the manner in which she carries off the difficult scene where, expecting a declaration of love from Keith, she learns for the first time that he is really in love with her sister, was a little masterpiece. It was a scene winch might have been ruined by the least exaggeration, hut the restraint with which she played it gave it all the dignity and tragedy which ; the author find in mind, and made it strangely moving.
Dayang Valerie as Patricia, youngest daughter, gave an admirable study of a budding minx. Her acting throughout was delightfully natural, and the laugh of the evening was gained by her reply of “Not when I'm about!” to her mother's assertion that it took Iwo to make a marriage. Dayang Elizabeth had rather an unsympathetic part, and one which, in our opinion, did not quite do her justice. All the same she earned it off excellently, and interpreted very well the selfish and rather brainless girl that Vivian was meant to be.
Mr. Kelley impersonated to the life the thick- skinned but bluff and essentially good-hearted young man of today, whose disregard for others’ feelings is due more to his bland ignorance that such feelings exist, rather than to any intention to hurt ; and as the Hon. Lotus Fay, Mr. Pitt-Hardacre carried off a most difficult part with distinction. Character studies are never easy, and Mr. Pitt-Hardacre revealed qualities as an actor which sliould make him one of the leading lights of the amateur stage in Sarawak.
Dr. Hutchison gave us an admirable portrait of Sir Alec, the middle-aged and distinguished surgeon who is wrapped up in his work, and who has no patience with the vagaries of the rising generation; and last but by no means least, Mr. Daubeny's butler was all that the moat correct of stage butlers should be,—respectful, suave, but possessed of a shrewd sense of humour.
Dr. Hutchison, who co-operated with Her Highness the Ranee, deserves great credit for a most efficient production. There was no hesitation and stumbling over lines, and none of that confusion over exits and entrances that we know and dread in amateur performances. The acting throughout was on an astonishingly high level.
In conclusion, the chief bouquets of the evening must go to Her Highness the Ranee, Dayang Valerie, Mrs. Daubeny and Mr. Pitt-Hardacre, but in a performance where the acting was so uniformly good it is not only invidious, but almost impossible, to make comparisons. And while we are throwing bouquets about, a good-sized bunch of violets ought to go to the members of the dramatic society who did not appear on the stage, but whose active cooperation did so much to ensure the success of the performance.
We print below some extracts from the programme.—(Contributed.)
OLD SARAWAK.
From the Sarawak Gazette
63 Years Ago.
THE
SARAWAK GAZETTE
' No.49 MONDAY, SEPTEMBER 16. 1872. Price 5 cents
ITEMS.
1 There is a great dearth of local nows at Kuching. The I Cliiniuncii art working away with vigour at their now hous,*, and trill soon have finished building them through the whole length of the bazaar. The Rajah and Ranee have gone for a week or ten days to Simanggang, whore I the Dyaks arc always glad to have their Highnesses among them.
Signboards. bearing names of the principal roads and crossroads in English and Malay, have been put up in : conspicnous position. A large quantity of wood for the hot i has bu n carried to its site, and* carpenters are at 'work, squaring and Kitting it ready for use. The burnt out
blacksmiths have rebuilt their houses, and may be said to ; have gained by the lire as the liberal assistance which was given them from many quarters has enabled them to fa). I prove upon their old abodes. The frightfully hot weather I we have Ind to complain of has given way to a spell of rain 1 and squalls. which may be the uvant courier of the N'.E. ’ monsoon, though it is rather early to look for its arrival.
Your correspondent who wrote last time about servants and musters will he glad to know that an Ayah was had up in Court on Saturday for leaving work without notice, and staying away for four or live days und4 various excuses, and told that she must return at once to service until the end of month, or pay a month’s wages into Court as fine.
A few* residents are agitating to net a Club House, with Reading Room and Billiards attached, established near the 1 riverside. Probably, the hotel will provide all that these fashionable spirits require in the way of chit chat and
I refreshment. while the Library is supposed to supply them with mental pabulum.
The "Straits Times" of August 31st contains an article i on the propriety of filling up subordinate official posts in the Straits with native-born subjects instead of cadets from England. This class has a prior claim on government from . being permanent residents, and &u increasing power in the Colony : while the very narrow field open to their energies at present is said to be another reason for advancing them wherever it is possible.
First Division News
January, 1936.
The Resident, First Division, Mr. W. F. Dick, reports:—
Her Highness the Ranee availed herself of the opportunity given her by Air-Commodore Smith of having a flight over Kuching in Flying Boal No. 1160 of 205 F.B. Squadron, Wing-Commander Scott piloted the machine.
Uppish Sarawak District.
January, 1936.
The Acting District Officer, Mr. R. G. Aikman, reports:—
Agriculture.—The Dahan Rubber Estates, Ltd,, harvested 20,000 lbs. of dry rubber during the month. The rainfall at Bau was 1235 inches. The highest recorded in 24 hours was 2 84 inches and the daily average was -10 of an inch. The rainfall at Dahan Rubber Estates amounted to 1810 inches. The weather during the last ten days of the month was hot and dry, quite unlike normal January weather The Land Dyaks are complaining that this unseasonable weather is likely to have a bad effeei on their padi crop this year.
Gold Mining.—The Jambusan Gold Mining Company surrendered their lease during the month.
Five Exclusive Prospecting Licences and two Mining Leases were issued during the month.
The actual production of gold for Upper Sarawak for the month of December. 1934, amounted to 2,083 ounces.
The actual gold obtained by the following companies during the mouth of December, 1934, was :—
Esher
When Cburcbyardi
Yawn
Veuctian Blinds
The Bronze Age
... Maurice V. Brett B-b 447 Cynthia Asquith F-a 485
Ethel Mannin F-m 14/
V. Gordon Childe 9c-c 191
W
(6)
The Sarawak Mining
Syndicate, Limited
The Kuching Gold Mining
Company, Limited
The Borneo Gold Mining
Syndicate
The Thye Yick Gold Mining Company
The Nam Loong Gold Mining
Company
415'28 Oze.
2419
155 64
155'4
139'75
Sadong District.
December, 1934.
The Acting Assistant District Officer, Mr. F. L. G. Crossley, reports :—
Agriculture.—The heavy rainfall, 37’51 inches for the month, dues not appear to have affected adversely the prospects of a good padi crop. Good reports have been received from the Sadong and Samarahan rivers, while n welcome absence of pests is noted. Some of the Land-Dyak crops above Tebekung, on low lying river-side land, have been destroyed by floods, but prospects on the whole are good.
Public Works.—Clearing work for the new Station at Serial! was continued, this time on the Kuching side of the Sadong river. The previously approved site for the bazaar on the river-hank is liable to be flooded, and is also objected to by the Chinese, who wish all shops to border the main road. The difficulty is to find sufficient high land bordering the road and not too far from the river, which will form the main water-supply. After three separate inspections with the Resident, accompanied on one occasion by Mr. R E. Edwards of the Public Works Department, a site about j mile from the river on the Kuching side was provisionally approved.
January, 1935.
Agriculture.—Prospects for the padi-crop are still good, though low lying farms which were badly flooded in December and at the beginning of this month are suffering badly from ulat. Rainfall for the month was 14’48 inches. There was no rain after the 20th of the month.
Soccer.
Kuching 3.
H.M.S. Falmouth 0.
On Tuesday 5th February. for the second time within the space of a few weeks, Kuching had the opportunity of testing their strength against a team representing the crew of a ship attached to the China Station.
On this occasion the. ship was the H.M.S. Falmouth and we think we may safely my that this team, in spite of losing by the margin of three goals to nil, was the best Ship's eleven we have had the opportunity of seeing in Sarawak for some considerable time.
The game took place on the Padungan ground under ideal conditions la-fore a large gathering of spectators.
The teams lined up as follows :—
Kuching :—Chiang Khoon ; Kun Hiu, W. .1. Chater; Eng Seng, Francis Tun. Yahya ; Pvee, Stephen Harry, Yaw Joo, Michael Juan. Weng Sheng.
H.M.S. Falmouth :—1’eploc: Nicholson. Reid ; Bastable, Lewis, Ware; Roach, Dr Bertram, Hayes, Livesey, Adams.
Referee :—D. McDonald.
Kuching won the toss and elected to kick with the aun. Both teams took some time to settle down and for the first quarter of an hour there was little to choose between them. Each defence in turn stubbornly resisted the attacks of the opposing forwards and it was apparently from an early stage that there were not going to be very many goals scored in this game. It was not until well into the first half that Kuching gained the ascendancy over their opponents principally through the superior play of their half-back line. In fact. More half time arrived, the triangular movements and interchanging of positions between the latter and the Kuching forwards thoroughly nonplussed the Falmouth defenders who were kept moving at top speed while the Kuching players were practically standing still. About ten minutes before half time Michael Juan received the ball a few yards from the visitor's goal. Finding” his path blocked by several of the opposing side, he manoeuvred for position skilfully and succeeded in finishing up with a good shot that entered the goal just inside the foot of the far upright.
After several more dangerous raids on the part of the Kuching forwards and many excellent saves by the Ship's goalkeeper, Stephen Harry dribbled the ball down the wing and centred low and square across tin- Ship's goal-mouth to Yaw Joo, who had positioned himself well to receive the pass and found no difficulty in increasing Kuching's lead to two. Half time arrived without any further scoring.
On the resumption of play the Falmouth team penned the Kuching side in their own half and looked as though they were going to give the latter a hard fight to retain their lead. The Ship's offside tactics in this half threw the Kuching forwards completely out of their stride and in spite of their superior speed they found it impossible to make any headway against these methods, allowing their overeagerness to let them full time and time again into the traps set by the Falmouth backs. Once, however. Y'aw Joo succeeded in breaking away but the goalkeeper rushed out and made an excellent save by throwing himself at the oncoming forward's feet and smothering his shot. The Falmouth's goalkeeper, we must mention, played a sterling game, especially towards the end when Kuching were pressing hard. At this stage some of his plucky and timely saves sent the crowd hysterical with delight.
Kuching's last goal came as the result of a neat movement between Yahya and Weng Sheng. The interchanging of positions between these two players left tlie Falmouth defence spreadcagled and enabled Yahya to run the ball almost up to the goal Une before centring high across the goal-mouth to Pa-ee, who. anticipating the move, dashed in from the opposite wing to meet the Ball on the bounce with I his head and send it into the top of tlie net at a I terrific pace.
Kuching's superior ball control, speed and the better understanding between their players won the day.
kuching 2nd XI 3 H.M.S. Falmouth 4.
On Wednesday 6thFebruary, a Kuching 2nd XI met H.M.S. Falmouth's team on the Padungan ground. The latter with six changes in the team that lost on the previous day had the satisfaction, on this occasion, of winning deservedly by four goals to three. Conditions were ideal and a large crowd of spectators gathered again to witness the match.
Kuching opened the scoring in the first five minutes with a goal from John Luke. Following the resultant kick off the Falmouth team pressed hard and nearly succeeded in scoring with a good shot from Lewis which the Kuching goalkeeper did well to save. A few minutes later Hayes dribbled through on Ins own and ran the ball into tlie net to make the score 1- 1.
Almost immediately Parramore added a second goal for the visitors who from this stage were always slightly the better team. Following this Kuching looked like scoring from a break away but Anthony Harry was ruled off-side. Brodie who was the most out standing player on the Kuching side, then had the satisfaction of scoring Kuching's second goal with n good hard shot from the wing. At this stage Brodie was sending across several dangerous centres which the Kuching forwards might have turned into good account only for the close marking of the Falmouth half backs, who cleverly broke up many dangerous movements. A few minutes before half time. Parramore. who had been working hard on the visitors right wing, centred for Hayes to score the Falmouth third goal. Half time arrived with the score still 3—2 in favour of the visitors.
On the resumption of play Kuching came more into the picture and following a hard shot by de Vos, Anthony Harry just managed to reach the ball as it rebounded off the Falmouth goalkeeper to score Kuching's third goal. Shortly after this Deli was penalised for a foul in the Kuching goalmouth but the resulting penalty kick was well saved by Abang, who succeeded in reaching the hall and diverting it round the post at the expense of a corner.
In the latter part of the second half Kuching made repeated efforts to break away and might have succeeded on one occasion, only for Anthony Harry falling into an off-side trap. De Vos was given one or two good opportunities to score at this stage but his shots were mostly off the mark. The last goal of the match came as the result of a miskick by Deli in the Kuching goal area. Hayes who was following up strongly had no difficulty in gaining possession and placed the ball calmly into the side of the net. The final whistle went with Kuching still pressing.
The Kuching XI proved most disappointing on the whole, but had the defence played up to the standard of the attack there might have been a different story to tell.
Wricon, the Falmouth's centre half, was the most outstanding player on the field, and it was easy to understand why the Hong Kong selectors had honoured him recently with the captaincy of I the Small Ships XI.
Mr. McDonald refereed and the teams were
H.M.S. Falmouth:—Peploe; Nicholson. Ha- therley; May. Wrieon, Lewis; Parramore. Bertram, Hayes, Gillespie and Adams.
Kuching:—Abang: Deli, Buang; Liang Seng. Buxton, Salleh; Jolin Luke, De Vos. Amit. Anthony Harry and Brodie
Engkilili District.
January, 1935.
The. Assistant District Officer, Mr. E. II, Elam, reports —
Agriculture.—The long drought is sadly affecting the padi and unless it breaks very shortly the padi crops, which up till this mouth had been doing well, Will be turned, especially the hill padi.
Mukah District.
January, 1935.
Biintulu District.
January, 1935.
The Acting District Officer, Mr. L. K. Morse, roports:—
Trade.—The price of sago rose to over fifty cents at one period during the month but fell to thirty odd towards the end of January.
Rnbber varied between seventeen and eighteen cents per catty.
P. IF.T .—Messrs. Brooke and Bormond arrived in Mukah on the 23rd January, and the work of electrifying the Mukah Waterworks commenced. Two fitters from the Brooke Dockyard came from Kuching to assist.
Al the end of the month the new engine was installed in the Power-house, and had been tested out The erection of the transmission line and the installation of the pumps was proceeding with all speed
Kapit and Song.
January. 1935.
The Acting Assistant District Officer, Mr. F. A.
Moore, reports :—
Trade.—Fifty-one sub-licences were issued to
heads of Dyak working parties logging above Kapit,
i.e., Lee Hua 38, United Timber 12 and Kanowit
Mills one. Over 200 logs came down during the
first half of the month during high water.
The price of damar has fallen during the last
month and the Dyak gets very little return for bis
two or three years' work in the Ulu Rejang.
Oya and Dalat.
January, 1985.
The Officer-in-Cliarge, Mr. D. R. Lascelles,
reports:—
Obituary. Awang Rais died on the. 24th at Kam-
pong Oya. Over 60 years of age, he had been
juragan of the Kim Chin Seng for many years.
He was always very obliging and was well liked by
everyone.
Agriculture.—Reports on Dyak padi are very
depressing and the almost record floods of December
appear to have done inestimable harm ; the jagong
also is only doing moderately well.
Trade.—Until almost the end of the month raw
sago averaged the high price of 62 cents per passu
in the Sungei Kut but the price suddenly dropped
to 36 cents in less than 48 hours. No one
appears to know the reason for this sudden fall but
possibly the rumour of sago factories at Sungei Kut
