The Sarawak Gazette
MONDAY. APRIL 1st. 1935.
Birth.
On the 25th February to the wife of Abang Abdul Latip, Sibu, a daughter.
Acknowledgment -
Mr. Thng Ek Long and brother, and their families beg to tender their thanks to all friends end relatives who sent wreaths, enrolls and letters. of condolence during their recent bereavement, and also those who attended their mothers funeral on 10th March, 1985.
...	March.
...
Her Highness the Ranee, accompanied by “ os Dayang Elizabeth and Lady Patricia Mackay, left for Singapore by the Vyntr
, Brooke at daybreak on March 7th. All three
are flying home, and left Alor Star by an Imperial Airways plane on March 11th.
so We wish them a sate and pleasant journey 51 and a speedy return to Sarawak.
We take this opportunity of informing 5? ' those who may wish to follow Her Highness'
example in travelling to England by air that - “ . their passports must be valid for all countries 55 covered during the course of the flight, and
I must also bear transit visas for Iraq and Egypt.
Incidentally, we read in the Straits Times that owing to the Greek rising, civil aircraft have been prohibited from crossing Greek territory until further notice. Imperial Airways are making arrangements through the courtesy of the Italian Government to operate the Ear Eastern Empire Service by way of Malta, Benghazi, and Tobruk, to Alexandria, where the normal route will be resumed. We hope that Her Highness the Ranee will not lie (—or rather, has not been—) subjected to any delay or inconvenience as a result of this unforeseen detour.
Her Highness the Ranee, Lord and Lady i Inchcape. Lady Patricia Mackay, Dayang ‘ Elizabeth and Dayang Valerie spent the first week-end of the month at Sibu Laut, where they occupied His Highness the Rajah’s new bungalow. On the evening of March 4th, they were met at Pulo Salak by His Highness the Rajah in H.H.M.Y. Ufaimuna, and on the following morning most of the party attended a tuna fishing at Sungei Tiram. In spite of an unpropitious start, due probably to
a heavy fall of rain during the night, results '
were satisfactory, numbers of manehong
and other sizeable fish falling to the spears of
those participating. The largest catch of the
morning was a malang weighing perhaps
thirty katis, which was speared in the
shallows by the river-hank. The Datus, who
were responsible for all the arrangements,
were thanked by Her Highness the Ranee for
providing a most entertaining morning’s
sport.
On the evening of February 28th Messrs. Kurahara. Takasaki and Miyachi were the guests of Their Highnesses the Rajah and Ranee at a small dinner party at Astana. They presented Lord and Lady Inchcape on behalf of the Japanese community with gifts of exquisite lacquer-work, and after wards Mr. Kurahara made a short speech of welcome to which Lord Inchcape replied. Dinner was followed by a spectacular display of fireworks.
We are informed that while in Singapore, Her Highness the Ranee, Dayang Elizabeth and Lady Patricia Mackay were entertained to luncheon at the Garden Club, China Building. by Mr. Wee Kheng Chiang, of the Biau Chiang Bank, Kuching. About ten Chinese merchants who are interested in Sarawak were present.
A farewell dance to the Earl and Countess
of Inchcape was given at the Residency on
the evening of March 8th, and was a great
success. About ninety Europeans enjoyed
Mr. and Mrs. Dick’s hospitality on this
occasion, and dancing continued until the;
small hours. The music was provided by G. I
Solosa and His Band.	’ j
Mr. A. Hannigan, Manager, Messrs. Sime,
Darby & Co.. Ltd., left for home on March
7th. We wish both Mr. and Mrs. Hannigan
a pleasant journey and a good leave, and we
hope that they will not forget the many
friends they have left behind them in
Kuching. Mr. Hannigan’s place is taken by
Mr. G. J. Dickson, who comes to us from I
Malacca.
Messrs. E. M. Selous and J. C. H. Barcroft returned from furlough by the Vyner Brooke on March 4th. Mr. Barcroft has gone to Engkilili as Assistant District Officer, and Mr. Selous has been posted to the Secretariat for Chinese Affairs.
Lord and Lady Inchcape visited the Batang Lupar in the Maimuna on March 6th. They were met at Lingga bv Mr. E. O. Bruce, Acting Resident. Second Division, and made a short journey up the Lingga River by launch. They returned to Kuching on the following day.
An informal dance was given at the
Sarawak Club on the evening of March 6th.
Dancing was preceded by a programme of
music rendered by the 'Kuching Military
Band.
Lord and Lady Inchcape left for Singapore
by the Darrel on March 9th. We understand
that they propose to return to Europe via
Burma and India, and we hope that it will
not be long before we see them back again in
Sarawak.
Dayang Valerie and Mr. James Brooke, who sailed by the same vessel, will be accompanied to England by Capt. and Mrs. Lowe, who are going home on furlough. They take with them our best wishes for a pleasant leave.
The Right. Reverend the Bishop of Labium and Sarawak returned to Kuching from Miri by the Darrel on March 9th.
The Sylvia Cinema continues to prove a great attraction, large audiences being the rule rather than the exception. There is no doubt that this cinema has added enormously : to the amenities of Kuching.
Reports that engkabang trees are in blossom have been received from a number of outstations. There appears to be some prospect of a crop this year, but engkabang is nothing if not erratic, and it is quite probable that this promise will remain unfulfilled.
Mr. W. H. Potter, of the Sarawak Timber
and Trading Co., returned to Kuching by the
Darrel on March 19th after a stay in England
of only five weeks. Mr. Potter is proceeding
immediately to Bintulu, where he will resume
the management of the Company's interests.
We are informed that His Highness the
Rajah has decided to erect a tablet in Sibu to
commemorate the work of the late Rev. J. M.
Hoover. We print below an extract from a
letter on this subject from the Government
Secretary to the Rev. Edwin Lee, Resident
Bishop of the Methodist Episcopal Church
in Malaya:—
“His Highness desires me to say that he
cannot allow this occasion to pass without
putting on record his appreciation of all
that Mr. Hoover did for Sarawak. In his
work and lasting achievements in this
country Mr. Hoover has a monument finer
and more enduring than any that could be
designed by the friends he has left behind
him, but, at the same time, I believe that it
is His Highness the Rajah’s intention to
erect in Sibu a memorial tablet recording
Mr. Hoover’s splendid services to the State.
Mr. Hoover was so closely identified with
the life of Sibu Island that the establish-
ment there of a small tribute to his memory
would be a fitting mark of the respect in
which he was held by all races and com-
munities.
This tablet is not supposed to take the place of any memorial that may be erected by public subscription, hut is being put up by His Highness the Rajah as a personal mark of appreciation of Mr. Hoover's loyalty and services to the State.
Visitors to Kuching during the month included Mr. and Mrs. ,1. M. Sime, of Singapore. Mr. Sime is Chairman of Messrs. Sime Darby & Co., Ltd.
The examinations for Government officers, which were held in Kuching from March 11th to 13th, were attended by Messrs. J. R. Out- ram, A. G. Taylor and F. R. K. Kitto.
We publish the following an noun cement, which is taken from The Times of February 14th
Ma. H. L. Owen and E. A. Whkri.sk.
The engagement is announced between Hugh Lewis Owen. Sarawak Civil Service (Retd.I. fourth son of the late Rev. I). M. Owen, of Tiverton, and Ethel Alberta, younger daughter of the late H. E. Weclcr. of Eastleigh.
Mr. Owen served in Sarawak from 1901 to to 1929, retiring at the beginning of that year as Resident. Third Division We extend our heartiest congratulations to him.
One or two Malay “Talkies” have recently been shewn at the Lilian Theatre. Kuching, and have had encouraging receptions.
Mr. E. H. Elam spent a few days in Kuching on his way to Sadong, where he is to take over from Mr. F. I.. Crossley as Assistant District Officer.
His Highness the Rajah visited the Saribas and Kalaka rivers in H.H.M.Y. Maimuna from March 19th to 22nd. His 11 ighness was accompanied by Mr. H. B. Crocker, Acting Government Secretary, and by Mr. C. D. I-e Gros Clark, Secretary for Chinese Affairs.
Among Administrative officers to be transferred during the month were Mr. H. E. Cutfield, who went to Simanggang on March 25th to take over the duties of Acting Resident. Second Division, and Mr. E. O. Bruce, who is to act as Resident, Fourth Division, during the absence on leave of Mr. J. B. Archer, and who left for that station in the Maimuna after handing over the Second Division to Mr. Cutfield.
Sir Adam and Lady Ritchie arrived in Kuching by the Darrel on March 18th. Sir Adam, who is Chairman and Managing Director of Messrs, the Borneo Co., Ltd., had just completed a tour of the Company’s branches in Siam and Malaya. Sir Adam and Lady Ritchie left by the Marudu on March 23rd for Sumatra, en route for Europe. This is Lady Ritchie’s first visit to Sarawak.
Advice has been received by telegram that both Mr. J. L. Noakes and Mr. D. L. Leach, of the Land and Survey Department, are being married before returning from furlough. Further details are not yet available.
Colonel J. F. Turner, Director of Works and Buildings, Air Ministry, arrived at Pending on March 19th by flying-boat on a tour of inspection of possible landing-ground sites in Sarawak and British North Borneo. Colonel Turner left the next day for Bintulu, stopping at Oya and Mukah on the way. From Bintulu. where he stayed the night, he went on to Miri and British North Borneo.
On the return journey, the flying-boat was forced to land at Labuan with a damaged propeller. Temporary repairs were effected, am! Colonel Turner reached Kuching safely on March 24th to find awaiting him a spare propeller, which had been brought over from Singapore by another living-boat. Both planes left for Singapore early the following morning.
Colonel Turner’s visit gives prominence to the reports that rapid expansion in air mail and transport services throughout, the Far East is impending. It appears likely that before very long, the arrival of the mail at Kuching will lx? signalled, not by the sound of a gun fired from the Fort, or the toot of the Vyner Brooke’s syren, but by the drone of a plane circling over the town before landing at the seventh mile.
We read in the British North Borneo Herald that a new edition of the Handbook of the State of North Borneo is now available, price -31. This publication, which has been revised’ to cover developments up to September, 1934, can he obtained from the Government Printing Office, Jesselton, The State Museum. Sandakan, or from the London Offices of the Chartered Company.
The Race-course was opened for training on the morning of 16th March. In spite of heavy rains during the preceding fortnight the course was in excellent condition, and some very satisfactory times were recorded.
It is pleasing to note the introduction of new' blood for the coming meeting—surely a sign of ihe times—and racing in the third division, with a probable field of fourteen, promises to be particularly keen.
We understand that much is expected of the newly-imported Sintak Bulan, Happy Boy, King Kong and Bunga Api, all of whom have shewn most encouraging times in their training. The first-named has proved j to be an exceptionally speedy pony over short distances.
On March 26th and 27th a most enjoyable concert was given at the Lilian Theatre Hall by the pupils of the Koong Min School, ; Kuching. There were no less than thirty- six items on the programme, which was divided equally into Chinese, Malay and English “turns.'’ It is no small feat for school children to be able to perform in three languages, and the organizers of this concert deserve great credit for a successful evening’s entertainment. It was successful, too, in more ways than one, for we understand that the funds of the school benefited con- ; siderablv from the financial result of the two performances.
After editing the Sarawak Gazette for over three years, Mr. R. E. Le Sueur, owing to pressure of work prior to his departure on furlough, has been compelled to relinquish the editorial chair. He deserves our thanks for the able manner in which he has conducted the paper, and he takes with him our best, wishes for a well-earned leave. We shall miss his cheerful presence in the club as much as we shall miss his curries, and that is saying a good deal.
Departure of His Highness
the Rajah.
We are informed that His Highness the Rajah proposes to leave Kuching by the Marudu on May -Ith in order to catch the homeward-bounci I’. 4- O. Hanchi in Singapore. His Highness expects to return to Sarawak by the end of July, or the beginning of August.
His Highness the Tuan Muda is due to leave England by the Rujputana sailing from England on April 12th. His Highness will meet His Highness the Rajah at Penang on May 9th.
Nazi Germany, March- July, 1934.
SOME IMPRESSIONS AND A DEFENCE.
I arrived in Berlin by aeroplane m the Spring of 1934, and was fortunate enough to have friends there who were glad to put me up. During my five months' stay in Germany I spent part of my time in Baden, part in the Rhineland, a large part in Bavaria, and some in Leipzig. During the whole of my visit I had a rattling good time, but I I noticed all the way through that being an Englishman, the Germans seemed delighted to entertain me; indeed, they did so to a degree that made me think for a moment. It seemed out of all proportion, and led me to believe that they were trying to curry favour with me just because 1 was English.—in the hope, I imagine, that I would take away with me a good impression of their country.
Well, if that was their idea, they certainly succeeded. It is very pleasant to be an Englishman in Germany, but when conversation turns on the French, remarks are made which are usually quite unprintable, and discussion of that particular topic is best avoided. And anyway, I, being, I hope, ! a normal citizen, did not press politics too far. but ;
went about Germany seeing what I could, making inquiries, and enjoying myself; and it is worth noting that I was never once molested by any uniformed—or other—Nazis.
Naturally one of the things that strikes one on entering Germany is the profusion of uniforms in the streets. These, to English minds, at once suggest militarism. and put our backs up. But one must remember that just as militarism is foreign to all English ideas, so it is in keeping with those of the Germans. They have a militarist tradition. They love to play at soldiers, and it doesn't do any real harm to anybody. And after all, who are the men inside the uniforms? From my observations, I should say that seventy-five per cent, of them are unemployed men whom Government wish to train physically and keep contented, so that there shall be no chance of the appalling chaos of 1930 being repeated. As long as these young men have something to keep them busy, they will not group together and talk the kind of hot-air which is so often of a highly subversive nature. Also, they will not lose their morale. We, in England, have social service centres for the unemployed,—in Germany they have the storm troops, and the various youth organizations. It is simply a difference of method.
A nation's backbone is its youth, and a survey
of post-war Germany shews what a decadent crowd
the younger generation of Germans was becoming.
Lawlessness and even murder were rife before 1932;
one has only to read the newspapers of that date to
find out just how rife, and even to-day one still .
finds steel bars across the entrances of houses.
When one inquires what they are for, one is told
that, one would not ask that question if one had
been there in 1929—1931.
The Hitler regime has come in for a lot of
criticism lately, some of it rather immoderate, but
one must bear in mind that there are always two
sides to every question. When Hitler assumed
power in March, 1933, Germany was at her lowest
ebb, and she can think herself lucky that such a
patriot should have been at hand when she needed
him most. That he has courage, no one can deny. ;
—for how many years had ho fought a losing battle, been imprisoned, and seen his followers j
cut down literally before his eyes? He must have seen that his country was in desperate straits and
could not possibly be worse off than it was. and
that, I am convinced, is the explanation of his I
actions. "You sec what a mess you have got
yourself into," he said, in effect. "Well, now that
you have elected me. 1 can't make it any worse,
and I am going to have a damned good try to make
it better. You have got to listen to me. got to. do
you understand?—And until I am thrown out, I
intend to rule Germany, and weld it together again j
into strong and compact polity."
This is admittedly dictatorship, and dictatorship
if abused can degenerate into an abominable
tyranny. But Hitler's obvious sincerity will prevent this. He has no selfish ambitions whatever. I
His one aim is the resurrection of his country.
It is true that his methods of government are
completely alien to all accepted democratic ideas, i
but remember that our own history is not altogether
innocent of dictatorships.—there was Cromwell, for
instance. We have achieved liberty through
centuries of constitutional government : Germany
has only been a nation for seventy-five years, so it
is hardly fair to compare the parliamentary system
which we have gradually evolved with her emer-
gency methods of government. The English have
a knack of calling attention to the mote in their
neighbour’s eye while conveniently forgetting the
beam in their own. The summary executions of
June 30th were admittedly horrify mg to mild and
humane people, hut in the eyes of the vast majority
of Germans they were necessary to save the State,
and were therefore justified. And after all, what
about Ireland in 1921, with its pretty little tangle
of Black-and-Tans, Free Staters, Auxiliaries, and
Republicans? Were the executions in Germany
any worse than our frequent reprisals on the Irish
"rebels"?
Looked at from this point of view, the events of
June 30th do not appear so very terrible. after all.
And in any case, what on earth had they to do
with us? What right had we, who are so morbidly
sensitive to foreign criticism of, say, our actions in
India, to revile the German Government for their
method of tackling a purely domestic problem?
Yet unfortunately June 30th was a terrible set-
back to the friendly relations of the two countries.
Hitler the gangster,—Hitler the bloodthirsty
ruffian, the violent rogue,—these were a few of the
effusions of our press that had such a disastrous
effect on public opinion throughout Germany.
I happened to be on a short visit to England in
the early part of July, and read many accounts of
the memorable 30th June in various newspapers.
There were two whose virulent attacks on Hitler
quite captured my attention,—in fact they nearly converted me, until I happened to notice that they were the very papers whose correspondents had been asked to leave Germany some time before. Their papers therefore had axes to grind, and they ground them with vigour, irrespective of the effect that tho grinding might have on the relations between two great powers, and consequently on the peace of the world. So much for the sensation press.
As it happened. I was lucky enough to meet the two correspondents in question, and I must admit that if I had been ruling any country in which they were operating, one of my first acts would have been to throw them out. But the papers that employed them hail lost a valuable source of "copy." (I cannot call it "news”), and when a chance came to hit back, they took it, with all the unscrupulousness that one might have expected from them. Their head-lines brayed to their millions of renders a distorted version of what had taken place which had been compiled without any examination of proofs or evidence, and the result was an estrangement between two great and friendly people (related, indeed, by blood) which may bo permanent. It is a moot point which is the more harmful, the rigid censorship which is imposed on the German press. or the uncontrolled licence of i its English counterpart.
Germany, with its aims and ambitions, is mis- understood in England, and the yellow press is to blame I am convinced that Hitler is sincere when he says that the German people desires peace.
It is all very well for us to bleat of the evils of dictatorship and aggressive nationalism; since the Stuarts, we have had a reasonably representative Government, and an unbroken line'of Kings while Germany is still fighting the ills of national infancy, I with no national history to guide her, and no traditions to mould her character. It is time that, she had a fair deal. Germany has her colonies taken from her: just try and think what we should be Without ours, and how we should fare I We should sink at once to the position of a third,—no. a sixthclass. power. Germany is struggling for a "new deal and she has got to have it, if there is any longer any justice in the world, and if the peace of Europe is to be maintained.
I only wish that more Englishmen would do what 1 did, and venture abroad to Germany. Believe me It is not a land of ogres and tyrants; it is a really peaceful country, anxious to come to an understanding with the rest of the world. Visit Oberammergau. and try and find the aggressive Nazi-ism we hear so much about. Go to the villages, which are the reel soul of Germany, and see how much they care about uniforms, or marching and countermarching. or ’Heil Hitler’ and all the rest of it. 1 he peasants are Nazis by conviction because thev have derived tangible benefits from Nazi rule and for no other reason. And they remain most charming and hospitable people, just as glad to welcome a foreigner as they would be to salute the most heel- chcking storm-trooper or Reichswehr man. And do not forget that most of the commercial firms are Nazis for very similar reasons.—because, in other words, their turn-over has been doubled since 1932 Why not support the Nazi Government if it has brought you security and increased prosperity? It does not follow that to be a Nazi you must wear a uniform and a revolver, goose-step down the street, and be ready to beat-np the first Jew you meet without provocation : many business men are Nazis, as I know from my own experience, yet they wear no uniforms, and count a number of .Tews among their friends. They are grateful for a strong and determined Government, and not unnaturally, being patriots as well as profit-makers, they are prepared to do their utmost to support a regime which they are sure is the only hope of their country.In conclusion, I can only say. don't listen to the yellow press, but go to Germany.—and see for yourself. You will return, if not a Nazi, at any rate filled with a considerable amount of sympathy for the Nazi outlook. Nowadays it is understanding of, and sympathy with, the other fellow's point of view that makes the wheels go round, and avoids that greatest of all catastrophes.—war.—E.U .E
Notes and Comments.
The question of wooden versus stone houses has again come to the fore, and controversy regarding the merits of each type of bungalow is at present raging. The case against the wooden house is that it is uneconomic in the long run; although comparatively cheap to build, its maintenance costs are heavy, and its life is limited, whereas once a stone or brick house has been erected (admittedly at a much greater cost), it needs little or no attention, and will last indefinitely. But, when one comes to examine the question, are the objections to a wooden bouse so serious as they appear at first sight? Most of us know of wooden buildings which ; have stood for twenty-five or thirty years, and which are still quite healthy . With ordinary care, I there appears to be no reason why they should not j continue to stand for many years to come. Timber I is admittedly subject to insect pests of various kinds , such as white ants and bubok, but these can usually be successfully combatted with paint or jodelite, , and there are one or two quite efficient wood preservatives on the market. And when all is said and done, the fact remains that the initial coat of a wooden house is usually less than half that of a masonry bungalow of the same dimensions. Which, after all, does count for a good deal.
And are maintenance costs really so persistently heavy as alleged? They need not be. if care is taken to see that only seasoned timber is used in
the first place, and if adequate supervision is
exercised during the work of building. This is
really the crux of the matter. Few building con-
tractors in Sarawak have sufficient capital to
enable them to carry adequate stocks of seasoned
timber. Their material, for the most part, is 1
purchased during the course of Construction, and
not unnaturally they buy in the cheapest market. (
The results of this become noticeable soon after the ,
house has been passed, and the contractor has
drawn his final payment. Planks warp and split,
gaps appear ominously in the walls, and truces of
faulty workmanship grow gradually apparent. A
few hundred dollars have to lie spent in putting all
this right, and once again the principle of wooden
houses receives a serious setback.
The solution would appear to rest in the gradual
acquisition of timber stocks by anyone who is
interested in building, and who foresees the likeli-
hood of an extensive programme of construction
or replacement. Timber should be purchased us
opportunity offers, with a view more to future needs
than immediate requirements; it should he ade-
quately stored, and then when a building has to be
put up. the builder has a stock of seasoned wood
to draw on, and can employ salaried carpenters
instead of contractors. There are plenty of expert
tukangs in tliis country who are very pleased to
work on a daily wage with one or two coolies to
assist them, and a promise of a bonus on completion of the job proves a great incentive to careful and honest workmanship. But, of course, supervision is necessary, though this as a rule should present little difficulty. This suggestion might be well worth the consideration of commercial firms, or, for that matter, of Government. We are fortunate in having an abundant supply of really first-rate
timber in Sarawak : why not use it?
All of which brings us to the question of what is
the most suitable type of house for the tropics.
Surely it is difficult to improve on the old-fashioned
wooden bungalow with deep eaves, and with a
verandah running all the way round it? Those of
us who are forced to live in the modern concrete
pill boxes look back on the days we spent in this
type of house with an affectionate longing.' There
is little, if any, glare; any breeze that there is
blows right through the house from end to end ;
and the verandah and eaves ensure that the sun
never strikes directly against the walls,.or only in
I he early morning and late evening, when it has
little of its real power. Compare this with the np-
to-date Hone or brick house of two storeys. The
walls are exposed all day to the full fury of the
son. one side receiving its attention in the morning,
the oilier during the afternoon. They absorb the
Is-at, and radiate it into the rooms even after dusk
lias fallen,—if anyone doubts this, let him place
his hand against the inner side of a brick wall at
o.O p.m. on a hot day. And the glare is appalling.
Curtains may do something to mitigate it, but not
much. Where there are no protecting eaves, and
no verandahs, the only effective way to avoid the
glare is to close the shutters, thereby darkening the
house and turning it into an oven by excluding all
breeze. No, if it comes to comfort, the old-
fashioned bungalow has it every time. Our fore-
fathers knew what they were about when they put
up their cool and shady residencies; and let us not
forget that they copied the design from the Malays,
who. after all, have been living in his country for
some hundreds of years, and who should therefore
know which type of house is best suited to it.
“This England.”
Under this heading, the New Statesman
and Nation prints every week a selection of
the choicest inanities which appear in the
contemporary press. The extracts which we
publish below give some idea of the heights
of inspired imbecility to which even the most
sedate journals can rise on occasion.
Refined young lady wanted immediately to im-
personate.Mae West, to advertise her new film.
Belle of the. 'Nineties.—Eastern Daily Press.
"No. manager would take me seriously. I even
darkened my hair to show that I have character and
brains.”—Miss Angela Joyce, ex-beauty Queen, in
an interview in the last Sunday Pictorial.
Much attention has been drawn to the Bishop of
London's statement that attempts are being made to
accustom the British public to semi-nudity on the
stage, which is foreign to English tradition. What
he said was taken down in shorthand, and will be
published soon after Christmas in the third book of
a series which he is bringing out on Questions of
the Day. It will be entitled Has the Kingdom of
Heaven Arrived’—Church Times.
For as that career began much earlier than 1908. when he was elected Member of Parliament for the Bewdley Division of Worcestershire; it began at Harrow, where, this unique personality entered the main stream of English tradition.
lie has himself said : “When the call came to me to form a Government, one of my first thoughts was that it should be a Government of which Harrow should not be ashamed."’
Stanley Baldwin has clung desperately—instinctively—to that thought throughout his political career.—Article in The Near East.
The Bible is the inspiration of Louis. He always reads it before entering the ring, and then, according to one of his seconds : 'All fortified and everything, he just wades in and knocks the other guy's block off."—Daily Express.
The epithet “bitch" has now been heard twice in one week from the West End stage, and has presumably been established in modern dialogue. —Daily Herald.
Prince Paul is known to be a firm friend of Great Britain. He prefers British engines for his son's nursery. Weekly Illustrated.
“I think it a disgrace that the Western Brothers should be allowed to pike full at all the best traditions of our great race. Cannot this sort of cheap humour be stopped? After listening-in to the performances of these young men, what possible conception can foreigners have of the true standards of English gentlemen?
Wellington said that 'the battle of Waterloo was won on Ilie playing fields of Eton.' What is good enough for the Iron Duke should be good enough for the Western Brothers." Retired Colonel in Pearson's Weekly.
My husband did not look any the worse for the punishment he received, although his face was bruised beyond recognition.—Case reported in Evening News.
6 Days Quicker to Far East.
GERMAN LINERS' BID FOR SUPREMACY.
Germany is shortly to begin her'great drive to secure supremacy in the express passenger and freight service to the Far East Early in May the Scharnhorst. first of the 18.000-ton turbo-electric ships specially built for this purpose, wilt sail on her maiden voyage. She will be followed a month later by the Potsdam and, in the autumn, by the Gneisenau.
These three North German Lloyd ships will maintain between European and Far Eastern ports n service unrivalled in speed and luxury, the route being arranged to include almost every port of importance on the high-way to the Far East.
On her outward voyage from Bremen the Scharnhorst will call at the ports :
Hamburg, Rotterdam, Southampton, Palma (Balearic Islands), Genoa. Port Said, Colombo, Penang, Singapore. Manila, Hong Kong. Shanghai, Yokohama, Kobe. On the homeward run from Kobe the route will he : Shanghai, Hong Kong, Manila, Singapore. Penang, Belawan, Colombo, Port Said. Marseilles, Barcelona, Palma. Southampton, Rotterdam, Hamburg, Bremen.
To signalize the importance of tins new express service Herr Hitler attended the launch of the Scharnhorst two months ago. From the speeches then delivered it is clear that Germany is out to capture the "blue riband” of the Far East, and her triumph would appear to be a foregone conclusion.
Au regards passenger accommodation the North German Lloyd claims that the new ships set an entirely new standard of luxury and comfort, never before approached by any ship operating to the Far East. Only first and tourist class will be carried, provision being made for 180 of the former and 140 of the latter. All cabins of both classes are outside, and I he, majority of the first class have private bath-rooms.
Electric welding has been widely used in the construction of the Scharnhorst and her two sisters, a method which has saved 600 tons of steel in each ship and a considerable gain in cargo space. Boilers working at very high pressure supply steam to the turbines which run the dynamos generating current lor the propeller motors.
Although the “service” speed is to be 21 knots, the ships are known to possess a reserve of power which would enable them, if necessary, to exceed this speed by a considerable margin. They will, it is claimed, reduce the voyage from Europe to the Far East by five or six days.
The Potsdam was originally laid down for the Hamlmrg-Amerika Line, but under a convention concluded a fortnight ago she has been transferred to the North German Lloyd, which will operate the three ships on a regular, high-speed schedule. —'.Straits Times.)
Pepper Questions in Commons.
EMPIRE PRODUCTION.
Several important questions concerning the recent pepper speculations and overseas trade were asked in the House of Commons yesterday.
Concerning [pepper, Air. Tom Smith (Lab., Normanton) asked the Secretary for the Colonies when he first received information of the speculative buying of pepper in an attempt to corner the supplies, whether he gave any warning to His Majesty's representatives in the Colonies likely to he affected: mid, if so, what was the nature of his warning.
Empire Production.
Mr. Paling (Lab., Wentworth) asked what was the approximate production of pepper within the British Empire, and what proportion, approximately, of the world production did it represent.
Mr. Paling also asked whether attention had been called to the heavy accumulations of stocks of pepper as the result of the recent attempts made to corner that commodity and what effect the accumulation was likely to have on pepper growers within the Empire; and whether he had any proposals for safeguarding the interests of the pepper growers.
Sir Philip Cunliffe-Lister, answering the three questions together, said : Exact figures of world product ion of pepper are not available. Figures for exports tire available, but appear to fluctuate considerably; in 1933 the exports from all producing countries amounted to approximately 51,000 tons.
Of these about 3,000 tons came from British India and 3,400 from the Colonial Empire. Of the latter, 3,360 tons came from Sarawak, which is the only important producer in the Colonial Empire.
Unaware of Speculation.
I was not aware of the speculation which was going on in pepper and 1 could not, therefore, give any warning to the Government of Sarawak. The present accumulation of stocks might obviously be expected to have a depressing effect on the price unless those stocks are strongly held. It is reported that arangements are being made in the trade for the holding and orderly disposal of the stocks, and it does not appear that any Government action to safeguard the interests of Empire producers of pepper is called for.—(Straits Times.)
from the following extract from the Second canto of “Bon Juan” :—
CLXX1X
But to return,	Get very drunk; and when
You wake with headache, you shall see what then !
CLXXX
Ring for your valet	bid him quickly bring
Some hock and soda-water, then you’ll know
A pleasure worthy Xerxes the great king;
For not the blest sherbet, sublimed with snow.
Nor the first sparkle of the desert-spring, Nor Burgundy in all its sunset glow, After long travel, ennui, love, or slaughter, Via with that draught of hock and soda- water I
So now yon know,	hock and soda-water is
the answer. Try it.
Mainly About Nothing.
BEAUTY TREATMENT FOR MEN.
Have you confidence in your face? Does the sight of your dial till you with the will Io succeed? If not, then read the following advertisement, which appeared in the Daily Telegraph
Face Confidence.—A Red Nose is a distinct drawback to your appearance and may have an adverse, effect on your business prospects. The only reliable method of treatment which will permanently correct this condition is given by. . .
The name of the firm concerned will be supplied on receipt of a stamped and addressed envelope. So don’t be diffident. Correct that Red Nose and see your profits climb sky-high !
A HAIR OF THE BOG	Most of us have our own ideas about. the most effective way of dealing with that "morning after" feeling. The choice of remedies is large, ranging from a tankard of 'black-velvet' to a ten mile walk followed by a swim. But some of us,—those of us, that is to say, who belong to what may be described as the sedentary school of thought, and to whom the mere suggestion of exercise in any form after a late night is anathema, are usually content to take our restoratives out of a glass, while cooling breezes from the fan play upon our fevered brows. Some of us go in for the conventional 'horse’s neck,’ others prefer a plain brandy and soda, with or without aspirin ; others again favour a gin-and- ginger, a gin-sling, or even a brandy cocktail—a nauseous milky mess, from which God protect us all. But Byron, who may with good reason claim to be an expert on this particular subject, had other, but very definite, ideas, if we may judge
EMPIRE STORY FOR MARCH.
Mr. Fostlethwaite, I regret that I must ask you to return to your bungalow and change into a costume more lifting to the occasion. The fact that we happen to live in the interior of Borneo is no excuse for disregarding the conventions, which, if I may say so, have done so much to make us British what we are, and without which civilization would rapidly degenerate into barbarism. The need for observing the usages of polite society becomes indeed more apparent when we inhabit the remote Outposts of Empire, since the slightest relaxation in this respect invariably precedes a general decline in morale which cannot but have an adverse effect upon the prestige of Government. All my life I have been accustomed to change for dinner, and I would as soon think of dining in a white suit as I would of going naked to the opera.
(An invisible orchestra softly plays the opening
bars of “Rule Britannia,")
When I am alone. I wear a dinner-jacket: when I have a guest, it is my rule to put on a tail coat and a white tie. It is a rule that I have never broken, and one which I expect my guests to observe with the same punctiliousness as I do myself.
I admit, Mr Postlethwaite, that you are only a planter, and that you have not had the advantages of n public-school and university education : and it is further apparent Hint you are not quite a gentleman. This is unfortunate, but if anything it only emphasizes the necessity for hastening now that social training that you should have received in vour youth. I must therefore insist that you comply with my wishes in this respect. My head boy will conduct you to your bicycle, and my chef shall be instructed to keep your soup hot for you. Good evening, Mr. Fostlethwaite; I hope that I shall be able to welcome you back in an hour’s time.
(The invisible orchestra resumes its playing of “Rule Britannia.'' which swells in a steady crescendo until the house is filled with the heart-stirring melody. In the background appear dimly the. figures of Mr. Rudyard Kipling and Sir Henry Newbolt,approval written in every line of their faces. They are superimposed on a composite picture of the Crystal Palace, the Albert Memorial, and the chapel of Eton College. From one corner of the room comes a sardonic chuckle. It emanates from Mr. Somerset Maugham, who is busy with a note-book.
An enormous bat flies slowly down the verandah. The music dies away, and all is silence.
First Division News.
February.
A fire occurred at a copra factory at the U mile, Rock Road, Kuching, during the small hours o: February lilt. The property destroyed was not of any particular value, but the owners were subsequently prosecuted for o breach of Municipal Regulations.
The Resident, First Division, and Mr. D. V. Murphy, Officer Superintending, Kuching Sector, Sarawak Constabulary, went to Lundu on the 7th in connection with the. case against ex-P.C. Uaop, who stole the Lundu safe. Usop was convicted and sentenced to 5 years' rigorous imprisonment, his accomplices Sa'at and Yahya being sent to prison for tliree years and two years respectively
In Kuching, two Chinese named Chong Tim and Kwan Fook were tried for the murder of one Phiong I’uk in March last year, and were sentenced to death. Their sentences were later commuted to 15 years’ rigorous imprisonment.
The Acting District Officer, Ban, reports that the Jagoi Land-Dayaks are growing very short of land for farming purposes, and are anxious to take up land across the Dutch border, where there is a large area of old jungle available. They were informed that permission for them to do this would have to be obtained from the Netherlands Judies authorities, and that in any case, if they farmed over the border, they were liable to find themselves paying two separate sets of taxes.
The Upper Sarawak Malay kampongs of Skunyit, Paluntan, Rembus and Lidah Tanah were visited luring the month by the Acting District Officer, who was informed that he was the first European Administrative officer to visit them within living memory.
Abang Osman, Officer-in-charge, Bau Constabulary District, made a round of the Jagoi Land- Dayak villages from the 13th to the 16th for the purpose of investigating the working of the border patrols and obtaining a first-hand knowledge of the mutes to and from Netherlands Indies territory.
The most interesting feature in connection with gold mining in tipper Sarawak during January was the astonishing success achieved by the Kim San Gold Mining Syndicate at Jebong. This syndicate, which had never before obtained more than 11)6 minces of gold, actually produced 442 ounces. This remarkable output was achieved at a relatively small cost by suspending leaching operations for two months while high grade ore was collected and stored. This is a method of working which might be adopted with advantage by other companies which are faced with the task of removing a large amount of overburden before obtaining their are.
The Acting Assistant District Officer, Sadong, reports with satisfaction that all the Sea-Dayaks in the Upper Samarahan and Tuang rivers have at last collected together into proper villages.
A total of twenty applications for shop-house lots at the proposed new Government Station at Serian have been received, and the list is now closed. Allotment will follow after demarcation by the Land Office.
The Acting Assistant District Officer, Lundu, reports that the general health of the district was unsatisfactory during the month, diarrhoea, dysentery, and fever being prevalent.
Examination Results.
. St. Thomas' School, Kuching.
Out of 20 candidates entered by St. Thomas’ School for the December, 1934, Cambridge Junior Examination, the following have been successful :—
1.Chee Shaw Fong
2.Chin Yim Fook
3.Paul Goh
4.P. Jong Kuet Siong
5.Jong Svn Choi
6. Lai En Phin
7.Law Lig Sia
8.Lim Beng Hap
9. Lim Eng Wan
10.Lim Ban Sing
11.Shim Phan Chi
12.Tan Nee Thong
13.Wong Mult Fu
14.Yeo Cheng Chin
St. Joseph’s School, Kuching.
Of the six candidates who sat for the Cambridge Junior Examinations December. 1934, the following passed :—
Yong Chao Chin Chang Chung T.iang Anthony (’hung Poh Su Juak Ng Shui Siong.
Sarawak Turf Club.
Minutes of a Meeting of the Commitee of
The Sarawak Tube Club held at tub
Sarawak Clur on 28th March, 1985,
at 6.15 F.M.
Present.—H. B. Crookcr, Esq. (in the Chair) Messrs. 'J'an Sum Guan, Chan Qui Chong, E. S. Holl, R. E. Lo Sueur and G. T. Bates.
Absent.—The Datu Shahbandar, Messrs. C. D. Adams, P. M. Adams, J. B. Archer and B. J. C. Spurway.
1.Accounts.—Audited accounts for the years
ending 31st December, 1983. and 31st December,
1931. were placed before the Committee. The
accounts were audited by Mr. W. Park of the
Chartered Bank.
2.Race Programme.—As there have been
several new donations of stake money it was decided
to rename some of the Races. The Revised Pro-
I gramme is :—
First Day.
Race No. 1. -The Tuan Muda’s Cup.
,.	2.—The Datus' Stakes.
3.—The Slump Stakes.
,,	4.—The	B.C.L.	Stakes.
,,	5. The	Malang	Stakes.
,,	0.—The	Pending	Stakes.
,,	7.—The	Ranee’s	Cup.
Second Day.
Race No. 1.—The Sarawak Steamship Co's
Stakes.
,,	2.—Messrs. Sime Darby & Co's
Stakes.
3. The Sarawak Stakes.
4.—The Jubilee Stakes.
5.—The States Sprint.
6.—The Turf Club Stakes.
,,	7.—The Rajah's Cup.
3.Selling Sweeps.—Proposed by Mr. Tan Sum
Guan and seconded by Mr. Chan Qui Chong that
Selling Lotteries be held on each race. Proposed
I y Mr Bales seconded by Capt. Le Sueur that
members be circularized. replies to be in by the
12th instant. Amendment passed. The Chair-
, man suggested that His Highness the Rajab’s
views shoukl I e obtained and this was agreed to.
4.Car Park.—The tender for clearing and
levelling the proposed car park received from Mr.
Lim Peng Mah for 3180 is accepted.
5.Cups.—The Secretaries informed the mcm-
hors that Cups had been ordered from Messrs. John
Little & Co.. Ltd., on approval, as usual.
6.Cash Sweeps.—Mr. Tan Sum Guau pro-
posed that the cash sweeps on each race should be
increased by 200 tickets. Seconded by Mr. Holl.
This was approved.
7.New Ponies.—The following new ponies
were classified :—
Sintak Bulan ... 12.2J Division III
Happy Boy ... 13.1.1	II
8.Gates al Road.—A letter from the Acting
Municipal Commissioner was read and it was
agreed to widen the gates where the Course
crosses the Pending Road.
9.Cash and Unlimited Sweeps.—Mr. Tan Sum
Guan asked that on the programme the words
"Honorary Supervisor-’ should be printed after his
name as otherwise people thought he and Mr.
Taylor were being paid for their services.
Approved.
Sarawak Turf Club.
Second Day, Monday, 29th April, 1935.
Provisional Programme for the Spring
Mewing, 1935.
First Day, Saturday, 27th April, 1935.
Race No. 1	[2.30 p.m.
THE TUAN MUDA’S CUP.
Value $250. A piece of plate of the value of $100 presented by His Highness the Tuan Muda with $150 added. Second to receive $100. Third $40.
A handicap for Division I ponies. Distance 0 furlongs. Entrance Fee $10.
Race No. 2	[3.0 p.m.
THE DATES' STAKES.
Value $250. $50 presented by the Datus with $200 added. Second to receive $100. Third $40.
A handicap for Division II ponies. Distance 5 furlongs. Entrance Fee $10.
Race No. 3	[3.30 p.m.
THE SLUMP STAKES.
Value $250. Second to receive $100. Third $40.
A handicap for Division 111 ponies. Distance 6 furlongs. Entrance Fee $10.
Race No. 4	[4.0 p.m.
Race No. 1	[2.30 p.m.
I THE SARAWAK STEAMSHIP COMPANY'S STAKES.
Value $250. $150 presented by The Sarawak Steamship Company Limited, with $100 added. I Second Io receive $100. Third $40.
A handicap for Division I ponies. Distance 5 furlongs. Entrance Fee $10.
Race No. 2	[3.0 p.m.
MESSRS. SIME DABBY & COMPANY'S
STAKES.
Value $250. $50 presented by Messrs. Sime Darby .& Co., Ltd., with $200 added. Second to receive $100. Third $40.
A handicap for Division II ponies. Distance 6 furlongs. Entrance Fee $10.
Race No. 3	[3.30 p.m.
THE SARAWAK STAKES.
Value $250. Second to receive $100. Third I $40.
A handicap for Division HI ironies. Distance 5 furlongs. Entrance Fee $10.
Rack No. 4	[4.0 p.m.
THE JUBILEE STAKES.
THE B.C.L. STAKES.
Value $250. $50 presented hy The Borneo Company Limited, with $200 added. Second to receive $100. Third $40.
A handicap for Division I ponies. Distance 3 furlongs. Entrance Fee $10.
Race No. 5	[4.30 p.m.
THE MATANG STAKES.
Value $250. Second to receive $100 Third $40.
A handicap for Division II ponies. Distance 4 furlongs. Entrance Fee $10.
Value $250. Second to receive $100. Third $40.
A handicap for Division I ponies. Distance 4 furlongs. Entrance Fee $10.
Rack No. 5	[4.80 p.m.
THE STATES SPRINT.
Value $250. Second to receive $100. Third $40.
A handicap for Division II ponies. Distance 3 ; furlongs. Entrance Fee $10.
I
Race No. 6	[5.0 p.m.
Race No. 6
[5.0 p.m.
THE TURE CLUB STAKES.
THE PENDING STAKES.
Value $250. Second to receive $100. Third $40.
A handicap for Division III ponies. Distance 3 furlongs. Entrance Fee $10.
Rack No. 7	[5.30 p.m.
THE RANEE'S CUP.
Value $250. A piece of plate of the value of $100 presented by Her Highness the Ranee with $150 added. Second to receive $100. Third $40.
A handicap for ponies of any Division. Distance 1 mile. Entrance Fee $10. $5 refunded to non- ncceptors. Handicap published on the Course. Post Entries allowed at $20 but no refund.
Value $250. Second to receive $100. Third $40.
A handicap for Division III ponies. Distance 4 furlongs. Entrance Fee $10.
Rack No. 7	[5.30 p.m.
THE RAJAH'S CUP.
Value $300. A piece of plate value $150 presented by His Highness the Rajah with $150 added. Second to receive $100. Third $40.
A handicap for ponies of any Division. Distance Round the course (about 1 1/3 Miles!. Entrance Fee $10. $5 refunded to non-acceptors. Handicap published on the Course. Post Entries allowed at $20 but no refund. No refund after publication of weights.
REGULATIONS.
Classification fob Spring Meeting, 1935.
REGISTERED Ponies AND OWNERS.
DIVISION I.
Pony.
Owner.
1.Flying Fox
2.Kim Mah
Penalties.—Winners of any race at this Meeting
after publication of weights shall carry a penalty of
7 lbs. for each race with a maximum of 11 atone
7 lbs.
Allowance.—Professional Jockeys who are Sara-
wak subjects and have not ridden more than two
winners under Sarawak Turf Club Rules, may claim
an allowance of 7 lbs.
Entries.—AU nominations, accompanied by
Entrance Fees, description of ponies, and declaration
of colours, to be made to the Secretaries not later
than noon, 6th April, 1935.
Scratchings.—Owners scratching ponies before
5 p.m. on 26th April, 1935 for first day and 5 p.in.
on 28th April, 1935 for second day, will receive back
half their entrance fees.
Handicaps.—J?or First Day will be posted on the
Notice Board at the Sarawak Club at noon on
13th April, 1935, and for the Second Day at noon
on 28th April, 1935.
Course.—Will be open for training on 16th March,
1935, at 5.30 a.m.
Ponies.—Must run on the First Day to be eligible
for entry in Races on Second Day.
Any Borneo Pony of not more than 14 hands in
height may be imported from B.N.B. and shall be
eligible for entry in Races open to Sarawak Ponies
provided that their sires and dams were foaled in
Borneo.
Al! new ponies shall carry top weight on the
first day in the division in which they are classified,
which shall be as follows :—
Division I over 13.2 hands to 14 hands
n 13.0 hands to 13.2 ,,
III under 13 hands
Owners.—Are requested to see that their syces
and jockeys obtain necessary badge for entrance to
Paddock.
Totalizators and Cash Sweeps as usual.
Prizes 20% reduction if under 5 entries.
No second prize will be awarded if there are less
than 3 runners and no third prize if less than 5.
No whip used in any Race shall exceed two feet in length.
Classification of new Ponies.
If spurs lie worn these shall not have rowels.
The Maximum weight shall be 11 stone 7 lbs and the minimum 7 stone.
The maximum fee to a winning Jockey shall be $15 in the absence of any agreement to ride for a lower sum.
Communications to be made to
The Borneo Compant Limited,
Secretaries, Sarawak Turj Club.
[Members are requested to apply to the Secretaries for necessary Badges or obtain them at the Grandstand.]
Second Division News.
Third Division News.
February.
February.
The Acting Resident, Second Division, reports that a party from Penghulu Bamba’s house, Ulu Ai, raided a house in S. Delok during the owner s absence, and carried off many heirlooms as pledges, the object, apparently, being to revenge a recently repeated insult of tangka ultin. Enquiries showed that years ago the original insult was reported to the then’ Native Officer, but for various reasons the matter was never settled. On this occasion prompt action, and the fact that the offenders were prepared to listen to reason, prevented an unpleasant situation developing.
A Simanggang Bazaar extension reserve scheme was completed during the month, and the sketch plan was approved by His Highness the Rajah.
On the 10th an unusually severe drought was succeeded by a continued spell of violent rain. This did considerable damage to padi crops, which until then had been promising, having been unusually free from pests this year.
A new local order was issued prohibiting traders from gambling in the up-river areas unless they were approved agents of the gambling farmer.
The Assistant District Officer. Simanggang. reports that rumours were current during the month that certain houses in the Undup had been stockaded. Native Officer Lucas Chnat, who happened to be in Simanggang, returned to Eng- kilili via the Undup in order to look into this matter. Apparently a scare, the exact cause of which is unknown, had started in the locality after Rumah Mandak had been accidentally destroyed by fire.
A Dayak from the Ulu Lingga brought in some sand which he had taken from the bed of one of the rivers, and which he thought contained gold. Rough tests showed what appeared to be a high gold content, and a sample of the sand was sent to Kuching for analysis.
The Assistant District Officer, Engkilili, reports that 21 Netherlands Indies Dayaks were found to be living in the Undup without passes. All were taken to Simanggang.
Drought has spoilt much of the hill padi in the Engkilili district, but in spite of this fair crops may be expected.
A tuba-fishing was held at Saratok on the 24th at which Pengarah Nyalu and Penghulu Undom were present. The catch was disappointing.
The Acting Assistant District Officer, Kalaka, reports that on the 19th an inquest was held on a Dayak, who had been killed by the fall of a belian tree which he was felling. In view of the very casual methods employed by Dayaks when felling old jungle, it is remarkable that accidents of this nature are not more frequent.
The District Officer, Sibu. reports an unusual case that occurred in Kanowit. A Chinese named Lai Koon Lee was brought in by a Dayak who had found him wandering along a Dayak track; on inquiry, Lui Koon Lee stated that on the previous night he and a companion had entered into a pact to commit suicide together, he being the instigator.
According to his story, they stole a boat and paddled some way down-river. Then, while sitting facing each other, they tied themselves band and foot and jumped overboard. His companion sank immediately, but Lai Koon Lee floated for about an hour, and eventually managed to reach the bank, the cord which bound him having by then broken. Although the body of the other Chinese has not yet been recovered, a preliminary inquiry has been held, and Lai Koon Lee has been detained pending further investigations.
A number of relations of the Katibas rebels arrived at Sibu, together with their wives and families, and were settled at Aup and in the Igan. All relations of the rebels in the Kanowit, Julau. Ngemah, Poi and Ulu Rejang areas are being turned out and compelled to live below Sibu. Many of the Kanowits came down also, but stated that they preferred to give up or kill the rebels, who are their relations, rather than evacuate their country. Their offer was considered worth a trial, so they were gathered together and divided into two forces under the supervision of Native Officers, Constabulary and Dayak levies, and set off on an expedition from Nanga Julau at the end of the month.
The land receipts, excluding the coast stations, realized $6,041.16, an increase of $899.39 over January. The Assistant Superintendent of Lands and Surveys. Sibu. reports a very satisfactory improvement in laud collections at Matu, Duro. Rejang and Kanowit, but collections at Sibu, Sarikei and Binatang are poor.
1G8 deeds were registered, and 29 applications were received for land during the month.
The following table gives the trade figures for the month, the 1934 figures being given for comparison.
Sibu.	1935.	1934.
Foreign Imports	...	$170,474.00	$89,937.00
Foreign Exports	...	224,915.00	92,221.00
Kanowit.
Foreign Imports	...	4,745.00	2,130.00
Foreign Exports	...	17,640.00	5,741.00
M.V. Doggenbank, a vessel flying the Dutch flag, arrived at Sibu from Singapore during February, and later proceeded to Bintulu.
Another conviction against a member of a Chinese secret society was obtained at Sarikei.
The Acting District Officer, Sarikei, reports that the reconditioning of the concrete wharf is nearing completion, (rood progress has also been made with the construction of the new Government offices The Acting Assistant District Ollicer, Kapit, reports that on the 14th Penghulu Paso and about 30 followers arrived down from Belaga, bringing with them 70 Kayane from Long Nawang, Dutch Borneo. They returned on the 17th, but ten days later another party of 14 Kayans arrived from Long Nawang with Penghulu Jugah. They had come overland from the Ulu Rejang to the Mirirai, the Batang Rejang having been in flood towards the end of the month.
The price of sago continues to be liable to rapid fluctuations throughout the Oya district, but was fairly steady at 55 cents per passu in Sg. Kut at the end of the month, as against a price of only 35 to 40 cents at Mukah. Rumours about the projected factories at the Igan end of the Kut are causing much debate in Dalat Bazaar.
As a result of the dry weather, engkabang has ! started flowering in many rivers in the Kapit district, and a good crop is expected about July. Owing to the fact that felling and farming operations will probably be in full swing about this time, many Dayaks will not be able to take advantage of this.
A Farewell Speech.
The Acting District Officer, Mukah. reports that Penghulu Umpoh of the Ulu Mukah was reprimanded during the month for general slackness, since it is apparent that he is the most useless penghulu in the district.
We print below in full a speech made by Dr. Su Chin Nang at a dinner-party recently given by him at Sibu. Wc understand that Dr. Chin Nang will shortly be visiting China, but we hope that, he will soon return to Sarawak.
Most of the work in connection with the electrification of the Mukah Waterworks was completed by the end of the month. Progress is now held up pending the arrival of a T-piece, but the new pumps should be in action a few days after this has been fitted.
In general, the health of the Oya district was good during the month, but elephantiasis seems to be unduly prevalent among the Melanaus. It is doubtful if anything can be done at present to diminish the incidence of this disease among natives
Many complaints were made to the Assistant District Officer. Oya. during the course of an upriver trip, regarding Ilie embargo on the sale of cartridges. There appears to be a very general bitterness about this rule in the Ulu Oya. since these Dayaks maintain that they have never given any trouble, and that by stopping the supply of cartridges Government has left them defenceless against the pigs anil deer which ravage their crops.
Dayak padi is poor in all districts of the Ulu Oya, much of it having suffered during the exceptional floods last December.
As a result of an election held in Kampong Kekan to choose a successor to T.K. Nyalong, one Gani bin Jemarai was selected, the whole kampong being unanimously in favour of his appointment. This has now been confirmed by His Highness the Rajah. '
Resident, Ladies and Gentlemen,
I have the honour to state that I have been in Sibu for twenty-five years. When 1 was in China, I always heard praisings of the kind and good Government of Sarawak from those who returned from Sibu. I was so much moved bv such praisings that I made up my mind that I should come across the sea. In 1910 I resigned from the service of my mother Hospital, and brought my family to come here. After 1 came to Sibu, I was comforted, as all conditions were just as what I had heard in China. Then, I was engaged to be i hi charge of the Government Hospital at Sibu for a period of seven years, during which time I worked with diligence and carefulness. I resigned from the Government on my own account—1. to start a dispensary. 2. to make rubber gardens. For this I have been quite successful. Since I have been living for a long period of years, I might boast myself that I am not only a good citizen in this country, but also a good help in telling people how to be law-abiding fellows. So we are much pleased to make our home here.
As I am in duty bound to return to China for the burial of my father, who died about 50 years ago, I take this opportunity of my immediate future going home to express my thanks to the Government. First :—1. I have made a good success both in trade and shop building, and in rubber gardens, from which I can get a good support for my family.
2.I have enjoyed much welfare in this country under the kind and good Government here.
3. I am not only satisfied with my trade and landed properties here, but I am also'much more satisfied with large increasing members of my family persons in this country of the hot climate. 4.However, sometimes when I was
or had a difficulty in some affaire,
complaints to the Government with my hot temper, which I used to regret after the matter passed ; but
Government Officers have been all kind to me from
time to time, and took no notice of it in their minds.
Tn general. I am sorry that I cannot say out all that I feel, but indeed T am very, very grateful to the Sarawak Government. Now let us drink
The Health of His Highness the Rajah, The Health of Tuan Resident,
' and good luck to every one of us. Prosperity to the State of Sarawak I Long life to His Highness the Rajah 1 Happiness to your Honour 1
in a trouble, Mr. P. M. Scott, Acting District Officer,
I made my was transferred to Miri during the month for
, Lawas,
for about
three weeks for medical treatment, Mr. K. H.
Digby being appointed temporarily to Limbang.
The Acting District Officer, Miri, reports that bumper padi harvests are expected in the Niah, Sibuti and Miri districts this year.
Miri experienced a drought of 24 days during the month, the total rainfall amounting only to 5.68 inches. This is exceptionally low for the time of year.
A Foochow Occasion.
ANNIVERSARY CELEBRATIONS TN S1BU.
A very interesting ceremony took place at Sibu on February 25th, when members of the Foochow community celebrated the 35th anniversary of their first arrival in Sarawak.
Notable among the items was the recognition accorded to the only two remaining members of the first and original batch of GO Foochows who arrived 35 years ago, followed by 19 of the second batch who arrived some months later.
Speeches were made by several well-known members of the community reviewing the past vears, and reminding the present generation of the greatly improved conditions, and the progress made.
The Resident, who was present, said a few appropriate words in recognition of past achievements. and expressed hopes of continued progress in the future.
A dinner was given in the Methodist Mission Reading room during the evening.—Contributed
Fourth Division News.
February.
Sir Neill Malcolm, Chairman of the Board of , Directors, British North Borneo, landed at Miri on the 20th on his way through to Sandakan.
The first appeal against a decision of the recently- formed Miri Board of Film Censors was referred to the Resident, Fourth Division, who upheld the Board's verdict after viewing the whole of the film under dispute.
A young man was taken by a crocodile in the Bakam river during the month. Barta of his mangled body were recovered some days later.
A number of Dayaks who have recently moved from the Batang Ai have been causing trouble in the Niah River by refusing to carry out their promises, and by opposing the authority of their elected tuai. The ringleaders were brought before the Resident, who gave them the choice of living peaceably or being sent back to the Batang Ai. They chose the former alternative. *
The District Officer, Bintulu, reports that a meeting of Kayan, Punan, and Penan chiefs was held at Tubau in order to discuss their adat. There has never been any record of the customs and fines of these tribes, in fact many of the people do not know their customs themselves, and this of course leads to frequent disagreements and inconsistencies. A rough summary of their customs, started by a former District Officer but not completed, was used as a basis, and a reasonably complete and comprehensive code was drafted. A further meeting will be held and a second and final reading given to the code before it is submitted for enactment.
The sentences of death passed on two Dayaks named Nyalai and China, who were convicted of the recent Sebauh murder, were commuted by the Supreme Court to fifteen years’ rigorous imprisonment.
Export of general produce from Bintulu is on the increase, since for some time past it has been noticed that s.s. Auby cannot take all of it, even though she now calls twice a month. If she takes full cargoes of produce, timber shippers are held up, and vice versa. As a result, a Dutch motor-vessel named the Duyyersbanlt has agreed to ship cargo from Bintulu to Singapore three times a month. This arrangement should fill a long-felt want, since the port has for some time been badly in need of additional shipping facilities, and in spite of this new vessel competing, there should still be plenty of cargo for the ,Auby. The Doggersbank, which is of about 330 tons gross, is specially designed for loading and carrying logs and timber.
Exports of timber from Bintulu are being maintained, the figure for the month being 130 tons.
The Rev. Father Van de Laar, of the R.C. Mission, Miri. arrived at Bintulu on the 19th and proceeded to Sebauh to supervise tlie construction of the new mission school there; Work has been started on the bazaar roads at Baram, which are in very bad state as a result of the recent floods.
The Lawns (Sarawak) Estates Ltd. exported 34,944 lbs of dry rubber during the month. Rainfall at Lawas amounted to only 3.57 inches.
