The Sarawak Gazette
SATURDAY. JUNE 1st, 1935.
Local and personal.
May.
His Highness the Rajah left for Singapore
and England by s.s. Vyner Brooke on May
8th. His Highness the Tuan Muda, who, we
understand, will fly out to Singapore after
meeting His Highness the Rajah in England,
is expected to reach Kuching about June 17th.
Pending His Highness’ arrival in the State,
the Government is being administered by the
Committee of Administration.
His Highness the Rajah will accompanied on the voyage home by Mr. and Mrs. J. G. Anderson,' and Mr. and Mrs. H. A. Adams and Miss Adams who are returning to England after a stay of some 18 months in Kuching.
Uis Highness the Rajah is exjieeted to return to Sarawak early in August.
On the evening of May 6th, the Silver Jubilee of His Majesty King George V, His Highness the Rajah entertained about fifty guests to dinner at Astana. After dinner. His Highness himself proposed the toast of “The King”, which was drunk to the accompaniment of the National Anthem.
The Jubilee was celebrated in Kuching by sports in which children from nearly all the schools in Kuching participated. These sports, the organisation of which had been entrusted by His Highness the Rajah to the Datu Amar, were a great success. They were held on the Police padang, which was suitably decorated for the occasion with plenty of red, white and blue bunting, and which presented a most animated appearance from midday onwards. A full account appears elsewhere in this issue.
On the afternoon of May 7th, a garden party was held at Astana which was attended by members of all communities, who thus had an opportunity of bidding farewell in person to His Highness the Rajah. Fortunately the weather was fine, and the party was a great success, music being provided in the Astana grounds by the Constabulary band, and light refreshments being served on the ground floor. Our thanks are due to His Highness the Rajah and the Astana staff for a most enjoy-
I able afternoon.
On May 2nd Mr. D. V. Murphy gave a dinner-party to celebrate his recent goodfortune in the unlimited sweep. The invitations were confined to men only, and twenty-two guests sat down to a Chinese dinner served in the dining room of Bukit Mata Kuching, which had been kindly lent for the purpose by Mr. G. T. Bates. After a short speech of thanks and congratulations by Mr. H. B. Crocker, the evening rapidly became musical in character, and the rafters of B.M.K. rang with the echoes of such old favourities as “A Bicycle Built For Two.” “The Honeysuckle and the Bee,” and “Oh! Oh! Antonio!” Altogether, it was a most cheerful party, and one well worthy of the occasion.
Incidentally, it is interesting to note that at gatherings such as this, it is always the old songs that are popular. There is no doubt that they possess a lilt that, is somehow never achieved by modern masterpieces such as My Hot-cha Momma or Baby Doodle Blues-
The Right Reverend the Bishop of Labuan and Sarawak sailed for home on leave by the s.s. Darr,el on May 11th. With him travelled Mr. and Mrs. C. D. Le Gros Clark, who were also on their way home. We wish them all a pleasant journey and an enjoyable leave.
Mr. E. M. Selous has been appointed to act as Secretary for Chinese Affairs during Mr. Le Gros Clark’s absence.
We record with deep regret the death, after a lingering illness, of Mr F G. Day. Mr. Day died in the General Hospital, Kuching, on May 20th and was buried on the- following day. The funeral took place at St. Thomas Pro-Cathedral, the Rev. 0. Philipps officiating, and was attended by a large number of Mr. Day’s friends from all communities.
An obituary notice appears in another column.
On the afternoon of May 10th, the members of the Sarawak Club were at home to about 200 guests, who were drawn from all communities. A programme of music was performed by the Constabulary Band, and games such as billiards, bridge, tennis, deck-tennis and bowls proceeded simultaneously, the last- named being especially popular, and producing some curious results- It is to be regretted that a proposed ‘singles’ between the Datu Shahbandar and Mr. Ong Tiang Swee did not take place, but this must certainly be reserved for some future occasion, as must the return billiard-match between Dr. Marjoribanks and Mr. Chan Kee Ong.
The Secretary and the members of the Committee who were responsible for the arrangements deserve our thanks for a most enjoyable entertainment, and one which we hope will soon be repeated. It was particularly pleasant to note the presence at the Club on this occasion of a number of Chinese and Malay ladies.
Mr. and Mrs. J. L. Noakes and Mr. and Mrs. D. L. leach arrived in Kuching by the Vyner Brooke on May 17th. We welcome Mrs. Noakes and Mrs. Leach to Sarawak.
We understand that Mr. Noakes is to be stationed in Kuching for some time to come; Mr. and Mrs. Leach left for the Fourth Division by the Gladys on May 29th.
Mr. E. Banks, Curator, Sarawak Museum, left Kuching on the same day bound on a collecting expedition to Mount Mulu. Mr. Banks expects to be away for some six weeks, and will no doubt fill in his idle moments on the mountain top with a perusal of The Oxford University Year Book.
Anyone strolling through the Kuching kampongs in the evenings cannot but remark on the number of young Malays who how dispense altogether with the songkok, anil walk about bare-headed. These youths look more likos from the coast than Sarawak Malays, which presumably they are. and the disappearance of yet another adat is to be regretted. It seems a pity that some of the older and more influential Malays cannot take these lads in hand and point out to them that by abandoning their customs one after another, even in so small a matter as that of dress, they run some risk of sacrificing the natural dignity and self-respect that are—or used to be—among the best and most marked characteristics of their race. Ikan bukan, idar-pun bukan, is a saying that immediately occurs to one in this connection.
During the last few years the telok blanga and sabok, the traditional dress of the Malays, appear largely to have given way to gawdy neck-ties, resplendent blazers, and bell-bottom trousers. This again seems a pity, for the outward trappings of Western civilisation sit no more gracefully upon Malays than they do on any of the other Far Eastern races. Visitors from Malaya, where the national dress is far more generally worn than it is here, cannot fail to be unfavourably impressed with this phase of “progress,” and it seems that Government might well take a lead by insisting on all Malay employees arriving at the office in Malay costume. This we believe, is the practice in some of the Unfederated Malay States,—not that insistence there is necessary. We imagine that in Sarawak it would be welcomed by the majority of Malays themselves.
Photographs of His Highness the Rajah’s loyal address to the King nave been received from the Government Agent, London, and may be inspected on application to the Secretariat. The address was engrossed on vellum and bound in blue morocco.
As we go to press, we learn of the engagement of Dayang Elizabeth and Mr. Harry Roy. We offer them our most sincere congratulations.
Films exhibited at the Sylvia Cinema during the month were, on the whole, not up ! to the standard of those shown during April. There were, however, two excellent Maurice Chevalier pictures, “Love Me To-night,’’ and “A Bedtime Story,” and one piece of amusing Laurel and Hardy slapstick, “Sons of the Desert;” and “The Prizefighter and The Lady” was interesting in that it shewed us a fight between Max Baer and Primo Carnera, with Jack Dempsey as referee and ravishing Myrna Loy providing the love interest. “Melody In Spring” was redeemed by the delightful acting of Charlie Ruggles and Mary Beland as an American dog-biscuit king and his wife (queen?) respectively, but an acute depression set in every time Lanny * 1 Ross minced across the screen, and his treacly , voice was very nearly too much for at least one member of the audience. “S. A. Crooners” are by no means everybody’s cup or tea. “Hold your Man” with Jean Harlow and Clark Gable was a mediocre American crook story, but there was nothing mediocre about the two Mack Sennett comedies : they ( were just plain bad. It is really incredible ’ that such deplorable rubbish can be produced , in this year of grace, and they emphasized : once again the fact that when an American 1 film is bad, it is a thousand times worse than ' even the dreariest British production.
Best individual performance of the month : a dead-hcat between the horse in “Steeplechase,” (a Mickey Mouse cartoon.) and Babe Leroy in a “A Bedtime Story.”
The wireless press news reports that Sir Philip Sassoon, Under Secretary of State for Air, stated in a speech in London that the Air Ministry would not let the demands of military aviation interfere with progress in the development of the civil side of flying. Imperial Airways Ltd. aimed at operating a two-day service' to India four or five times weekly, a two-and-a-half day service to East Africa thrice weekly, a four-day service to Singapore thrice weekly, a four-day service : to tne Cape twice weekly, and a seven-day service to Australia twice weekly. He maintained that the great advance represented by this schedule was justified already by the growing commercial use of air transport alike for passengers, goods and mails. He had no doubt that the ideal which was aimed at would sooner or later be attained.
Notice.
It has been brought to our notice that the following advertisement has appeared in Singapore:
"Estate in Sarawak, Borneo, about 5000 acres at 10 years old ; 3000 acres at 9 years old; 3000 acres at 8 years old; 1000 acres at 6 years old; 12,000 acres, about 10-11,000 acres tappable; planted 20x20 and 18x18; some light lallang and bluker; no permanent buildings: rent $2/- p/ac; transport by steamers; compact block running back from river-bank; a road through the estate, otherwise no roads in this district.
Trice $250/- per acre.
Per E. T. BARTELLS, 9, Robinson Road, Singapore, Phone 3373.”
We are authorized to point out that there is, of course, no such estate in Sarawak.
Obituary.
It is with deep regret, which, we are sure, will be shared by his many friends in Sarawak, that we have to announce the death of Mr. F. G. Day on the night of May 20th at the General Hospital, Kuching. The funeral, which took place on the evening of the 21st, after a service in the ProCathedral, was attended by a large and representative gathering of friends which included most of the European community. Mr. Day underwent a severe operation in England last year, and he never recovered from the effects of this; from the date of his return to Sarawak in October last year he became steadily worse, and was compelled to enter the Hospital on March 11th with the knowledge that he had no chance of leaving it alive.
Mr. Day was in his 68th year, and was one of the oldest European inhabitants of Sarawak. He entered the Government Service in 1894, and after serving for four years in Labuan and Limbang, he was transferred to Kuching, where he held various appointments for the next twenty-five years. Amongst the posts he. filled were the following: Magistrate, Court of Requests, Postmaster-General. Superintendent of Customs, Acting Treasurer of Sarawak, and Acting Judge of the Supreme Court. He was also member of the Committee of Administration, and after retirement he acted as Director of Education in 1927 and 1928.
After completing his service with the Govern-
I ment, Mr. Day did not return to England except on occasional visits, preferring to make his home in Sarawak amongst his many old friends. Mr. Day's family has been closely connected with Sarawak for many years; his father. Major F. G. L Dav, who was Commandant of the Sarawak Rangers, joined the Sarawak Service in 1886 and died whilst on leave in 1894. His brother. Mr. H. R. A. Day, who served here from 1886 to i 1910 and was at the end of his service Resident of the First Division, is now living at Bath, and to him and to Mr. Day's widow we extend our sincere [ sympathy.
Mr. Day’s many friends of all races will remember him chiefly for bis readiness to advise and assist all those who took their troubles to him, and for his ready hospitality.—(Contributed.)
Notes and Comments.
Protagonists of the “rough and ready" school maintain that local knowledge and an understanding of the people with whom he has to deal is of more value to a magistrate than a knowledge of the law. A district officer should most certainly know and understand his own people, but in judicial work local knowledge is by no means an unmixed blessing. It cuts both ways. For instance, if a magistrate has before him on a criminal charge a man whom he knows to be a rogue, he is almost bound to be prejudiced against him. Either that, or else realising all too clearly the possibility of his being so prejudiced, he goes to the other extreme in his effort to achieve impartiality, and is so reluctant to convict, except on the most overwhelming evidence, that the rogue goes on his way rejoicing. This is a psychological factor which definitely exists, and one which cannot be ignored. There is therefore much to be said for the proposal that District Officers should deal summarily with petty offenders, but that more serious cases should be left to a visiting magistrate, ami preferably to one who has had specialised legal training. This suggestion is bound at first to provoke a storm of protest on the grounds that- it would mean that the District Officer would find himself with his hands seriously tied in his own district; but this, of course, reveals a complete misconception of the duties of the visiting magistrate. A moment's reflection will show that this magistrate, by relieving the District Officer of a large part of the purely judicial work that now takes up so much of his time. will, in actual fact, be doing both him and the natives under his control a favour, since he will enable him to devote more and more of his attention to purely administrative work. And this, it is generally admitted, is what. is needed in this country just at present.
Every colony goes through three distinct stages of development. ’ The first is the pioneer stage, when primitive peoples are for the first time brought into contact with a civilisation considerably more advanced than their own. The representatives of this civilisation have their hands full during this stage in establishing in the native mind some respect for their own conceptions of morality and ethics. This ] process, which takes time, is known either as "settling the country;" or else as "pacifying the interior," and keeps the pioneers so busy that they can devote little attention to other matters. Rough and ready justice is all that they can find time for, and it works admirably—for a while. Until the ground-work is complete, that is to say, and the country begins to feel the good effects of peace and security.
When that happens, it has entered safely on the second stage, during which the administration shapes the material which the pioneers have made available, and builds upon the foundations they have laid. A universal respect for law and order gradually replaces the former deference to mere tribal sanctions and tabus; natives become conscious of sonic central authority more powerful and obviously wiser than their immediate tribal chief, and thus the idea of a state is born within them ; communications improve, and as a result the network of government spreads farther and farther afield until even the remotest places and the most unfriendly tribes tire caught within its meshes, which at last cover the whole country; the interior becomes safe for traders, and a wave of immigration follows. Settlers take up land, towns spring up round the focal points where their produce is collected and marketed, steamers appear at the ports and in the rivers, and. given
The administration of justice to primitive peoples
is a subject on which it is possible to theorise
indefinitely. There are, however, two main schools
of thought whose views have been admirably sum-
marised by Sir Alison Bussell in his article on the
East African report, which wo print elsewhere.
Both schools have a great deal of right on their
side, and both can produce arguments that carry
weight; hut in the end one is forced to agree with
Sir Alison Bussell that the rule of law is the only-
rule which has any hope of operating continuously
with success.
Continuously .... Thal is the crux of the
matter. Bough and ready justice is all very well
in its way, and has much to recommend it in
certain circumstances, hut it does depend to an
entirely disproportionate degree on the individual
officer, and its administration must therefore
necessarily vary with individuals. Furthermore, by
dispensing with any sort of legal code, and by pro-
viding no machinery for appeals, it places a
responsibility on individual officers which they
should not be called upon to bear. It may be
argued that this is an extreme case, but it is what
would occur if we were to carry to its logical con-
clusion the theory that an administrative officer
should be the “father and the mother" of the
tribes under tris control: that his only training
need be the acquisition of a sound knowledge of
their language and customs; that his adminis-
trative skill can effectively take the place of a code
of laws; and that his dealings with natives should
never be questioned by those whose knowledge of
them is not as extensive as his own. This system
may work satisfactorily for a while, provided that
the officer concerned is a paragon of wisdom and a
walking embodiment of all the virtues. As long
as he is in charge of a certain district, justice is
administered in accordance with his personal, and
no doubt admirable, ideas; but as soon as he is
transferred, his successor proceeds to put his own
particular ideas into practice, and it is not only
possible, but even probable, that they differ con-
siderably from those of the man from whom he
takes over. There can therefore be no uniformity,
and this in time is bound to lead to dissatisfaction
and abuses. It is better for twenty natives to
escape on a legal technicality—though in actual
practice this almost never occurs—than for one to
be wrongfully convicted, and to have no redress.
And there is another side of the question to be
considered. Even the most single-minded magis-
trate is human, and is therefore liable to make
mistakes; and it is the law, or the legal system,—
call it what you please,—that constitutes the
native's only protection against the injustices that
may be caused by those mistakes. And, let us
add", against the danger of possible abuse of power
by those set in authority over him. For such
things have happened in the past, and unfortunately
will always happen where there is no adequate
control. A code of criminal procedure, by giving
every convicted person an absolute right of appeal,
allows for this control, and provides a safeguard
that is welcomed not only by the native, but also
by the magistrate himself. For the thought that a
case may always go before a higher court- acts as
a great check on hasty judgments, as does the
knowledge that even if there is no appeal, the
minutes of the case and the magistrate's finding
are always subject to revision by trained and
experienced legal officers.
normal economic conditions, the country goes steadily ahead. And it is at this juncture that it becomes increasingly aparent that the "rough and ready” system of administering justice simply will not do. The rule-of-thumb methods that served well enough to rompihe a quarrel between rival chiefs, or to punish a head-hunter, are found to be quite inadequate when applied to the needs of the rapidly- growing trading community. And in consequence, a separate judiciary composed of trained legal officers has to be set up within the administration. This parting of the ways, so to speak, is usually a sure sign that the third singe has been reached,—the stage of gradual but uninterrupted development, and of real progress in the best sense of that much-abused word. From now onwards, the administration of justice is in the hands of officers specially trained and selected for this task, and the administrative officer is free to assume his proper function, that of ‘guide, philosopher, and friend’ to the people with whose lives his own is so closely hound up. He is free at last to assist., instruct and advise the native, to train him up in the way that he should go. and to do his best to ensure that he is fitted to lake his place in the strange new world that the advent of civilisation has opened up to him.
It is to the young that the future belongs. I trust that through the fund inaugurated by my dear son the Prince of Wales to commemorate this year, many of them throughout this country may be helped in body, mind and character to become useful citizens. To the children I would like to send a special message. Let me say this to each of them whom my words may reach—the King is speaking to you. 1 ask you to remember that in the days to come you will be the citizens of a Great Empire. As you grow up, always keep this thought before you: and when the time comes, be ready and proud to give to your country the service of your work, your mind and your heart.
I have been greatly touched by all the greetings which have come to me today from my Dominions and Colonies, from India and from this homo country. My heart goes out to all who may be listening to me now wherever you may be—here at home in towns or villages, or in some far off corners of the Empire. or it may be on the high seas.	r
Let me end my words to you with those which Queen Victoria used after her Diamond Jubilee, 38 rears ago. No words could more truly or
simply express my own deep feeling now. “From
my heart I thank my beloved people. May God . bless them.”
The Jubilee.
SARAWAK'S LOYAL ADDRESS.
THE KING'S MESSAGE.
We print below the text of the message i broadcast by His Majesty the King on May 6th
At the close of this memorable day I must speak to my people everywhere. Yet how can I express , what is in my heart? As I passed this morning through the cheering multitudes to and from Saini Paul's Cathedral, as I thought then* of all that these 25 years have brought to me and to my country and my Empire, how could I fail to be most deeply moved? Words cannot express my i thoughts and feelings. I can only say to yon. my very dear people, that the Queen and I thank you from the depth of our hearts for all the loyalty and—may I say—the love with which this day and always you have surrounded us. I dedicate myself anew to your service for the years that may still he given to me.
1 look back on the past with thankfulness to I God. My people and 1 have come through great J trials and difficulties together. They are not over. In the midst of this day’s rejoicing, I grieve to ' think of the numbers of my people who arc still I without work. We owe to them, and not least to those who are suffering from any form of disablement. nil the sympathy and help that we can give. 1 hope during tins Jubilee Year all who can will do their utmost to find them work and bring them hope. Other anxieties may be in store, j But I am persuaded that with God's help they - may all be overcome if we meet them with confidence. courage and unity, so I look forward to the j future with faith and hope.
The following is the address made by His Highness the Rajah to His Majesty the King
To His Most Excellent Majesty George The. Filth by the Grace of God of Great Britain', Ireland and the British Dominions beyond the Seas, King, Defender of the Faith, Emperor of India.
Pin? Rajah of Sarawak begs to tender the loyal and heartfelt felicitations of all Races in the Protected Stale of Sarawak to His Majesty the King Emperor George V and to His Majesty's Most, Gracious Consort Queen Mary on the occasion of the Twenty-fifth anniversary of His Majesty s accession to the Throne.
"Sarawak is fully and gratefully recognisant of the benefits (hat have accrued to her under British Protection and it is the constant prayer of her Rajah and people that His Majesty may be long sprayed to continue his august rule and beneficent activities in the furtherance of Imperial well-being and in the cause of peace.” The following telegram was received from the Secretary to His Excellency the British Agent for Sarawak, Singapore, on May 11 th :—
‘' Government Secretary Kuching.
"Requested by Secretary of State to convey to you by command of His Majesty the King an expression of His Majesty's sincere thanks' and appreciation for the loyal address submitted on occasion of His Majesty's Silver Jubilee.
Secretary to the British Agent.”
Sarawak Letters.
To the literature of Sarawak, already not incon- siderable, has been added the correspondence" which passed between the founder of that State and the woman who, more than any other individual outside Sarawak, supported the Brooke family in its early trials and made possible the secure and beneficent dynasty of today. The first Rajah was unmarried, and Mr. Owen Rutter, who has edited this correspondence with sympathy and with the essential qualification of local knowledge, has formed the opinion that the love which Sir James Brooke might ! normally have given to a woman was sublimated into passion for the welfare of the native peoples of Sarawak. If that was so it was fortunate for civilisation in Malaysia, however much personal unhappiness it may have brought to the Rajah. It would be difficult to find in the history of modern imperialism purer or more disinterested motives than are revealed in these letters. In the beginning it was probably a desire for power, together with adventurouaness, that led James Brooke to establish his little principality on the coast of Borneo, hut as time 1 wore on he became so intimately associated with the people—and the same was true of his nephew, the second Rajah, in association with the Sea Dyaks . —that their welfare became the first consideration
of his government. This was only possible because there were practically no foreign enterprises in the : country, enterprises whose interests would have .required to be balanced with those of the natives; but on the other hand the very absence of foreign capital nearly brought about the ruin of Sarawak in those early years.
It is startling to learn, from the Correspondence which has just boon published, that the first Rajah was driven to such desperation by lack of funds and by the refusal of the British Government to lend him oven moral support, that be nearly gave up the attempt to guide Sarawak along the path of an independent state. Overtures wore made to France and Belgium, as well as to England, tn assume some sort of protectorate over the country, and the names of several other countries appear in these letters in the same connection. It was touch and go several times whether Sarawak became a European colony, and to his everlasting credit let it be said that only the refusal to obtain conditions favourable enough to his beloved Malays and Dyaks prevented Sir James Brooke from signing an agreement of transfer. , His position was most precarious for a period of i years, notably after the abortive Chinese uprising at Kuching, and he had to thank Baroness Burdett I Coutts for many favours. Time after time this I lady replenished the Sarawak coffers when they were j empty and when no other funds were available, and ; she also helped Sarawak by putting up the money Io build the first steamer owned by that State. In those days, with piracy always ready to break out along the coast, and with bush fighting part of the daily administrative task up the Sarawak rivers, the possession of an armed steamer was a decisive advantage.
Taking him by and large, the first Rajah comes very well out of these letters. -He seems to have been almost inhumanly distant and austere—as was the second Rajah, if "Good Morning and Good Night” is to be believed But those characteristics are likely to be formed. at any rate on the surface, by long years of lonely life, and the natives of Sarawak,'who after all are the people who chiefly matter, certainly gave Sir James Brooke unyielding loyalty and affection. They saw and responded to his courage, determination and manifest single- mindedness, and they also saw that those qualities
were being devoted wholly to an effort to create a different and more idealistic kind of colonial administration in Sarawak. The form of administration which existed in the Straits Settlements of that day was familiar to the Sarawak natives, and indeed there is reason to suppose that they were much less opposed to its introduction than their British champion, but he remained adamant in his belief that Sarawak should evolve a very simple and inexpensive type of administration, closely connected with traditional native leaders and institutions, and should be developed by an independent and happy peasantry rather than by foreign capital. Without entering into a painful episode in the history of the Brooke family, it may be said that the manner in which the first Rajah re-assumed control of Sarawak after his retirement, shaking himself like an old lion in his retreat in Devonshire, was magnificent, and in this and innumerable other incidents he reveals himself in these letters as one of the finest European figures in the history of Malaysia.—Straits Times.
Rajah Brooke and Baroness Burdett Coutts. Let tore Edited by Owen Rutter. With a Foreword by Her Highness the Ranee Margaret of Sarawak. Hutchison. 18/..
British North Borneo’s Advisory
Council of Native Chiefs.
We note from the British, North Borneo Herald that a meeting of the Native Chiefs’ Advisory Council was held at Sandakan on May 4th, 1935. We print below extracts from the speech made by His Excellency the Governor on opening the Council meeting :—
"1 am very pleased to come here to-day to welcome to Sandakan the chiefs of the State of * North Borneo who are gathered in this room to consult together about many matters connected with their work and the welfare of their people.
"Twenty years ago a Native Chiefs' Advisory Council was set up, composed of Grade I Chiefs who have the title of ‘Orang Kaya-Kaya.' But 1 can find no record of this Council ever having met. It is my intention to enlarge this Council so that each District may be represented by one chief. I also hope to arrange for the Council to meet once a year to advise me about the welfare of the natives and to consult together about matters of common interest.
"You have come to Sandakan at a time of great rejoicing and festivity. All rares here are celebrating the twenty-fifth anniversary of the day on which King George V came to the throne of his fathers; and in all parts of the world this happy event is being celebrated in a similar manner. Here in North Borneo we live under His Majesty’s protection; and the peoples of this country should ever be thankful that under his protection they have lived in safety unmolested by other races from distant countries. You and your people should always be mindful of this, but particularly so when you see—as you see to-day in Sandakan harbour—one of His Majesty’s warships, which are for ever patrolling the seas to protect yourselves and millions of others in many countries all over the world from aggression. As your Governor, I have submitted to His Majesty on your behalf an Address giving suitable expression to these feelings of gratitude.
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, JUNE 1, 1935.
89
"The prosperty of the natives of this country 1 is the main object for which this Government is working. This can only be fully achieved when , every able-bodied male native is either producing a crop like rice, rubber, pepper, coffee which he can sell, or working for others on their rubber estates or on their limber concessions, or in some capacity. Then, with the proceeds of bis sales or of his wages, as the case may be, he and his family will he able to live happier and more comfortable lives, having the wherewithal to purchase imported goods and other luxuries. In this way only can your people attain happiness and prosperity ; and it is your primary duty as chiefs to do all you can to sec that the children grow up strong and healthy, and that the adult males work either for themselves or as wage- earners for others.
"I will now leave you to discuss what I have said and to consider the other matters that await your consideration; and I wish you even’ success in your deliberations."
The Administration of Justice in
East Africa.
We Reproduce below an article contributed by Sir Alison Russell, formerly Chief Justice, Tanganyika Territory, to The Journal of Comparative Legislation and International law. This article deals with the Report of the Commission appointed by the Secretary of State for the Colonies to’ investigate and report? on the Administration of Justice (other than Native Courts) in Kenya, Uganda and Tanganyika Territory,—a report which, as Sir Alison Russell points out, is a state document of great interest and importance, and from which emerges “the age-long debate between the executive authority and the judiciary.” We omit the preamble, which deals with certain points of colonial procedure which are of no interest to readers in Sarawak, and go on to the body of the article.
The two opposing points of view are best stated by two extracts, one from the Report and one from the appendix. The Commission state their opinion as follows :
We regard it as a fundamental necessity, from the point of view of law and order, that there should be a strong and adequate judiciary which the people of the country understand and respect. It is of equal importance that judicial work should be performed by persona with adequate experience who are trained in the weighing f evidence and the requirement!! of legal proof.
The Governor of the Tanganyika Territory states the opposite opinion :
If a fundamental change of the legal structure is now out of the question, and if more and more professional judges uro, and will be, in consequence required for it* administration, I would at least urge in the interest* of the native population that such measures of alleviation as are still possible may be taken in tho direction of simplification and decentralization by the method of entrusting more powers with fewer formalities to the local administrative authorities in the out-districts, and, if it is necessary, by increasing the training of the Administrative Officer in the art of clear thinking and the knowledge of the criminal law.
It- will be observed that what the Commission regards as a fundamental necessity, the Governor would desire fundamentally to change.
Sir Donald Cameron, G.C.M.G., K.B.E., in his address to the Legislative Council of Nigeria on March 6, 1933, in discussing a similar problem, said :
The old argument will no doubt be used, too, that owing to his closer daily contact with them, the Administrative Officer must know more of the habit*- and mentality of the natives than a judicial officer can, and- must therefore ta tatter equipped to correct their, faults. This issue seems to ta a very closely defined one. If tho judgment of the court is to be the judgment of an officer experienced in the art of sifting and weighing evidence' and is to be based solely on tho evidence which has been- laid before him in the case, it does not matter a great deal to me what he is called. Administrative Officer or Magistrate, or what the court may ta called; it is sufficient that the court is a judicial tribunal and the trial officer a judicial officer. But if tho decision of the courtt may properly be swayed by political or other non-juridical considerations .within the knowledge of the Administrative Officer and is therefore not to lie based solely on. the evidence which has been led, then in my judgment the court has ceased to be a judicial tribunal and the officer has Warn d to ta a judicial officer. Change the system of law, if you will, mid punish the people by. Administrative Officers exercising a kind of parental correction because the people arc primitive; but I remember always, pray, if you do so that you will thereby, ta depriving the natives of the protection of any judicial court and any judicial system of law. That has not in the past been the policy or tho practice which has governed the acts of the Nigerian Government.
That is very well said and puts the whole matter in a nutshell’ But, as Lord Macnnghten said of of the rule in Shelley's Case, it is one thing ta put it in a nutshell and another to keep it there.
There are two phrases which are inevitably’ brought into any discussion on the matter : (1) legal technicalities; (2) knowledge of "the native."
Legal Technicalities.—It is sometimes alleged that the judiciary delight in dealing with cases in.which natives are concerned in a highly technical way, and’ that they take pleasure in quashing the decisions'., of administrative officers on purely legal technicalities. It is to be remarked, in the first place, that there is a provision of law in East Africa which, lays down that every court shall decide all cages in which natives are concerned "according' to substantial justice without undue regard to technicalities of procedure." The judiciary obey this provision of law us they obey any other provision, of law. But a native is entitled to the protection of the law no less than any other British subject, and when there has been a substantial breach of. the. law a judge would fail in his duty if he treated, it as a mere technicality. The attitude of the judiciary ta fairly described in the following passage from a handbook for magistrates written by the writer :
An opinion has occasionally been held that the High Court rather enjoys quashing or revising tho decisions of magistrates. Such an opinion could only he held by a magistrate who had in view the cases coming from his particular district, and a short experience in the High Court offices would show him that it is entirely erroneous. All the coxes from all the districts arriving at the High Court represent what may fairly he described as an avalanche of papers. ... In order that a case may be quashed or varied, the revising judge must write a considered judgment. This judgment must ta laboriously and accurately prepared, as magistrates have been known to return to the charge with success. And this is not nearly so easy as initialing and dating a file, and passing it as correct. Tn any case which is not obviously wrong, the Attorney-General is asked if ta wishes to appear and support the conviction. Magistrates may therefore rely upon their decisions being supported when this can properly be done. It is certainly unpleasant to have one’s judgment quashed or varied ; on experience which tho revising judge himself may undergo at the hands of the Court of Appeal. If a judgment is shown to be wrong in law. the magistrate must in future cases follow the law as laid down. If a judgment is held to ta wrong on the facts, as this makes no difference in future cases, the magistrate may continue to consider that his finding on the facts was the right one.
90
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, JUNE 1, 1935.
It was with interest that the Report was searched for instances of legal technicalities. The following evidence was as near to it as the Commission could get :
Chairman : Have you any case in mind where a conviction has been quashed on a pure triviality?
Withness: I think it has happened in some of the stock theft cases. I cannot quote at this moment, but I think some of the District Officers who have these cases before them day after day would be able to give you more information about them.
Chairman : We have been looking at Home returns, I don’t know if you have seen them. 1 do not think anyone has yet suggested that any of these cases were interfered with on trivialities.
' Withness: No. If you wish for information on that point I could send the District Commissioner, Kisumu, who is intimately acquainted with this kind of work, to
appear at Nakuru.
In Kenya confirmation case No. 97 of 1933, Mr. Justice Thomas, in delivering judgment, expressed the following opinion, with which the Commission state that they are in complete agreement:
In the appendix to Vol. I of the Kenya Law Reports , appear- the following : “The valuable provisions of Article 20 of the Order in Council of 1920 are not. to be mis- construed into an authority fnr administering justice to the native in the rough and ready style of which some affect to think highly, but which is generally but the sign of lack of exjwrience or of sympathy and patience and not infrequently results in what is in reality rough and ready injustice.”
Those words meet with my entire approval and I repeat them here and give them even greater fame, if possible, than they had in the early history of the Colony. Tins I dram necessary, for some would still seem to think that the language of the Order in Council is to be treated as a charter of liberty to allow any breach of regularity in the administration of justice and more especially to excuse errors in the proper conduct of trials on the port of authority.
Finally, the Commission reported as follows :
We have made a careful examination of the records of wors done in confirmation and revision by all three High Courte and we are fully satisfied that the work is well done and the powers properly exercised. We have found no case in which a conviction has been quashed on what is only a technicality.
It is supposed that it is too much to hope that the phrase “legal technicalities’’ will never again be heard of in this connexion.
Knowledge of the Native.—It appears to be alleged that the judiciary do not have any "knowledge of the native," and that an administrative officer acting as a magistrate necessarily has that knowledge. The first question is. who and what is "the native." "The natives" are sometimes spoken of as if they were the same throughout Fast Africa ; but in fact the different tribes are complete! different. It is just as unwise to apply ft knowledge of the natives of one part of East Africa to the natives of another part of East Africa as it would be to apply a knowledge of "the native" of Devonshire to "the native" of Lombardy. Indeed, more so : for the natives of Devonshire and Lombardy have, at least to some extent, the same sort of religion and the same sort of customs and culture : whereas the natives of different parts of East Africa have entirely different religions and customs, and no common culture whatever. The needs of the service require administrative officers to be stationed from time to time in different parts of the territory; it is rare for an officer to be appointed for more than a few years in the same district. As a rule they learn one language well, Swahili, the common language spoken by many of the natives throughout East Africa. Rarely do they learn another local language ; at least, not so well as to be able to converse with freedom in it. On being transferred to another part of the territory , they will be confronted with another completely new language or new languages. It is submitted, therefore, that, as a rule, the most that
an administrative officer can obtain is a general knowledge of African natives : a very useful knowledge indeed, but not sufficient to take the place of evidence in a court of justice. Moreover, it does not seem clear why this general knowledge cannot be acquired by a member of the judiciary who spends his time in administering justice to "the native."
This "knowledge of the native” is alleged to have a remarkable effect on the conduct of trials by administrative officers—sometimes apparently supplying the place of missing evidence. It was with interest that the Report was searched for instances when a "knowledge of the native" unmistakably altered the course of justice. The following instance is as near to it as the Report contains. Mr. A. de V. Wade writes :
One instance alone may suffice in support of this contention. A native of Kisii was charged with theft from a I.no. The evidence against him was complete and flawless, but the ace r. nod protested that he was innocent. The magistrate fun Assistant District Commissioner), knowing that whenever a Kisii stole from a Luo he was so proud of the fuel that he would always admit it, refused to convict for no other reason than the accused’s protest, and ajourned the case for further investigation. It transpired that there had been a quarrel and that the complainant and all flu- witnesses had concocted an ingenious and perfect conspiracy. But for the magistrate's local knowledge an innocent man would undoubtedly have been convicted. Such instances ran, of course, he multiplied indefinitely.
It is greatly to be hoped that this is not tin? case. If he is correctly reported, the young officer appears not merely to have committed a breach of the law, but to have been lacking in ordinary common sense. The law provides that the court shall examine the accused to see if he has any explanation to offer on the points in evidence against him, and,common sense would seem to require that some attempt should be made to ascertain the relation between the accuser and the accused. Mr. Wade Considers that this instance alone suffices to dispose of a highly debatable question; but if. as he says, "such instances can, of course, be multiplied indefinitely,” the writer, who has unsuccessfully looked for such instances during a quarter of a century of legal service, can only regret that he did not select two or even three instances of greater value. No other instance of this kind of "knowledge of the native" appears to have been brought to the notice of the Commission; but it is supposed that it is too much to hope that this argument will not continue to be brought forward in this connexion.
A knowledge of the time the cows come home is of value—but it is submitted that of greater value is experience of the reactions of the native before the court, whether be is telling the truth or not, and whether he is intentionally obtuse or merely confused ; and surely the best means of gaining that experience must be the assiduous daily practice of a stipendiary magistrate in the court.
The Governor of Uganda writes :
I venture,' however, to call attention to the fact that I served for two and a half yearn as Registrar of an Indian High Court, and that I may therefore claim to have some experience of aspects of this exceedingly difficult question which do not ordinarily come within the purview of the administrative officer.
The writer served for one and a half years as Chief Secretary to the Government of Uganda, and in virtue of this sen-ice he may be allowed to express his opinion on "the native" in relation to the administration of justice. It seems remarkable that people asserting a "knowledge of the native" should yet consider him to be a stupid sort of person, quite unable to understand the meaning of a trial before a judge of the High Court. A native is
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, JUNE 1, 1935.	91
accustomed to different grades of headmen and
chiefs, and he is accustomed to the administration
of justice in bis native courts and in the magistrates’
courts. Tn any district which is sufficiently ad-
ministered to allow of a visit of the High Court he '
has no difficulty whatever in understanding that he
is accused of a serious crime and that a special kind
of officer, in a red robe, of special knowledge,
different from his administrative officers, is sent to
the district to try him. In the writer’s experience,
the native is by no means a stupid or terrified person
when his liberty or interests are concerned.
The Acting Governor of Kenya writes ;
I find myself in full agreement with the arguments
elaborated in paragraphs 2 to 9 of Mr. Wade's Memoran-
dum, and whatever criticisms may be passed on the
present system of administering justice in criminal
matters in Kenya, it is not, in my opinion, either logical
or fair to base such criticisms on its failure to conform
with a theory which in fact the Government had never
endorsed. . . . Any experienced Administrator could
quote oases both of convictions and of acquittals which,
though legally unassailable in the eyes of the trained
lawyer, have amounted in natives' eyes to a miscarriage
of substantial justice . . . financial considerations apart,
I should welcome the appointment of an additional Judge.
I have no personal knowledge of the magisterial work
of Administrative officers.
Mr. Wade writes :
Under such conditions as these it may well be that the
man best qualified to determine the facts in a native
criminal case is nol necessarily the expert in law, hut
one who, from having lived and worked among natives,
has some understanding of their customs and mentality
and is therefore ir. a better position to estimate tho value
of evidence than the Judicial Officer, whose contact with
the natives of the Colony is both remote and transitory.
It may be admitted that Administrative Officers are not
commonly so skilful in the conduct of judicial proceedings
hr are those who have made the practice of the law their
profession, but in Kenya any lack of skill there may be is
remedied to Rome extent at least by the system of
revision ' by the High Court.
Were it not for the expense involved T should welcome
the appointment of an additional Judge.
The Governor of Uganda, in his despatch, covers
the whole debate. It is not possible to deal at
length with his despatch, which must be read in
its entirety. It is clear that be has a poor opinion
of the value of judicial training. He writes :
In paragraph 65 of their Report the Commission have
recommended that a more extended use might ha made
oi the services of professional resident magistrates. They
state that they have it in evidence that much of the lime
of those magistrates is taken up in trying minor statutory
offences. They suggest that this is a waste of time of a
professional magistrate, but they make no suggestion as
to by whom such offences should be tried. . . . I
presume, therefore, that the Commission had it in the
back of their minds that such cases might be tried by
junior administrative officers. I venture to point out
that the junior administrative staff already perform at
toast as much routine office Work as is compatible with
the necessity for allowing them time to devote to the
study of languages, and for ensuring that they obtain as
much experience as possible under the tuition ol a senior
officer of the duties which they will ultimately be called
upon to perform themselves. I would therefore strongly
deprecate any addition to the duties which are laid upon
cadets and junior administrative officers. Further, with
due respect to the Commission, T feel that tho time of
the professional administrator is in valuable as that of a
professional magistrate, and T can see no justification
whatever for imposing upon the former duties winch the
Commission consider would lie u waste of lime in the
case of the latter. Those minor statutory offences nrn
precisely tho claw of eases in which local knowledge,
which is the special qualification of the administrative
officer, is ol the least value, and I am strongly oi Ilia
opinion that such minor statutory offences should in all
cases where possible bo tried by a permanent member of
tho judicial service.
This conception is new to the present writer. It
must, it is thought, be incorrect from a cash value,
since the salary of a stipendiary magistrate is twice
or even three times that of a junior administrative
officer: it may be that some spiritual value is
referred to. Later on in his despatch, the Governor
writes:
1 consider that more effective steps eon and should be
taken to ensure that junior administrative officers obtain
sufficient experience as magistrates.
This menus experience in the more difficult cages :
the simpler cases being allotted to the trained
judicial officer. Although a stipendiary magistrate
may have spent ten years in the daily administration
of justice to natives in the courts of the territory,
yet bis "knowledge of the native" is to be deemed
incomparably less than that of a newly-arrived
junior administrative officer.
As regards the Governor of the Tanganyika
Territory, it is sufficient to make three extracts
from his despatch :
... I do not feel impelled to enlarge upon my
ignorance o! local conditions, .My remarks are of n
general nature, and if they con be regarded as carrying
any weight at ail, it can only be on account of a long
administrative experience in another part of "native *
Africa where similar problems have arisen.
At home the great edifice of legal procedure, built up
in the course of generalions of complex civilization, is
familiar and ineluctable. To tho African, whoso simpler
lite and outlook require no more than speedy justice for
the complainant uud for the accused, commonsoase,
impartiality and understanding in those who try their
cases are the only real requisites, and the rest is incom-
prehensibly superfluous and frequently onerous.
I It is to my mind, not so much a matter of a
(hypothetical) unfamiliarity with legal procedure being
"more Ilian compensated for by his (tho Administrative
Officer's) knowledge of native law and custom . . .
language, mentality, outlook on life and environment"
but of that knowledge being an essential pre-requisite.
It is now desirable to consider the views of the
administrative officers themselves on this matter.
Mr. Hignell gave evidence. He is the Provincial
Commissioner of the Central Province of Tangan-
yika. He has had long administrative experience
I in the Central Province and has acquired the
complete trust of the primitive tribes of his province. He may safely be said to have a knowledge
of the native. His opinion is as follows :
Chairman: You plead for a Resident Magistrate or
District Judge to he stationed in the Province?
Witness: I do not see any other way in which we are
to get through the work and avoid these delays. . . . I
feel about extended jurisdiction that it is not a part-time
job for anyone.
Chairman: It is not a part-time job, nor is it a job
tor a man who has not been trained in law?
Witness: That is the point I wish to make.
The Chief Justice of Uganda said :
Sir Charles Griffin took the trouble to ascertain from
tho principal Administrative Officers of tho various dis-
tricts where the High Court had jurisdiction whether they
luul anything to complain about as regards loss of
prestige. With one dubious exception, they all said :
"No. certainly not. We like the High Court."
The writer's experience is the same as that of
Sir Charles Griffin, except that he did not meet dubious exception. All the senior administrative
officers whom he met, without exception, welcomed
the High Court, or if there was no circuit of the
High Court in their province they asked whether
it would nut be possible to establish a circuit there.
When the High Court opened its session, the senior
administrative officer attended the court and as a
mark of respect took a seat on the Bench : after a
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, JUNE 1, 1035.
Short time he withdrew,? and proceeded about his business : nor even after that was be found pining and haunting the court of his bygone hope and endeavour. The appointment of a stipendiary magistrate was always urged by senior administrative officers for places where the work of the courts was sufficient to warrant such an appointment. The view of administrative officers is that the administration of justice is a skilled matter which is best performed by a person with legal training.
Conclusion.—There are, therefore, two sharply divided opinions on the main question raised in the Report: (a) That the administration of justice to natives in the courts of law in East Africa is more efficiently curried out by administrative officers without legal training than by judicial officers with legal training. This is the opinion of all Governors, with rare and notable exceptions, (b) That the administration of justice to natives in the courts of law in East Africa is more efficiently carried out by judicial officers with legal training than by administrative officers without legal training. This is the opinion of all administrative officers and unofficial members of executive and legislative councils, with rare exceptions, and of all judicial officers.
The answer to this question given in the report Will, it is thought, be held to be conclusive.
“Nyabor.”
Nyabor, or nyainbor as it is more correctly called, in the Melanau term for a type of line-fishing that is confined to the shallow waters of the river mouths. If one enters any of the kualas along the coast during the fine weather, one can usually he sure of seeing a row of small boats rocking gently on the bar. In each boat squats a fisherman, hunched up under an enormous Urendak, motionless as a wooden image. At first sight these people appear to be merely brooding on the cosmos, so still do they remain; hut as one approaches closer, one sees that their canoes are filled with fishing tackle, —hooks, lines, and floats, and that actually, for Melanaus, they are comparatively busy.
It is n restful scene. The sea, calm as glass and palest blue-green in colour, laps lazily along the glistening beach, and curls into a line of ripples on the bar. On shore, coconut palms and feathery casuannas form a pleasant background to the white strip of sand. The gentle breeze hardly rufties the surface of the water. All is peace,—but not for long.
Suddenly, without warning, one of the fishermen leaps into violent activity. He has had a bite. Something that resembles a bar of gleaming silver is threshing about in the water twenty or thirty yards from his boat, and his line is taut as a piano-wire. He jumps to his feet, maintaining his balance in the swaying canoe by a miracle of adroitness, and for the next few moments it is a case of pull devil, pull linker At last, either the line suddenly slackens, or else a fine Senangin of some seven or eight katis is hauled struggling into the boat, there to be given its quietus with the back of a parang.
Those who are keen on fishing will find nyambor well worth a trial, and I know of few better ways of passing a Sunday morning at any of the coastal stations. All that is required is a stout handline, some enormous hooks, a few wire traces, a float of plai-ee-wood.—and the services of a local fisherman. Senangin, which are the chief prey of the nyambor fishermen, feed only at certain states of the tide, and local knowledge of currents and feeding grounds is essential. The most favourable conditions appear to be a flood tide on a cool morning, and it is then that the best catches are usually made.
Ono starts out, as a rule, at about seven o'clock in the morning. By the time the bar is reached, the out-going, barongs are already hull-down on the horizon, having made full use of the land breeze that is at its strongest just before dawn. After anchoring.generally just where a tine of foam marks the meeting-place of the brown river-water and the grey- green water from the sea, the tackle is prepared. To one end of the coiled handline is attached the wooden float; to the other, a few feet of wire and a look large enough to hold a buffalo. Bait is provided by one’s boatman, who has already been busy with u join. It consist of a number of long, thin fish covered with scales of a bright gold colour. These fish the boatman proceeds to fillet with amazing neatness, using a parang which looks clumsy, but winch is actually razor-sharp. Two of tlicse fillets arc threaded onto the hook, which is then flung far out into the tideway. No weight is used, the line being siniplv allowed to drift. You then make yourself comfortable under a kajang, light a cigarette, and hope for the best.
A series of vibrations indicate that small fry,— buntal and such,—are worrying the bait. Hence the wisdom of the large hook; if you used a smaller book, you would be continually wasting time by pulling up small and often inedible fish. As it is, they merely nibble at the bait without getting themselves caught. Sooner or later however, will come a tug which sets all your nerves quivering with excitement. This time there is no mistake,—a senangin is at the other end of your line fighting for its life, and is letting you know all about it. If it is a fish of ordinary size, it can usually be hauled into the boat after a minute or two of give and take; if it is too large to hold, the plai-ee float is flung overboard, and the boatman hastily pulls up his nnei.or and follows the float's erratic course across the surface of the water. When the fish is growing tired, the line is retrieved and the catch pulled safely inboard, though not without a final desperate struggle. The thing to remember is to strike, and strike hard, the moment you feel a bite, for senangin have mouths like cast iron, and only n vicious jerk will ensure the, hook penetrating.
All nyambor fishermen take with them a stout tempuling' since although in the ordinary way they need not expect anything more formidable than a senangin, they have to be ready for the occasional shark, ray. or swordfish. The writer once witnessed a battle between a Melanau youth and a sting-ray that lusted for twenty minutes, and ended in victory for the Melanau, though not before his tiny canoe— just a shallow dug-out without side-planks—had been several times within an ace of capsizing. The ray was about five feet across, and the poisonous spine at the base of its tail was as thick as a man's finger. And the writer once hooked something on which no impression could be made with the tackle in use,—it was like trying to hold a plunging horse with a length of pack-thread, and just as futile. The line snapped, and the fish (if it was a fish) went on its way trailing about sixty yards of stout cord behind it. It was the old. old story of the big one that got away.
After an hour or two's fishing, the boatman will usually prepare some umai. To do this he cleans and scales a freshly-caught fish, and then cuts very- thin slices from it. These are placed on a board, and limes and buah masam are squeezed over them. A few chopped chilie are scattered among the slices, and the result is then eaten. Believe it or not, it is delicious.
native harpoon.
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, June, 1, 1935.
More "This England.’!
“Trust” Houses.
We reproduce below a further .selection from the inanities collected every week from the contemporary Press by the New Statesman and”Nation:—
Cannot; the ban on the importation of parrots into England now be removed, thereby giving an opportunity for English exiles with their parrots to return to their homes for the Royal Jubilee?— Letter in Daily Mail.
I know a man who has spent his “honeymoon” at Filey every summer for the last twenty years; and he is certainly not alone.—From a Guide Book to Yorkshire.
Perry to remain an amateur if he can make 20,000.—Daily Telegraph. Lord Derby, one of the most accomplished of after-dinner speakers, . . . read his speech at last night’s dinner to inaugurate the British Industries Fair .... Throwing his manuscript aside he paid tribute to the interest of the Royal Family in the Fair, remarking : “Hour after hour they go round and round showing an honesty of purpose 1 should like, many of my horses to have.”—Daily j Telegraph.
Every night, for as long as I can remember, 1 have looked under the bed before retiring. My mother, who was born in 1833, did so ton, and she often told me that her mother always looked under the bed.—Letter in Daily Express.
Wanted. Six beautiful blondes. Must be comely of limb, pretty of face and completely lacking in personality.—Advt. in Wevlyn Times.
In character the Irish Terrier is what may be defined as a “perfect gentleman,” and moreover one is thoroughly aware of his status. For instance, the one I owned would always differentiate between guests, in whom he displayed a courteous interest, and the servants, whom he ' treated with polite indifference,- J. Wentworth Day in Evening Standard.
“Every Christian man and woman who walks on , the sands on a Sunday is helping to ruin this land.”—The Rev. N. Younger. President of the Methodist Conference.—Western Morning News.
Why call it the “New Deal”? Is it a game of cards we are playing—possibly a gamble? Is it not bad enough that Britain has copied the negro- ( American dance music? Need she copy American habits of speech as well. -Letter in Observer.
The Sarawak Association,
Singapore.
At the annual general meeting of the members of the above association held at their premises, No. 19, Verdun Road, the following gentlemen were elected office-bearers for the ensuing year President, Mr. . Wee Kheng Watt (re-elected); Vice-Presidents, Messrs*. Wee Kheng Hong and Kho Thye Jin; i Hou. Sccretarv, Mr. Wm. Attenborough; Hon. Treasurer, Mr. Rong Lian Siong; Hon. Auditor. Kueh Ah Bee (re-elected); Sports Superintendent, Mr. Morgan Chai; Committee, Messrs. Ho Hing Chow, Bong Nyan .Toon, Albert Than and Sylvester Chong.
Those who have suffered from the heat in Singapore duririg the last few days will sympathise with the complaint made by a resident of the Improvement Trust’'garden village” in Kim Kiat Road.
These cottages look pleasant enough from the outside, set in tree-lined streets, with tiny gardens around them, but they must be highly uncomfortable to live in.
The cause of the trouble seems to be the flat roofs, constructed of concrete and a roofing compound. One can easily' imagine the effect of the sun beating down on roofs like that.
The oldest civilised inhabitants of this country, the Malays, learnt long ago the value of a steeply pitched roof, with a space between it and the rooms below, in keeping a house cool.—(Straits Times.)
The Malays also learnt long ago the advantages of surrounding a house completely with a verandah, so that the sun’s rays never penetrate the rooms except in the very early morning and late evening; in fact, I hose of us who dwell in concrete houses reluctantly have to admit that our Malay friends are one up on us as regards their knowledge of how to live in comfort in the tropics.—Ed.
Mainly About Nothing.
A SLIGHT CONTRETEMPS.
Professor Dingleberry’s many friends will doubtless be interested to learn that he has now abandoned his geological studies. At one time the professor was seldom to be seen without his little geological hammer, which he carried in his hip-pocket in the way that Americans in pre-repeal days carried their supplies of rye and bourbon. The hammer was much in evidence, for wherever he went he was constantly chipping. He used to knock corners off even the most celebrated buildings, so much so. in fact, that on more than one occasion he was the victim of misunderstandings on the part of hall-porters of various blocks of luxury flats in May- fair ; and the Vicar of Hog’s Norton never really forgave him for detaching the toe of one of his most prized crusaders, and for filling his satchel with fragment4 of the famous twelfth-century font which until then bad graced the porch of the village church. The professor pointed out gaily that it was all in the interests of science, and continued to knock away pieces of a valuable reredos until he was forcibly removed.
A crisis was reached, however, when the professor entered the reading-room of the British Museum, and in an excess of geological zeal started tapping at the faces of some of the readers. He had already irretrievably damaged the nose of a distinguished commentator on Hegel, and was well on his way to. fracturing a relativities cranium before his hand was stayed by an interfering attendant, who took his hammer away and was really quite rude to him. And when the Keeper of Oriental Ceramics found several irreplaceable Ming jars lying in fragments, it was all up with geology as far as professor Dingleberry was concerned. Putting on bis boots. ho suffered himself to be led away to a place of confinement, and after a passionate outburst of weeping, he decided in future to devote himself to psycho-analysis as being less likely to involve him in physical discomfort. “For." as he pointed out, with his charming smile, “the worst that can happen to me then is a repression of my libido, and somehow I don’t—no, I do not think that that is likely to occur. On the whole, no.”
With that I left him.
94
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, JUNE 1, 1935.
SPORTING NEWS IN BRIEF.
Purchased by the Committee.
A woman is going to run from the Dick Whittington Statue in Highgate to the Monument, E.C., and, without stopping, she will run up the 311 steps of the Tower. This feat has never been attempted by man or woman.—Sunday Referee.
Nor, so far as I know, has anyone yet attempted to swim from the pub at the power-station end of Cheyne Walk to London Bridge, run seven times round the Royal Exchange, smoke sixteen Burma cheroots in quick succession while doing an uninterrupted series of ‘splits,’ indulge in an exchange of personalities with the driver of a number 15a bus, sidle backwards down Throgmorton Street, and then get safely out of Algerian Antimony Concessions at 48. But I hear that a Bishop has taken a bet with one of the Lords of Appeal that he will eat a sevencourse luncheon, walk twice up and down the Athenaeum library on his hands, read aloud the leading article from the Morning Post while standing on his head on the tape-machine in the hall, crawl on his stomach all the way to the House of Lords, and there entertain the assembled Peers with a comic song of his own composition ‘guying’ divorce-law reform. "But,” said my informant gravely, “the old geyser has bitten off more than he can chew, since "Squiffy” Winklestein has laid seven to two against his pulling it off, and Squiffy has never yet lost money on the turf or anywhere else.” When 1 asked him how Mr. Winklestein imagined that be could possibly frame the result (for the Bishop’s staying-power is known and respected throughout the length and breadth of England,) he winked at me darkly and hinted that Squiffy, in his genial but decidedly non-Aryan manner, had ‘got at' one of the Athenaeum waiters, who, when the great day arrived, would ensure that the floor of the library was covered with a thin but effective film of French chalk. “And if that doesn't result in a shattered pelvis for his reverence.” he said, rather coarsely, I thought, “I'll eat the bound volume of the Church Times for 1896. In the meantime. I'll have a double brandy, thank you very much.”
First Division News.
April.
A list of road reserves in Kuching which are due for development is at present being compiled. When this is completed, it is hoped to institute a programme of development extending over a number of years.
The Dahan Rubber Estates, Ltd., harvested ‘21,500 lbs. of dry rubber during the month.
An accurate census of the population of Upper Sarawak has recently been carried out, and reveals the surprisingly low total of 21,170 of all races. Land Dayaks amount to 11.689, Chinese to 7,575, and Malays to 1,197. The balance is accounted for by six different races, including four Europeans, seven Melanaus, and two Punans. We understand that the Punans arc at present accommodated in the female gaol.
There is a fair prospect of an engkabang crop in Upper Sarawak this year, though the Land Dayaks are not unduly optimistic. Trees have flowered in several areas near Jagoi and Gumbang.
A considerable amount of work has recently been carried out on the Siniawan-Buan section of the Bau-Kuching road. A number of awkward bends have been straightened out, and the road has been widened in several places. It is hoped to continue this work during the next few months and, in addition, to proceed with the improvement of the Siniawan-Bau Ki tang section of the road.
Considerable progress has been made with the erection of the Bau and Tondong schools. The Bau school should be ready for occupation by the end of May.
A welcome feature of the month has been the re-opening, under new management, of three gold mines previously closed down. It will be interesting to see whether or not this revival is justified by results.
There are now twenty-three establishments in Upper Sarawak leaching for gold by the cyanide process. Several General Prospecting Licences and five Exclusive Prospecting Licences were issued during the month.
The total production of gold for Upper Sarawak for the month of March, 1935, amounted to 1,899 ounces. The actual gold obtained by each company during March. 1935, is shown by the following table :—
Almost all head tax has now been collected in the Lundu district.
One hundred and eleven logs of Krueng wood were shipped from Lundu during April by m.v Sri Merbo.
Constable Wan Ali of Lundu was sentenced to seven days cells and dismissed the force for gross neglect of duty in failing to arrest a Malay who is wanted by the Netherlands Indian authorities for criminal misappropriation of Government money.
Communications between Lundu and Kuching have greatly improved lately, since there ore now three motor-vessels on the run. Competition has resulted in passenger fares being reduced from 8.3 to .82 for the single journey.
The Assistant District Officer. Sadong. reports that work on the new government buildings at Srian proceeds satisfactorily. The new offices were completed by the end of the month, and good progress had been made with the European officer's bungalow.
The Peng Ann still maker her regular trips to Kuching, but her cargoes are not very large as nearly all timber is exported by small Malay boats, the freight being considerably less.
A very successful regatta was held at Simunjan on the 7th at which, in addition to local boats, boats from Lingga and Lundu were also present. The Malays carried off most of the honours, and the Sadong Dayaks held their own against the Batang Lupar challengers. A fire-work display was held at night, and land sports and a football competition were also on the programme. A full account appears elsewhere.
Some very fine padi-land at Sungei Apin, which has long been sought after both by Malays and Dayaks, was divided up equally between the two
races by the Native Officer and the Assistant District Officer. Natural boundaries were followed wherever possible so as Io avoid disputes in future. Application for survey will be made later to the Land and Survey Department.
A Malay named Bujang bin Seniun was taken by a crocodile at Sungei Antti on April 14th. Crocodiles in the Sadong district are getting very bad, and professional catchers will shortly be engaged to deal with them.
Mr. Wright. Assistant Forest Officer, was engaged during April on the exploration of an area of roughly 50,000 acres above Balai Ringin (Sadong district) It is proposed to constitute this area a Protected Forest.
Sadong Regatta, 1935.
A most successful regatta was held at Simunjan
OU April Till in very line weather. Races for boats
with crews of 30. 15, 8 and 3-men were held, and
11:., Imuoitrs were almost equally divided between
Ilie Malays and Dayaks, the former gaining a slight
drainage by winning the more important races.
A record number of boats turned up from a
number of districts including such renowned places
as Lundu and Lingga. The Batang Lupar boats.
Unfortunately for them, wasted most of their
strength in verbal blather, and so won no race.
Maivellous to relate, very good starts were obtained
in nearly all the races, and there was practically
i no fouling, the red flag having to be hoisted only
once, and that was when some "wags" in the
1 3-men race imitated the never-to-be-forgotten*
60-men Mukah boat, which joined in the race half
j way down the course, having hidden in the apong
till it could sneak out unseen at an advantageous
moment, at the same time obtaining a handsome
lead. But M.L Vava is fast, and the umpires on
her soon spotted the crime.
Cock-fighting went on for .3 days, and many fine
curties were eaten. One small dispute occurred,
but us the winning cock had passed out before a
re-light could lake place, the status quo was
ordered. The him eabonif were presented with
momentos of their inglorious work, and all except
the losers went away very happy.
A knock-out football competition was played in a
sen of mud. and the competition lived up to its
name as in the semi-final a technical knock-out
I was registered when one of the local constables
discovered that Dayaks have harder heads than
Malays—incredible though it may seem, since
after a good collision the policeman had to retire
with a bloody held to the dispensary, only to find
that the dresser was the referee. The Malays
from Kampong Nanas bad an easy victory over the
government team in the final, winning by 3 goals
to nil.
At night a firework display was held in which
one of the representatives of the Japanese Estate
at Samarahan did valuable work. The fireworks
looked more like bombs than anything else, and
had a 1-second fuse. When the first fire-shell went
up, the scramble to get out of the way was too
wonderful to believe, and the old railway line was
a veritable Becher's Brook obstacle to the
inebriated Dayaks in the wild rush for shelter, and
the shouts of "jaga" made one think that at least
all the prisoners had escaped.
The one who enjoyed this enjoyable regatta the
most should have been "the sphinx" in charge of
the gambling, whose "croupier" gathered in the
money with monotonous regularity.—(Contributed.)
Jubilee Day in Kuching.
SPORTS AND MAIN ON THE POLICE
PADANG.
On the afternoon of May 6th, a most successful
sports meeting for the Kuching school children was
held on the Police Padang, pupils from twelve
different schools taking part in twenty-seven
events. The meeting had been arranged at short
notice by a committee of Malays working under the
direction of the Datu Amar, who must be congra-
tulated on a remarkable piece of organization.
The programme, which commenced at one
o’clock and lasted until 5 p.m., included every con-
ceivable type of race, from a straight sprint to
obstacle, egg-and-spoon, and slow bicycle races. To
finish up with, there were several tugs-of-war between the Constabulary and other teams, during j
which the rope twice-provided an unforeseen diver-
sion by snapping just when the excitement was most intense. This was hardly suprising, in view
of the thoroughness which which the rival teams had
dug themselves in ; it is by no means easy to pull
ten or a dozen sturdy Malays over a mark when they ,
are lying flat on their hacks with their heels set six
inches into the ground I
The Police Padang, which had been specially
decorated for the occasion with arches, booths and (
other temporary structures, was gay with red.
white and blue bunting. Union Jacks and Sarawak
flags, and presented a memorable spectacle. There were refreshment-sheds where competitors and I
spectators were regaled with sweet drinks and
cakes, and tea was served for Europeans, Chinese
and Malays in a special kajang shelter, which was
the equivalent of the marquee we know so well at
home. His Highness the Rajah honoured the
meeting with his presence, and was received on the
sports ground with the Sarawak Anthem, played
by the Sarawak Constabulary Band. The Datu
Hakim, accompanied by Mosque officials and
several of the leading members of the Malay com-
munity, then read to His Highness the following
ceremonial address :—
-TT
Bis- millah - hir-rahman - nir-rahim.
Alham-dulilla-hirabil alamin wasala tu wasabi
mu-ala shirafal muslin wa-ala alibi wasah bihi
ajina-in.
Bahawa diwasa ini ia-lah sebesar-besar hari yang
patut di-mulia-kan ia-itu hari Yang Maha Mulia
Baginda King George yang kalima dudok ber-
takhta di-atas singgasana kerja-an-nya genap 25
tabun. Di-dalam kandongan masa itu Baginda
telah memrentah dengan ka-adilan yang mashhur
dan limpah kurnia-an-nya serta kaseh sayaug yang
maainur meniheri aman senlosa kepada hamba
rayat yang her-nanug di-bawah panji-panji-nya ;
yang maha tinggi itu dengan kerana itu kami ber-
mohon dengan sebesar-besar per-mohonan : bahawa
di-lanjut-kan oleh Tuhan seru sekalian alam atas
asia Baginda dan Baginda Permaisuri serta putera-
putera dan puteri-nya dengan ber-kekalan di-dalam kaaehatan dan afiatan yang awfa.
Demikiim juga do’a kami bagi Sri Paduku Duli
Yang Malin Mulia Tuan Rajah kami. bahawa di-
kekal-kan oleh Tuhan afiru sekalian alam ber-
takhta di-atas singgasana kerja-an-nya memrentah
di-dalam negri Sarawak dan da’erab-nya serta pula
di-lanjut-kan asia-nya dan Paduka Duli Yang Maha
Mulia Permaisuri ’ dan Petri-petri-nya di-dalam
aebat dan afiat selama-lama-nya—Amin. Amin
This may be rendered freely into English as follows :—
All praise to God Almighty, Lord of the whole world ; upon all his Holy Prophets and Apostles, upon their households and their friends, peace.
This great day is one which it is fitting that we should honour, since it is the twenty-fifth anniversary of the accession to the throne of His Majesty King George V. The beneficent rule of the King-Emperor has conferred upon all peoples under this sway the inestimable benefits of peace, prosperity, and secure and just government. Therefore it is the most fervent and earnest prayer of all of us who shelter beneath his protection that God may prolong his life and grant to him, his consort, his sons and his daughters, in perpetuity, the blessings of peace and perfect health.
And furthermore. we pray to God that His Highness the Rajah may long be spared to rule- over us in Sarawak: and we ask His blessing and protection for Her Highness the Ranee and for all Their Highness' family. Amen, amen.
On the conclusion of the sports, the Sylvia Cinema, bj the kindness of His Highness the Rajah, was thrown open to the school children for two performances. Those for whom no room could be found in the cinema were later consoled by a series of spectacular main produced by the members of the Perhimpunan Setia Club. The popularity of the sports was abundantly proved by the number of spectators present, but during the evening the crowds that arrived to witness the various main far exceeded all expectations. For some hours the kampongs must have been very nearly empty,—-seldom in the history of Sarawak can so many people have been assembled at one time and in one place. So great, in fact, was the enthusiasm that these items were continued for one extra night.
Jubilee Day will live long in the memories of tlw people of Kuching, and our thanks are due to those who did so much to make it a success. We give below a list of those responsible for the organization .
Football.
League fixtures for the season are now nearly half completed. As expected, the strengths of teams participating in this year's competitions have proved far more even than in previous years; a point that will be gather from a perusal of the league tables given below.
The Municipal F.C., following a 1—0 win over the Medical "A'' team, remains the only unbeaten side in either division of the league.
The standard of play among the first division teams has, on the whole, been very good, especially in the matches between the Municipal and the S.C.F.A., and the Constabulary “A” and the S.C.F.A. The meeting between the Municipal and Medical "A” was awaited with great interest, since both teams were undefeated last season, but the game, although undoubtedly exciting, was far below the standard usually expected of these teams. We can only presume that the players of both sides allowed’the importance of the occasion to affect their nerves.
The Perhimpunan team, although beaten 10—1
bv Medical ‘‘A" on a waterlogged ground, staged
a’ notable come-back in their match with the
S.C.F.A., and following the acquisition of two or
three new players, gave the latter a hard fight to
gain their 3—2 victory
The standard of play in the second division has been rather disappointing, a number of the games being fur below last season's standard. At first it was thought that the championship would rest between St. Thomas' and Medical "B,” but both sides have already dropped valuable points to teams below them in the league table, and there now seems little to choose between the whole of the five teams in this division. The performance of Constabulary Singh, a purely Sikh team, in running St. Thomas’ and Medical "B" to a draw was one of the surprises of the season. Although lacking in ball control to the same degree as the remainder of the teams in this division, it is observed that the Sikhs are never lacking in energy; a point they attribute to a six mile run every morning before breakfast.
S1X-A-SIDE TOURNAMENT.
A six-a-side soccer tournament for silver medals kindly presented by Mr. D. V. Murphy was comenced on the evening of May 24th. Although a similar tournament was held in 1933, players in Kuching still appear to know little if anything of the game. The entries amounted Io twelve teams and some very surprising results were produced. Twelve minutes were allotted for the duration of each game. Although only two round of the competition have been played off to date, the participants have already learnt that skill without wind is useless in a game of this description, as was so ably proved by the Sikhs in defeating the Constabulary “A” team by 2 goals to nil. Results to date are as follows :—
First Hound.—Constabulary Singh heat Constabulary A. Medical B beat St. Joseph's. St. Thomas' beat S.C.F.A. Municipal heat W. J.
Chater's team.
Second Round.—Constabulary Singh beat S.N.A. Medical A beat Medical B. Municipal beat St. Thomas'. Perhimpunan beat Constabulary B.
Semi-final.—Perhimpunan beat Constabulary Singh. Municipal beat Medical A.—W.J.C.
Second Division News.
April.
Fruit and engkabang trees have been flowering profusely throughout the Simanggang district. Swamp padi crops have been reasonably good except at Sebuyow, but practically no bill padi has been harvested.
The construction of the new European bungalow at Simanggang is proceeding satisfactorily, and the building should be completed in June.
In accordance with the new regulations regarding the sale ol cartridges, the Acting Resident, Second Div-Lion, has ordered that the sale of gunpowder to any y son in (bis district is to be stopped until further notice. No. 4 shot cartridges only may be sold to Balau and Undup Dayaks, and not more than seven rounds at a lime.
Skrang and Batang Ai Dayaks may not purchase cartridges unless special permission is obtained from the Resident. Owners of cap-guns will not he required to pay tax until the sale of gunpowder is allowed once more.
Mr. W. P. N. L. Ditmas, Assistant District Officer, Simanggang, reports a curious phenomenon which was observed at Gaiau during an up-river trip. At about 7.15 p.m. some Dayaks pointed out to him a bright light which appeared high up in the sky in a westerly direction. This was at first supposed to be an unusually bright star, but it was seen to be slowly sinking, and soon afterwards disappeared behind a hill. Dayaks in the locality stated that they had seen tins light before, and were convinced that it was an until. It was again seen at Mentu the following night, and Native Officer Abang Morni said that he had seen the same light at Lingga on a rainy night when no other stars were visible.
In the counts of this tour, Mr. Ditmae also discovered that there were two places in the Sebuyow river about one hour's paddle from the bazaar where gas bubbles out regularly at all states of the tide. This has apparently been occurring for some years. When a light was applied to the gas, it burnt with a hot flame which was almost odourless. When burning, the gas has no odour at all.
Visitors to Simanggang during the month included the Right Reverend the Bishop of Labuan and Sarawak.
At Engkilili a Dayak named Nua anak Angga was convicted of causing mischief by fire with the intention of destroying tho house of a Chinese named Chai Kee. He was sentenced to one year’s rigourous imprisonment by the Acting Resident, Second Division.
The padi crop in the Engkilili district has been exceptionally poor, but former favourable reports of the pepper crop arc now confirmed. The crop should he harvested about the end of June.
It is satisfactory to note that in the opinion of the Assistant District Officer, Lubok Antu, the Dayaks in the Ulu Ai appear to be quiet, and to be more inclined to listen to reason than they were before. Penghulu Ramba and his brothers, however, are exceptions, since Ramba has shown clearly that not only is he unfit to be a Penghulu, but he is also a thoroughly unsuitable man to live at the very top of the river. It will be remembered that Ramba committed an inexcusable outrage last February when he and his brothers seized by force of arms the property of an old woman of Sanggong’s house in the Delok.
Mr. G. R. H. Arundell, Assistant District Officer, Lubok Antu, arrived in Simanggang on April 13th. having walked to the Ulu Skrang from Ulu fxibang Bays by way of the Ulus Engkari and Lemair.ik. and then boated down-river. He reports that Dayaks in all these rivers appear to be very friendly, arid state their willingness to co-operate in any setion designed to track and capture the rebels.
Padi harvests in the Ulu Ai have been everywhere a comparative, or complete, failure, and there will be considerable distress throughout this river until next year.
Chinese, pepper gardeners are gradually settling and taking up land at Lubok Antu, and if it were not for the fact that this station is. to Chinese, rather difficult of access, the influx would undoubtedly be rapid.
The Acting District Officer, Betong, reports that very few natives visited the station during the month, since they were all busy farming.
A diving contest was held at Saratok on the 19th, under the presidency of Pengarah Nyalu and Penghulu Undom, to settle a land dispute between one Jimbau' and Lunsa. The verdict was awarded to the former.
This is the first contest of this nature to be held at Saratok for some years.
A census of the Kalaka district was completed during April and revealed an approximate total of 18,897 of all races On April 20th, the Acting Resident, Second Division, arrived at Kabong, and a pukat fishing was held with only indifferent success. On the 21st a regatta was held, of which a full account appears elsewhere.
Kabong Regatta.
A very successful regatta was held at Kabong on Easter Monday, The Acting Resident, Second Division, Mr. H. E. Cntfield was present accompanied by Messrs. Dilmas, Barcroft and Mace and many of the Government staff from Simanggang and Saratok. Chief honours went to two Sebuyow built boats paddled by Sebuyow Malays, Choba Choba owned by Tuaiikn Haji Semail and P. Anglia Ways, and Rajah I.aut owned by Mr. D. C. While and Native Officer Abang Bujiing. Many new boats were built in Kabong and some good finishes resulted.
The organizers, Mr. D. C. White and Native Officer Abang Bujang, me to be congratulated on an excellent programme winch was carried through up to time and without any trouble.
Credit is abm due to the Gouri Writer, Mr. bee Kui Yu, the junior Native Olficer, the Malay School Masters, and others who officiated and assisted to make the event such a success.
The prize-giving took place in the Malay School in the evening which was followed by a main which was well attended.— (Contributed).
Third Division News.
April.
One inquest was held at Sibu during the month, a verdict of accidental death by drowning being returned. A Cantonese woman named Lee Ah Moi fell off the back of a Foochow launch, thus causing a slight inter-racial dispute, as the crew of the launch were alleged to have made little effort to save her.
Two Foochows, Chiew Kit Moi and Tiong Eee Ding, were drowned in a sudden squall whilst crossing the Rejang near the Leba'an. The bodies wore recovered on the 29th.
An outbreak of dysentery, similar to that in the Poi last month, was reported from the Ngemah, and a number of deaths were said to have occurred. A Dresser went up to investigate and found that it was a false' alarm. A certain number of people were sick, but only with fever and ordinary diarrhoea.
Rumours of outlaws continue, but nothing definite comes to light. It is hoped that the shortage of rice may eventually force them out of hiding.
The party sent to investigate the vicinity of Bukit Lila Bulu and other hills returned after a month’s search and reported that they had found no trace of any of the wanted men.
Nearly all the Simanggang levies garrisoning the blockhouses in the disaffected areas have given three months' notice, the Undup contingent from the Poi heading the list, and departing for home on the 4th. As each garrison goes it is being replaced by local Dayaks from the banks of the Rejang below Kanowit, and the Kabah. All of them are “friendlies,” who have served on various expeditions, and who are acquainted with, or know by sight, many of the outlaws
The reports of engkabang this year continue to be good, and it is hoped to harvest the fruit in August. Samples sent in, from the Katibas especially, are of very fine quality.
The Acting Director of Public Works visited Sibu and, amongst other things, investigated the erosion of the river bank near the pig slaughter house. It has been decided to make a number of small groynes to reduce the force of water, and plans, with information as to the amount of timber available, have been forwarded to Kuching.
S.L. Chamois has been repaired after involving herself in a collision with M.v. Rejang during Sarikei regatta.
Most of the piles for the foundations of the new Sibu Residency have been driven, and concreting should commence early next month. Work is now being done on the floor joists, posts, wall plates, doors and window frames.
The raising of Lanang Road is progressing satisfactorily, and, given good weather, should be completed early in June.
His Highness the Rajah, accompanied by the Government Secretary, Mr. and Mrs. H. A. Adame and Miss Adams arrived at Sibu in H.H.M.Y. Maimuna at 11 a.tn. on the 5th. There was an official landing .with a guard of honour under the command of Mr. W. H. Kelley, Assistant Commissioner of Constabulary. On the 6th His Highness sat in Court, and afterwards made a tour of the offices, departing for Kapit the next morning. On the 9th His Highness arrived at Kanowit, where a very large number of Dayaks were waiting. His Highness left for Sarikei on the following day and from there visited stations on the Coast, returning to Sibu on the 7th, and leaving for Kuching the same day.
The Acting District Officer, Lower Rejang, reports that there was very little crime in the district during the month .The persons suspected in the Luan Murder case had to be released for lack of evidence, and the case seems likely to remain an unsolved mystery.
Two wanted gang robbers were arrested by Mr. .Mi Koon, the Court Writer, Sarikei, who is to be commended for an excellent piece of work. Two of the four wanted secret society leaders were discovered in the bunkers of s.s. Kuranda, having boarded the the vessel at Sibu.
A quantity of pepper is being held in Sarikei bazaar in anticipation of a rise in price; it is understood that speculative offers of more than the market price have been refused, which is astonishing in view of recent developments in the pepper trade. 72.80 piculs of F.A.Q. pepper were exported during the month.
A representative of Imperial Chemical Industries Ltd. visited Sarikei during April and carried out some experiments with pest (enipanggnu) destroyers.
Trade at Sarikei is steady, and the shops prosperous. It is not anticipated, however, that any of the ehop-house lots recently applied for will be built on unless there is another boom in pepper prices.
The block of shops built by Government as compensation to those shop-house owners whose shops were demolished in accordance with the town planning scheme was completed during the month. The old bazaar is now completely demolished and arrangements to build a “bund” on this area being made.
The first two miles of the Repok road were metalled, but'the Bulat road is to be closed to motor traffic since funds for metalling are not available.
Timber is being collected for the new Government offices at Sarikei, and work should proceed shortly. At present only the concrete pillars and beams have been completed. Tenders were obtained for the construction of Native Officer's quarters at Sarikei and Binatang, and building should start during May.
His Highness the Rajah, accompanied by the Government Secretary and the Resident, visited the district during April.. On the morning after his arrival. His Highness sat in Court to hear requests, and then proceeded to watch a regatta which had been arranged in his honour. The Government Secretary left for Kuching in the afternoon.
Early next morning His Highness and the Resident went to Daro and then on to Matu, where His Highness sat in Court and also inspected the bazaar. His Highness went out on the same tide and spent the night in the Maimuna, leaving for Oya early next morning. On the 17th His Highness stopped at Binatang, where ho saw the new school and both bazaars, and also visited the Hockien School. After hearing requests in Court, His Highness left for Sarikei, where he spent the night. Next morning ITis Highness walked round the kampong and bazaar and visited the two Chinese schools. His Highness’ kindness in specially breaking his journey on his way through was much appreciated by Malays and Chinese alike, since the regatta had rather upset the normal routine on the first visit.
Fresh water had to be fetched to Sarikei by lighter during the month, but fortunately the drought broke before the situation became really acute.
Another case of grave-robbery was reported at Mukah during the month. This revolting crime appears to he peculiar to the Melanau districts, and is the result of these people burying gold ornaments and other valuables with their dead.
A number of persons in the Balingian district are said to bo suffering from ophthalmia, and an outbreak of measles was also reported from that district. The Mukah Dresser was sent there on the 28th and was still away at the end of the month. In Mukah, health was fair only, sore throats and fever being very common.
The Acting District Officer, Mukah, has been informed that certain Mukah traders have rented a sago factory in Kuching and propose to refine and export I heir own sago. This should benefit the local planters, since the project is bound to be opposed by the Binatang “ring" with consequent competition and rise in prices.
No further progress has been made with the electrification of the Mukah pumping station. The delay is to be deplored, since the present supply is very poor, and as a result drinkable water is at a premium just now.
Wan Ibrahim bin Tuanku Ali, Native Officer, ' arrived at Mukah from Sibu during the month, and proceeded to Balingian on the 29th to take over that station from Abang _ Mustapha, who will resume duty as Travelling Native Officer, Mukah.
It is interesting to note that the system of selling marked cartridges, which has been in operation in Mukah for nearly two years, has now been adopted for the whole State.
The Offieer-in-Charge, Oya and Dalat, reports that on April 12th a Chinese in Oya bazaar attempted to attack another_with a parang, but was prevented from doing any harm by the fact tliat he was suffering from acute beri-beri and could only walk with difficulty. Ho was arrested, but proved to bo hopelessly insane, and was sent under escort to Sibu.
All three Oya Penghnlns report that affairs in the uln are quiet at present. Reports show that the padi crop in the Pakn and Ulu Oya has turned out to be far better than was expected. Engka- bang has flowered in abundance, but the fruit has not yet set.
A large party came to Oya for Easter week-end, made up of Mr. P. M. Adams, Mr. A Macpherson, Mr. A. L. McLaine, Mr. D. C. Hodden, Mr. A. R. Snelus, Mr. and Mrs. B. J. C. Spurway and children, and Miss Ennion.
One. hundred and four patients were treated at Kapit dispensary during the month.
A ten-year old Dayak girl was taken by a crocodile at Pala Wong during April. Reports from a number of stations indicate that crocodiles are growing more and more troublesome, the system of granting rewards for their destruction is shortly to be re-introduced.
Ail the Penghulus of Belaga, Kapit, and Song, with the exception of 1’enghulu Puso and Penghulu Temonggong Koh, came to Kapit at the beginning of the month to meet His Highness the Rajah.
Seven hundred and fifty-nine sub-licences to work timber were granted at Kapit during April.
His Highness the Rajah, the 'Government Secretary, the Acting Resident, Third Division, Mr. and Mre II. A. Adams and Miss Adams arrived at Kapit on April 7th. An official landing took place on the 8th, after which His Highness met representatives of all communities in the Courthouse. Tn the evening His Highness visited the new hospital and the Roman Catholic Mission, and later witnessed a Mupu Kenyalang ceremony and a display of Dayak, Kayan and Punan daucing.
Lawas (Sarawak) Estates Limited,
The Directors submit their Report, with Statement of Accounts duly audited, to December 31st last.
The net profit for the period January 16th, 1934, to December 31st, 1934, amounted to .£9,380 9s. 6d.,
from which has been deducted the snm of £757 19s. lid. being Preliminary Expenses written off, leaving
the sum of £8,622 9s. 7d. available for distribution.
In view of the low book cost of the Estates, £30 13s. 6d. per planted acre, it is not deemed necessary
on this occasion to allocate any sum to Depreciation, and the Directors now propose a Dividend payment
of 9d. per Share, free of Income Tax at -Is. 6d. in the £, equivalent to 4 838 per cent, gross, absorbing
£7,711 Is. 4d., leaving a credit balance of £911 8s. 3d. to be carried forward.
During the period a crop of 1,162,667 lbs. of Rubber was harvested, at a f.o.b. cost of 3'29d. per lb.
The "all-in" cost, after charging London expenses, freight, insurance and selling charges, was 4'13d. per tb. The average gross price realised for the portion sold was 5'94d per lb.
In accordance with the Articles of Association, Mr A. Parker Smith retires by rotation, and being eligible offers himself for re-election.
The appointment of the Auditors rests with the Members, and Messrs. Jambs, Edwards & Co. offer themselves for reappointment.
By order of the Board,
ROWE, WHITE * Co., Ltd.,
Secretaries.
4, Lloid’s Avenue, Fenchuroh Street,
London, E.C.3.	.
April 17th, 1935