The Sarawak Gazette.
FRIDAY. NOVEMBER 1st. 1935.
Local and personal.
October.
His Highness the Rajah left Kuching on October 9th on a visit to the Third Division, returning on the 18th. His Highness, who travelled in H.H.M.Y. Maimuna, called at all Government stations in the Rejang River.
On October 21st His Highness the Rajah left for Miri by m.v. Marudu. His Highness, who was accompanied by Mr. D. C. Hudden, is expected to return to Kuching on November 2nd. Mr. Hudden was on his way to take up his appointment as Acting District Officer, Baram.
Her Highness the Ranee and Dayang Valerie visited Sibu Laut from October 9th to 14th.
On September 28th His Highness the Tuan
Muda and Mr. A. W. D. Brooke arrived at
King's Pavilion. Kuala Kangsar, where they
were the guests of His Excellency the High
commissioner and lady Thomas. His High-
ness later paid a visit to Cameron Highlands.
Mr. L. K. Morse and Mr. J. O. Gilbert both passed through Kuching during October on their way to Singapore and Penang respectively, where they were married. They have our best wishes for the future.
It is interesting to note from the Sibu monthly report that thirty-four tons of camphor logs were exported to Hong Kong during September.
On October 19th Mr. G. T. M. MacBryan gave a farewell tiffin party at the Rest House to which a large number of friends were invited. The proceedings, which lasted well into the afternoon, concluded with a singsong, and most of the guests, we imagine, would have been glad enough to have been able to cancel their usual Saturday afternoon games.
Mr. MacBryan left Kuching on the 21st with the intention of going on the Haj.
The coast seems to have been suffering from the attacks of crocodiles just lately, since during September people were taken at Bintulu, Mukah and Balingian. At Bintulu one of these beasts attacked and capsized a boat containing six occupants, one of whom he took; he was subsequently traced and killed, however.
It is remarkable that there are not more deaths from crocodiles in the Melanau districts, since in spite of the rewards offered by Government these people almost never take the trouble to hunt and destroy the animals, and the coast is rarely if ever visited by professional Malay crocodile catchers. There seems nothing, therefore, to prevent them breeding and multiplying as they please, since they have no natural enemies.
Mr. W. H. Potter left for home by the Vyner Brooke on October 2lst, having severed his connection with Messrs The Sarawak Timber and Trading Co.. Ltd.
Mr. R. E. Le Sueur arrived in Kuching on bis return from furlough on October 14th, and left the same day by the Rejang to lake up his appointment as District Officer, Sibu.
Rubber Restriction has been much to the fore lately as a result of the announcement of the second tapping holiday. It becomes increasingly obvious that rubber producers in Sarawak desire all the benefits of restriction with none of the attendant sacrifices; this, though a very human point of view, is one that will naturally have to be altered if restriction is to work with success in this country.
The extent- to which the recent trade revival is due to restriction is indicated by the the figures submitted by the Commissioner of Trade and Customs showing the quantity and value of rubber exports in 1935. and during the corresponding period of the past three years. These figures will be found in another column
Capt. and Mrs. C. P. Lowe and Mr. R. W. Lowe, Mr. W. Harnack. Dr (Mrs.) E. Le Sueur and Mrs. J. P. Baird arrived in Kuching bv s.s. Vyner Brooke on October 28th.
We are informed by the Postmaster-General that the charges for Christmas greeting telegrams to all offices in the British Empire have been reduced to a flat rate of $1.75 for 10 words and 18 cents for each extra word. Telegrams despatched under this reduced rate,”which will be in force from December 14th to January 6th, 1936. inclusive, must contain only greetings and words of endearment
Rates for telegrams to all other countries may he obtained at any Post Office in the State.
A notable wedding in Kuching during October was that of Abang Suleiman, son of Datu Abang Haji Mohideen, of Sibu, to Siti Hahmah, daughter of Tua Kampong Moha
mat Arbi. The belulut ceremony was held on the 13th, and the sanding took place on the following day; the houses of both the bride and bridegroom’s parents were beautifully decorated for the occasion, and the exquisite Brunei sarongs and coloured silks worn by the Malay ladies who were present made a most delightful spectacle.
The proceedings were followed by a bana- sawan given by Land Dayaks from Seras. A full account appears elsewhere in this issue.
Marriage of Miss Dorothea Parnell.
The wedding of Miss Dorothea ("Dolly") Parnell, the only daughter of Mr. and Mrs. Edward Parnell, to Mr. George Glass Hooper took place at St. Augustine’s Church, Queen's Gate. London, at 11 a.m. on October 7th.
The bride, who was supported by her grandmother, Mrs. Isabella Elspeth Parnell, and accompanied by her young brother. Master Charles Purnell, wore a blue costume and a blue hat with veil and shoes to match. On her left shoulder was a spray of white orchids. She carried a blue handbag with her monogram in gold, and her only ’ ornament was a diamond brooch, the gift of the 1 bridegroom's mother.
The reception was held at the Milton Court Hotel, South Kensington, the lounge of which was beautifully decorated with pink chrysanthemum and white j heather. After cutting the cake, the health of the bride and bridegroom was drunk by a small gathering of relatives and friends, about thirty in all being present.
Alter the reception, the bride and bridegroom left for G’lenengles Hotel, Perthshire, where part of their honeymoon will be spent. Later, they will go for a short time to Downe Hall, Bridport, the bridegroom's home. It is understood that they will live in london at 27, Montpelier Place, 8.W.
Among the presents the bride's parents wish to in-knowledge the following from friends in Sarawak :—
Mrs. Ogawa Tsuna and Mrs. Ogawa Suga (a coral necklace), Mr. Ong Tiang Swee (cheque). Mr. Ong Kwan Bin (cheque), Mr. & Mrs. Lau Chin Swee ta pair of gold bangles and jade ring), Mr. Wee Kheng Chiang and Mr. Lim Song Kee (jade), Mr. Tan Sum Guan fa pair of gold bangles), Mrs. Lau Chen Hiang (jade brooch), Mr. Lim Cheng .; Hock (gold bangles), Mr. Lau Su Yong and Mr. Lau Teng Kheng (gold chain), Mrs. Assan (diamond ring), Mrs. Choo Ah Hian (pearl brooch), Mrs. Lim Ghim Swee (cheque).
RUBBER RESTRICTION.
We are authorized to publish the following correspondence which has passed between the Sarawak Chinese Chamber of Commerce, Kuching, and the Chairman. Rubber Restriction Committee. It is considered that this correspondence should be of interest to the planting community of the State :—
KUCHING, SARAWAK, ‘2nd October. 1935
(3) In view of the fact that there has been but a short space of time between the last Tapping Holiday and the coming one, it is presumed tint a considerable amount of severity will be con- sequently felt by everyone concerned in the rubber industry. If it can be arranged, we would request you to kindly allow the coming holiday to commence from 1st day of the Chinese New Year, i.e., 24th January. 1936. until 8th February. 1936. both days inclusive, which amounts to 16 days.
We have the honour to he.
Sir.
Your obedient servants.
For Sarawak Chinese Chamber of Commerce.
Tan Sum Guan and Tan Boon Stew,
Secretaries.
The Chairman,
Rubber Restriction Committee,
Kuching.
Sir,
We have been requested by the local and planters to approach you on the subject of the new Government Order re Tapping holidav for rubber gardens, which is to come into operation on 27th instant.
The requirements of the above Order in respect of a Tapping Holiday of 23 days are causing much anxiety to both the producers and dealers, as well as the general traders. who have all experienced a certain amount of hardship during the last Tapping Holiday which took place from 8th to 28tb July last ft They do not seem to have completely recovered themselves from the bad effects of the last holiday, and in view of the approaching Hari Raya and Chinese New Year they anticipate an even greater hardship after the enforcement of the above Order. During the last holiday many of the tappers were thrown out of work, while the small holders had suffered most seriously, owing to their inability to recruit tappers to take the place of tho-e who had left their gardens. The larger holders, however, bad been compelled to retain their labour-force by sacrificing themselves to the granting of a living wage to the tappers. who were given other work such weeding, etc otherwise these tappers would have left their estates to look for work elsewhere
We beg to make the following suggestions. which we believe would afford Mime relief tn nil concerned, and which we trust will receive your favourable consideration : —
(1) To have o Sunday Tapping Holiday which should take effect forthwith, and which could be continued throughout 1935 and 1936. This will mean a rest of 52 days in a year, and it had occurred to us that a holiday of this nature which i- spread throughout tbs year will not be felt so seriously as one that in to run for three weeks at a stretch. In the event of any default on the part of the producers, they may be heavily fined and the informers may be amply rewarded.
(2) The exportation of unmilled Bark Scrap should be prohibited. Such a prohibition will lead to a reduction in the export of milled Bark Scrap by about 50%. thereby allowing a greater quantity of good rubber to take its place. This prohibition of unmilled Burk Scrap shall continue for any period of time as you think is necessary.
Kuching, Sarawak.
5th October, 1935.
The Secretaries,
Sarawak, Chinese Chamber of Commerce, Kuching
GENTLEMEN
I have to acknowledge the receipt of your letter dated 2nd October. 1985, regarding the rubber tapping holidav which has been declared to commence on the 27th October. This has been the subject of consideration by the members of the I Committee and has been submitted to His Highness I the Rajah. I am directed to make the following J observations in reply -
2. It cannot be denied that a tapping holiday must cause hardship to employers of labour and to employees thrown idle; where genuine hardship exists amongst employees thus thrown idle Governrnent is prepared to give help. These are difficulties inherent in a system of restriction based on the declaration of tunping holidays and, although it must about' admitted that other systems would I undoubtedly give rise to other kinds of difficulties. I unfortunately no other system which would prove a praeticable	of the problem, in the circum
dances of the rubber industry in Sarawak, has yet been found Nevertheless, it is equally correct to date that the sacrifice asked to be made by producers and dealers is clearly negligible when the present price of rubber, as a result of the scheme of restriction is compared with the level of prices previous to the introduction of the scheme, and the immense advantages which have and ore being derived therefrom, not only in the price obtained
I for rubber but also in the considerably increased quantity handled and exported.
3. The scheme to regulate and control the product inn and export of rubber is international in its scope. Sarawak is a party to the scheme, and it was introduced as a collective measure that would save the industry at the request or with the agreement of producers and those interested generally in the industry. As a result of the scheme the price of rubber has been materially improved, and for these reasons Government expects the loyal coperation of all producers and dealers, and especially of the more influential bodies and members of all communities who can do so much to make successful such action as it is found necessary to take to carry out the scheme which redounds to the advantage of everyone concerned in the industry.
4.The object of declaring the tapping holiday during the period 27th October to 18th November inclusive is mainly so that advantage will be derived therefrom in reducing the quantity of rubber exported this year. This is considered necessary and desirable in view of the present and possible future statistical position. As you are no doubt aware, the International Rubber Regulation Committee recently ordered a further cut of 5 per cent., thereby again reducing the permissible exportable amount, and it is not improbable that it may be found necessary to impose a further cut in order to achieve the declared intention of further reducing world stocks and so maintain the benefits of the scheme. For this reason it is not possible to defer until next year the declaration of the next holiday. 1 should also emphasize that it cannot be said that the period elapsing between the last tapping holiday and the next is unduly short; in view of the circumstances to which I have referred above it is quite probable that it will be found necessary to declare tapping holidays at more frequent intervals next year than has been the case this year when we have enjoyed the benefit of a larger permissible exportable amount, chiefly as a result of a smaller cut during the early part of the year. It should also be realized that a period materially less than that for which the next holiday has been declared cannot be expected to give an adequate result, and that, obviously, there cannot be much advantage in declaring a lapping holiday during a period the major portion of which a large section of producers would not be lapping anyway.
The suggestion of prohibiting tapping on Saturdays and Sundays has already been made but because of its impracticable nature could not be entertained. Without embarking on prodigious expense, out of all proportion to the results likely to be obtained, it would be impossible. under the circumstances in which rubber is grown widespread throughout the State, adequately to enforce a measure of this nature; it might therefore be expected to reflect adversely on those producers who, willingly or by compulsion, had observer! it if it were later found necessary to take further measure owing to the excessive quantities of rubber still being exported. However, at present few, if any, rubber holdings are fully tapped for 7 days a week throughout the year, probably none is tapped for more than an average of 23 days a month ; h measure, there fore, which only prohibited tapping on one particular day of the week would be wholly inadequate to*Effect the necessary degree of restriction, in fact it might well be described as being valueless as a measure of restriction.
6.The suggestion to prohibit the exportation of unmilled scrap is at present under consideration, and may therefore be adopted, but it should be realised that it would not be of statistical benefit as a, measure of restriction since under the scheme exports of rubber are calculated on the basis of dry weight content. It would therefore be helpful in considering the matter further if you would inquire and inform me regarding the terms on which the Kuching millers would be prepared to mill scrap rubber from other districts where producers have not available the facility of local mills; it would be considered undesirable to penalize such producers.
7.In conclusion 1 am to repeat and stress in the strongest terms that His Highness the Rajah, having undertaken the obligations of the International Agreement on behalf of the State and particularly those concerned in the rubber industry to whom the scheme has been and continues to be of so much benefit, is firmly resolved to honour the terms of the Agreement; therefore His Highness naturally expects every loyal citizen to do his 1 utmost to advance the success of the scheme and encourage the observance of any measure it may be found necessary to introduce, and His Highness would deprecate any motive not inspired by a proper regard for the common weal and which might tend to hinder or defeat the objects of the scheme. I am also to add that His Highness strongly advocates that all in a position to do so should endeavour to stimulate the development of industries other than rubber, upon which His Highness has repeatedly given warning that too much reliance has been placed. Effective action along these lines can be expected to help the position materially.
I am, Gentlemen,
Your obedient servant,
(Signed) H. M. CALVERT, Commissioner of Trade d Customs.
Chairman,
Rubber Restriction Committee.
in connection with the above correspondence, the Commissioner of Trade & Customs has supplied the following figures showing the quantity and value of rubber exports from 1932 onwards. These figures arc illuminating, and give a good indication of the benefit to producers brought about by the introduction of restriction.
Rubber Restriction Committee.
The following notice appeared in the I Govermment Gazette of November 1st: —
Rubber Restriction Committee.
The Public are hereby notified that the above Committee will welcome at any lime constructive 1 proposals from anyone interested in Rubber Restriction, and that the Committee is prepared to meet and hear any such proposals on receiving a written application from any member of the Public desirous of being heard in person.
R. L. Daubeny,
Acting Chairman, Rubber Restriction Committee.
Kuching, 24th October, 1935.
Sarawak Rubber Growers’
Association.
PRELIMINARY MEETING.
A preliminary meeting of Rubber Planters and Dealers was held on the 24th instant at the offices of the Sarawak Chinese Chamber of Commerce, Kuching, to discuss the advisability of forming an association, to be called The Sarawak Rubber Growers’ Association, with the following objects in view :—
1. To protect the interests of the Planting Community, and to assist in and support any schemes relating to the welfare of the rubber industry.
2.	To represent to public bodies and to Government the views of those connected with the industry.
3.	To co-operate with Government in promoting and securing the operations of such measures as may seem expedient for the betterment of the industry in Sarawak.
4.	To collect and circulate information relating to the industry.
Mr. Khan Ah Chong, of the Sungei Mayan Rubber Estates, in addressing the meeting, pointed out the necessity for forming such an Association in order that those concerned in the robber industry in Sarawak might Be able to represent themselves to Government and others as a body, instead of ax separate individuals, us and when any occasion arose. The benefit of this Association was obvious, and he was fully convinced that, it would he enjoyed by everybody concerned. He hoped that everyone interested in the rubber industry would join as a member.
The following gentlemen were elected officebearers for the period ending 31st December, 1936, viz.:—
The Council of the Association wish it to be known that they will welcome applications for membership from all parts of the State from planters, dealers, and others concerned in the rubber industry.
The Mystery of Master
Humphry’s Clock.
Translated from the original by “The Butler.’’
New Readers start here. Uriah Heep, who washes his hands with invisible soap, and imperceptible water, and in consequence is rather an unsavoury character, calls in
Oliver Twist, the world-famous detective, to elucidate the mystery of the theft of Master Humphry's Clock from the Old Curiosity Shop. While hot on the trail he breaks into a Bleak House on a lonely highland moor to meet
Little Nell, a revolting child whose sugary sweet sentimentality is fortunately cut short by her timely death; she is accompanied by
Little Dorrit, her cousin, three limes removed, and now in danger of being put away for good, and
An unncommercial Traveller, whose eternal plaint of Hard Times, plays old Harry with Our Mutual Friends’ nerves.
Dombey & Son, financiers, auctioneers, accountants (Turf) and general dealers in anything from which a profit may be extracted have mysteriously become possessed of some American Noles and some Pictures from Italy—contrary to their Great Expectations these prove to be forgeries, they therefore instruct
David Copperfield, who so ably failed to solve the Mystery of Edwin Drood, to clear up the mess, and burn the lot (both lots in fact). He enlists
Martin Chuzzleicif, a brilliantly clever journalist on the staff of the Pickwick Papers and part owner of the Sketch Book, to his aid, and both are now on the trail.
Now Read On.
"And so,” lisped Little Nell “her mummy took her home and-forgave her everything, and all three lived happily ever after.”
"Balderdash and Bunkum,” replied Little Dorrit Have you heard this one—
There was an old man of Sibuti
Whose manner was fearfully fruity
He said "You may think
I in addicted to drink
Doctors orders, my boy, its my duty.”
"Now. Now,'* cried Oliver with some asperity, twisting round on his chair until he resembled a cork- crew. “You children must remember we're trying to find that dock.”
"Oh all right,” said Little Dorrit in a very bored tone, and then, brightening up ... . “what about this”
Pada inasa suatu ada orang
Budi-nya di-kata ada kora ng la selalu dudok
D'alas buah bur ok
Tentu diam ia diri s'orang.
“Rather good	what?”
At this moment with a tremendous crash the uncommercial Traveller fell to the floor, an ugly wet slain spreading over the carpet where he lay; a quiet “tick—tick—tick—tick—" eerily resounded, and stopped as suddenly as it had begun.
The silence was ominous, and from even' corner of the room the damp cold seemed to draw in—, closer—closer.
(To be continued.)
I’m not so sure.—Ed.
The Clouded Leopard in Sarawak.
HY E. BANKS AND E. M. 8ELOU8.
So little is known of the habits of the Clouded
Leopard (Neofelis nebulosa) that some account of
captive ones may he of interest.
One animal, a semi-adult male, was obtained at
Min, and kept alive for some time; it measured
S' 3r in length, of which 2' 6' was tail; The weight
was only 24 Ibs. but we have seen a larger female
weighing 37 lbs. and there is some indication in
skulls that females may run larger than males.
The specimen wax on the whole distinctly slug-
gish, showing no inclination, by day or by night, to
walk or climb about in its cage, and though fur from
tame was not so aggressively vicious as its smaller
congener, the Marbled Cut (Pardofelis marmorata).
It is usual to describe this leopard as arboreal and
nocturnal. hut it is perhaps more terrestrial than is
supposed : when hunting pigs with native dogs 1
have twice known this animal bayed on the ground,
in both cases for but a short time since neither dog
or cat cared about coming to grips; in the first case
the animal was secured, but in the second vise a
native arrived on the scene armed only with a
parang, and cut himself a sharpened stake with
which to attack the beast, which tied precipitately.
From this and other accounts natives fear the
Clouded Leopard not at all, nor do their dogs and
fowls suffer from its depredations; wild pigs are
eaten, and the Clouded Leopard will return time
after time to the remains (which I have been shown)
until they are finished; this and the fact they may
even occasionally be caught in a panjok (the long
line of native snares) and are known in some localities
to inhabit the secondary growth or "blukar,” where
much climbing is impossible, all goes to show that the animal spends a good portion of its time on the i
ground, and in daylight, as well as being arboreal.
Food consisted of live monkeys, chickens and rats. dead food being refused ; its prey was secured by shock tactics, a sudden rush and a straight right or left from a forepaw knocking over or paralysing the objective. after which a single bite appeared to stab or crush out life. Two fowls a day ware willingly eaten, the feathers being laboriously plucked out by mouth and teeth. A large Pig-Tailed Monkey
(Maooetfx memestrinus) was quickly killed and put
up no sort of fight; when dead, the fur on the hind
quarters wax removed by licking with the rasp-like
tongue, and the meal commenced at this hinder end.
Rats were eaten whole. Although 1 believe the
Clouded Leopard to be able perhaps to maul a man
who wax defending himself. I cannot imagine it
living able to kill him outright, as its larger congeners
may do; incidentally, considerable fear of the animal
was evinced by town-living Malays, and an attendant
could only he found to clean out its cage with
difficulty. It wax noted quite by accident that the
Leopard evinced the greatest fear of the noise of a
"Flit" pump used by someone close at hand, and by
employing this could ever after be relied on to retire
into its corner whilst its cage was cleaned out. a
novel method of combating such an animal.
The pattern on its forehead is particularly notice-
able. and if of no use in a comparatively confined
apace. may possibly in the proper surroundings have
a paralysing or mesmeric effect on its smaller prey.
Considerable care was taken of its relatively long tail, which in repose was curled round under its chili: the I very broad rounded forepaws were an outstanding
feature, emphasising their use in securing prey. When standing, a very slouching attitude was adopted. head and hind-quarters being canned very low in marked contrast to the appearance of, say, the. Marbled Cat. where the legs are very straight and the buck high-arched.
The animal at night sometimes uttered a loud rattier moaning roar, most comparable to a strong wind passing over the mouth of a large empty jar, and the many "Tiger Hills" in Borneo are not improbably so named by the natives on account of the similarity of this roar with that made by the wind in rocky caves.
As I have mentioned elsewhere, the Clouded Leopard is not rare in Borneo, but its skin and body are put to so many use by natives that they will fetch f4—.£5 each, and it is only recently that we have secured two whole specimen. The canine teeth of the upper jaw are prized by Kayans, Kenyahs and a few Kelamantans as car ornaments; holes are bored in the upper part of the ear-shell and these teeth arc then piked through with the object of giving the wearer a ferocious appearance; clusters of beads on a string are attached to the bases of the teeth and prevent them -lipping forwards through the hole-. As much as $20 may lie paid for a long and perfect pair of subequal teeth. Though the skin is also used as a seat-mat (tikai burit) or a war-coat. and portions of the body as medicine, most of the people in question will not kill this animal, and must buy from Punans, Dayaks and others who have no such tabu, but who probably encourage it in their friends.
One of us (E. M. S.) obtained from some Enkari Dayaks one of two kittens about six weeks old that had not been killed in the excitement when the mother deported leaving her offspring on the ground in the jungle. The animal soon became tame and playful, and led the life of an ordinary domestic rat. though to start with it health on a diet of milk from a bottle and raw and cooked meat gave considerable anxiety.
At the age of from five to six months its general colouring was grey, with heavy brown or black markings on the back and flanks. The underside was yellow, marked with black spots extending on to the legs and very large paws. The tail, also spotted near its Toot, was profusely ringed throughout the greater part of its length. the hairs at the tip being, however, rather scanty. The comparatively large bend wax beautifully marked, the black dotted pattern on the forehead being particularly striking. The fm-c was barred with black and light greyish yellow, and the yellow throat had a distinctive broad black bar across it The ears were rounded, with n round white patch extending over almost the whole of their backs; the eyes were large, sometimes brown and sometimes powder blue according to the light.
The general appearance of this cat when walking was akin to that of the Leopards, and quite different from that of the domestic cats. The head was carried low with the back practically straight, and the tail, which wax extremely sensitive, held off the ground and invariably curled sideways. The gait varied, being at times a slinking and at times an upright walk, the former tendency predominating. The animal trotted like a dog at slow speeds, but broke into a typical gallop when in a hurry.
The specimen, though never caged, showed no
particular liking for trees or jungle, and used the
claws and paws like a cat when it wished to climb.
It was bold but suprisingly inept at balancing on
narrow branches, from which it fell or threw itself
at the first opportunity. It slept at full stretch
with the tail curled round the hind-quarters, but
never lay on the actual ground, even if it only
mounted a box a few inches high.
The animal was active during the day, but
positively vigorous at night: milk and cooked or I
raw bones were its diet at first, and although it
was deterred from chasing the live fowls walking
about, it dealt faithfully with trussed up fowls and
rats, starting usually at the head and neck: though i
it showed a natural interest in its prey, the general
outlook towards life and towards them was not
definitely very aggressive. Cleanliness was a
marked characteristic as in domestic cats, but it
did not purr, and when pleased or excited emitted
a peculiar chuckle, changing to a growl when angry
or annoyed.
The general impression, if one is to judge from
the behaviour of this kitten, is that the species is
no more than semi-arboreal, and semi-nocturnal,
and, as a whole, exceptionally placid. It is worth 1
noting that from the information supplied by Mr. Selons, and the description of the adult animal,
we have independently arrived at the conclusion i
that the species is at least hut semi-arboreal, or
more terrestrial than was supposed.
[This article is reprinted, by courtesy of the *
authors, from Vol. XIV of the Sarawak Museum
Journal, which is at present in the press.—Ed.]
The Wood and the Trees.
( Continued).
Ill.—EXPLOITATION.
We now come to the question of exploitation—a sore point with local foresters. Exploitation in this country as a whole can only be described as chaotic. No doubt this statement will be met with a storm of protest from local millers and others, but in anticipation we would ask them to consider whether they really have any logging organization at all, pointing out at the same lime that by organization we do not mean arrangements with contractors to bring in logs from wherever they can get them.
Ninety per cent, of the mills in this country are abetting the pernicious practice of “frontage- scratching” which means that extraction is limited to the river banks. This is excusable as long as reasonably good timber is obtainable there, but the practice has now become so firm-rooted that it will soon be difficult to break the loggers of it. Even now it is deplorable to see the type of timber which is offered to some of the mills on a take-it-or-leave-it basis. The sooner this is slopped the better for everybody, for since it obviously cannot go on for ever it would be easier to make the change gradually; but in addition the present state of affairs is uneconomical in that the losses in converting poor small logs would more than offset the cost of organized extraction of good ones. Another reason for demanding the change is that there is little doubt that the timber-trade is suffering from the dissatisfaction with timber aroused in purchasers by the poor quality of the produce of these small logs.
We do not propose to go into the question as to whether the blame for the present methods is to be attributed to the mills or the loggers, except to i remark that, as the price paid for logs must have a definite bearing on the amount of trouble expended in getting them, the mills cannot be entirely exonerated.
Apart from the question of uncertain quality and size, the uncertainty of supplies under present conditions is a major factor in retarding development.
1 The uncertainty is caused by the absolute dependence of loggers upon climatic conditions, it being the usual practice to rely upon small side-streams as the
1 primary extraction route. The main stream itself i seldom causes a hold-up, but as a result of drought in the side streams logs are held up for weeks or months although a mile of land-line would have
got them away.
In other countries considerable expense and
trouble are regarded as an inevitable part of log-
extraction, and in Malaya it has been found
economical to use several forms of land transport
to a large extent. To prevent misunderstanding:
we do not suggest that land-transport is preferable
to water-transport but we do insist that the time
has come to supplement water-transport by land-
links. The links should be between the felling area
and the floating dream which must he one with a
reliable and adequate volume of water. As far as
our information goes, the longest forest tramway
in this country extends for about a mile, and the
others could be counted on the fingers of one hand.
There are no “panglong” extraction roads such as
are common in Johore. Buffaloes are used rarely
and casually. Wire ropeways are unknown. The
common method is to roll out the timber on a twin
line of logs placed end to end, a method which is
definitely uneconomical and otherwise unsatisfactory
in that it requires the cutting of a rent is wide
enough to accommodate the longest logs.
While some form of tramway is probably best
suited to large scale logging in this country, there
is no reason why the Johore “panglong” method
should not be found workable, as it is practised in a
very modified form in Limbang and elsewhere. The
method is to construct a sort of inverted railway—
the “rails” of heavy timber being on the ground
and the “sleepers” or cross-pieces on top supporting
a sledge which is man-handled over the greased
“sleepers.” The Limbang sledges are too small—
they should be 15 to 18 feet long so that the greater
part of the log’s weight is evenly distributed on
the runners.
Expense has been an inhibiting factor to the use
of tramways with iron rails, and wooden rails are
not very satisfactory unless the type of outfit known
as the “German tramway” is used. This is a very
satisfactory arrangement and requires only a special
type of trolley having wheels of the pulley type with
concave treads of sufficient width to rim on round-
wood rails. The rails are simply round poles nailed
to sleepers, and they need not be laid with very
great accuracy as the allowance for gauge variation
is made on the axles of the trolley where consider-
able lateral play is given.
At least partially mechanised extraction cannot
he staved off much longer and we suggest that
millers would be well to make a start if only in a
small way to educate loggers.
This, unfortunately, brings us to the question
that millers so diligently try to avoid—the relation-
ship between themselves and the logging outfit.
So long as the presently common relationship holds
there will be no progress. The mill merely says
it wants logs and hopes for the beat. This is a [ most unsatisfactory policy, meaning as it does ; irregularity, of supplies and increased costs which reduce the power to compete with better organized I mills elsewhere. It would nut have lasted so long ' but fob the possibility of "froutage-scratehing” and it will die, we hope, with the exhaustion of the frontages. But strange as it may seem, the local sawmill industry, unlike all other industries, continues to be content with the most haphazard supply of raw material imaginable, and appears to be taking no steps to improve matters except in a few cases.
Obviously if regular and satisfactory supplies of raw material are to be assured, either the mill must organize its own logging camps or it must buy from logging firms which are prepared to work on a sound extraction method. The latter possibility is remote, but there is no reason why mills should not profitably organize their own logging camps.
brance but they may have a potential value if we only knew it, and the only way to find out is to experiment. Until we do find uses for the “useless” species we are hampered in our extraction operations —not to mention regeneration—to the extent that costs may quite well be doubled or trebled. The limited number of desirable species per acre means that longer “lends” are required with consequent expense in time and materials, so that with every new species for which a use is found we not only make a fuller use of what nature provides but we do so at lower cost to ourselves.
There are, of course, other wavs of overcoming the difficulty, but these are silvicultural and take a long time tn develop. In the course of years the silvicultural works will show results, but closer milisalion of the existing “jungle” can show them immediately, although naturally the silvicultural method will give the more complete results in the end.
IV.—Utilisation.
The final stage in the forestry cycle is also that which inspired it, namely the use of the produce. To realize the importance of this, it is only necessary to think of the many uses to which timber, not to mention any other forest product, is put.
Your shirt and socks are probably made of wood; your newspaper certainly is. Your household furniture is mostly of wood and the bungalow which contains it is probably also constructed of that material or required a considerable quantity in connexion with its erection. There is wood in your car and your games equipment m fact wherever you turn you see the products of the forest.
Proper utilisation of timber, with its manifold uses is not, therefore, an easy matter. Steel and glass are more or less steel and glass, but timber is anything from material soft as cheese to the hardness of metal. And not only that: its characteristics vary so greatly that only long experience or scientific inquiry can say whether a particular timber is the best for a particular purpose. The result, is that certain timbers have acquired ;i reputation as the best suited to a particular job and have held the fort in face of all comers despite the fact that their price is only commensurate with their reputation. This is doubtless very satisfaction to the producers of the particular timber, but not necessarily so to the community at large. It is therefore very desirable that an examination of the possibilities of other timbers should be made.
The results of such inquiries are of immense importance inasmuch as the may not only reduce the costs of production of the manufacture itself, but—what is very important to forestry here—may enable a letter use to be made of the land by the utilisation of a greater number of species. To clarify this last point: the flora of the Bornean forest consists of several thousand species; of these some hundreds are timber possibilities, but how many are in common use? Ts it too much to say that the timbers in really common use are limited to belian, kapor, meranti, geronggang and medang? We know there are others, but even accepting a further list can we make it exceed a dozen ?
It is here that the utilisation branch must step in. An area of forest in the virgin state may carry 60 to 80 tons of timber, but these figures will account for probably 20 to 30 species of which only 2 or 3 are definitely desirable at the moment. What of the others? At present they are only an encum-
Unfortunately the user of timber, who actually is the man best equipped for discovering the suit- abilities of new species, is hampered in his desire— if such exists by his fear that the new wood may not come up to expectations. We ourselves had an experience which illustrates this. We required a radio cabinet and specified certain local woods but 1 he cabinet-maker demurred. We widened the range and gave the craftsman choice of materials. He refused on the ground that he did not trust the endurance of the local woods and would not risk his reputation on anything but leak. Now, teak has a reputation which it deserves, but it does not now stand alone even in shipbuilding where it was once supreme. Bornean woods have invaded that realm and as their qualities became better known their use will increase.
It will no doubt he urged that it is the place of Forest Research Institutes to do the experimental work. Granted. But it is unfortunately a fact that many of those who most strongly support this plea are the hist to accept the research worker’s findings. Actually the work must be divided, and the final decision on suitability given by the carpenter and the user. For that reason each one of us can do n part by taking a broader view, and taking a chance now and then by using a wood that attracts us even if we know nothing of it otherwise.
The foregoing may seem a little vague and unpractical, so perhaps a few examples should be given to illustrate our meaning. Let us start with the use of belian. This timber has a reputation for durability second to none and has therefore , become the standard whereby all other local timbers , are judged. This is perfectly fair if at the same time we consider the conditions under which the timber will he employed, say as posts in the ground; but it is not fair to condemn meranti, for example, because it cannot compete with belian under these trying conditions. Yet we have seen household furniture made of belian when meranti would have been infinitely better as regards beauty and portability. and quite adequately durable. Let us keep our belian for saltwater piling, for bridges and such like, hut don’t let it intrude into the domains of less durable but more suitable timbers. Petir is a wood of only medium durability but it makes beautiful furniture; yet how often do we see it used. Keruing was despised locally until the demand for it in England caused it to be cut here and made the “seconds” available on the local market—now it is in regular use. Apart from its buttress, tapang was useless until it was found that impregnation made it suitable for railway sleepers.
The trouble in tins country is that it is not fullv realized that durability is a relative term. Instead of having one standard of durability—the resistance to decay while in the ground—we should have many. For example, what has furniture, or for that matter match-hoarding. to do with the ground? A house which admits white-ants and damp is either badly constructed or badly looked after, and is no reason for the general use of "durable” woods in interior work. Beauty, satisfactory seasoning qualities and ease of working combined with light weight far outweigh pure durability and should he given full consideration.
“This England.”
We print below a random selection from the “This England” column of The New Statesman and Nation :—
Priest-in-Charge wanted for St. Mary's, Ash Vale. Catholic essential. Fast bowler preferifd.—Church Tim cs.
As regards the visitors to the bungalows, these now pay live and six guineas per week rental, and it is evident that such a class of people who are willing to pay such a price can hardly be termed "undesirable.”—Letter in Observer.
Birmingham factories are reported to be expanding because cruising holidays are causing an increased demand for souvenirs from abroad.—Times.
We always say that however much machines may progress, however skilled factory-made lingerie maybe, we still take a snobbish and artistic pleasure in the word "hund-made.” Wolsey, understanding this quaint psychology, have invented a special machine, so delicate that it actually copies the tiny faults of handwork.—Good Housekeeping.
Juno writes: Why doesn't “U’bique" teach her children a prayer in Greek? God would still understand and it would be an excel lent beginning for a classical education.—Letter in Nursery World.
It was rather nice to think that this year the partridges had a lovely restful Sunday on the First of September.—Western Mail & South Wales News.
Had it not been for a vicar I might never have handled a club. I dread to think of what sort of job I should have made of my life had this been the case.—Golfing article in News of the World.
The bows of the Napier Star had ripped through the bows of the Laurentic just beneath one of the anchors. . . .
Three men were found dead in their bunks, three others were missing, their bodies hidden amongst the tangled mass of debris. . . .
How near disaster came to catastrophe was also evident. Had the Napier Star struck twenty yards further astern, she would have cut clean into the first-class staterooms.—Daily Mirror.
The British North Borneo
(Chartered) Company.
We print below extracts from the speech made by Major-General Sir Neill Malcolm, k.c.b., d.s.o.. who was in the chair at the I Ninety-eighth General Meeting of Share- ! holders of the British North Borneo Company held at Winchester House. Old Broad Street, London, E.C. 2, on July 16th. 1935. These extracts are taken from the full text of the speech published in the British North Borneo Herald.
"The outstanding feature which no doubt everyone . has recognised is that for the first time for three years we are able to show a legitimate trailing profit in the year 1934. For the two preceding years we ' wire fortunate in that our trading loss was more than covered by the appreciation of our investments.
This year. 1934, however, we were fortunate because in addition to a further appreciation of nearly £*27,000 ' we have a trading profit of just under £10,500. I need hardly say that this is almost entirely due to the effect of rubber restriction, and if you will turn . to the last page of the Accounts you will see that rubber has resumed its place as our principal export ; and that the value of that export has gone up by : over 200 per cent. -that is to say, from £179,000 to nearly £568,000. I shall have something to say about rubber restriction later on. It has been difficult to work as is inevitable with any scheme of the kind, but, difficult or not, there is no getting away from the main fact that our improved position and that of rubber glowers in the country is mainly, if not entirely. due to restriction. Further, I am glad to say that although restriction is now being felt much mon- severely than was the case, last year, owing in the reduction in our permitted percentage of exports, improvement has continued and the results for the first five months of this year show us to be rather more than £10,000 better off than we were fur the same period of 1933.
"We are at tins moment passing through a rather critical time in regard to our finances for the year 1935. The first factor is rubber restriction, which is now very rightly severe. There is, as I suppose everyone in this room knows, a cut of 35 per cent, of our quota. That cut in our quota has not yet produced any increase of price above that which our producers were getting for their rubber twelve months ago, when there was practically no restriction, and everybody was working nearly to full output. That must, and I certainly think it is inevitable that it should, reflect itself upon our railway receipts very directly, both on the exporting and on the importing sides, for with the reduced exports there can hardly fail to be reduced imports. We are not able to export as much as we did last year, and I suppose our traders will not be able to import as much as they did last year. Therefore with regard to our railway receipts, we get it both ways. What the effect of that is going to be one does not quite know. It may be that from now onwards there will not be the same improved results
that there were in the first five months of which I
have already spoken. The second adverse factor of which I thought to warn you is the recent sharp fall in the price of copra from something over £13 a ton to under £11 a km. That hits our northern area round Kudat as well as the East Coast. For these
reasons, which I have thought it right to put before you, notwithstanding the favourable results for the first five months, it is still too early to form any idea of what the financial result of this year is going to he. I repeat what I said before that even with the low quota which we have undoubtedly got—and I am convinced our quota is on the low side as compared with that of other people—even with the 35 per cent, cut the country is better off with restriction than it would be without it.
‘ Our new Governor is Mr. D. J. Jardine, who came to us from Tanganyika where he was Colonial Secretary for five years. Although this is his first experience of the Far East he has had truly remarkable experience in Cyprus and many parts of Africa. This experience outside Asia enables him to bring a fresh and powerful mind to bear upon our particular problems, and after many discussions—daily discussions, I might say—with him. I am very confident that the country will reap great benefit from his administration. He is fortunate, as he is himself the first to recognise, in that he has assumed the reins of government at what looks like the beginning of a period of returning prosperity.
“And that is just the impression I gathered— returning prosperity—on lauding at Jesselton last February. The impression I got then was that we were at the beginning of better things: although we have not got very far in that direction yet, we are hopeful. Jesselton and the West Coast have suffered far more than Sandakan and the East Coast, and in February last that part of our territory was just entering upon the stage of convalescence. The outstanding visible result of the slump was the reduction in the number of Europeans about. The club is almost empty, the race-course is abandoned and the golf-course is almost idle. Whether the old kind of prosperity will ever return to the West ( oast is doubtful, for estates have discovered that they need far fewer assistants than they used to employ, and so too, though not to the same extent, has Government. It is possible that in the not very distant future planters and Government Officers may be replaced by aviators, for aerodrome1 sites have already been selected at Jesselton and Kudat which may before long be in use both by the Air Force and for commercial purposes.
“Now let me say something of the minor industries, of which I was able to gain a certain amount of first-hand knowledge during my visit. Of these the most important is perhaps the Japanese fishery on Si Amil Island. That fishery is constantly growing and, curiously enough, fish seem to become more plentiful each year. When I first visited it eight years ago it was on the mainland at Tawau and gave employment to thirty hands; now it has been transferred to Si Amil Island, tinning inachinerv has been installed and 265 men and
women are employed. It gave me the impression of being a very happy and prosperous community. Those of you who are fishermen—and many of you who are not fishermen—I am sure, will be interested to hear that early this year they had their record catch for one day of 6,000 fish. When you remember that these fish weigh from 6 to 10 lbs., and are all caught on the rod in the space of a few hours you will realise the possibilities of North Borneo waters for deep sea sport.
“Close by Si Amil is the small island of Mabul,
where another enterprising Japanese has started the
cultivation of pearls. When 1 was there he had
just laid down his oyster beds but was afraid he
might have to move to more sheltered waters.
However, from a letter I have had since my return
I gather that he is hopeful of placing North Borneo cultured pearls on the market- at no very distant date. 1 hope he will not be disappointed. 1 now come, working northward as you will realize, to the tobacco planting by the newly formed Darvel Tobacco Plantations, Ltd., near Lahad Datu. It was part of our Agreement with the Imperial Tobacco Company that we should provide a metalled road by the end of this year. That road is progressing well, and 1 was able to get out to the estate on a lorry.
“While on the subject of roads you will be glad to hear that the trustees of the Colonial Development Fund approved our second five-year plan, and have granted us £10,000 a year for a further period of five years. I need hardly tell you that this is not pure charity, but this grant was made in the hope of direct or indirect benefit to British trade. The figure- I have already given you to the rebate on British goods are the best possible evidence that there is very distinct and direct benefit already forthcoming.
“The last industry I wish to mention—and it is the one in regard to which you will probably Ims must interested —is oil. I told you last year that a concession to the Anglo-Saxon Company was almost i complete. I am glad to be able to tell you now that negotiations were carried to a successful and very friendly conclusion and that geological reconnaissance was started towards the end of last year. It is. of course, still far too early to form any opinion as to whether oil will or will not be found in payable quantities, but you will be interested to know that the most promising area is that rather uncompromising stretch of swampy mangrove between Marndn Bay and Sandakan. I understand that the geological survey will not be finished for at least another year or eighteen months, and will then be followed what are known as gravity tests covering an equally long perk al. So that we cannot hope to have an\ definite news for quite a considerable time Perhaps at our Meeting in 1938 there will be good news, hut perhaps, too, the news may be disappoint- ing. We may hear that the Company has had to abandon their work without any satisfactory result Inking arrived at. It is impossible to say more than that the exploratory work is proceeding as rapidly as impossible. and in any event they have not f stopped vet.
“Let me sum up by saying that I feel decidedly confident as to the immediate future of the Company. The Balance Sheet which we have laid before you is the most satisfactory which has been produced in my time as President, the Accounts are better than they have been for some years, and j there are many minor evidences besides those I have mentioned to you, of returning prosperity. The flow of immigration lias been resumed; the Note Issue has increased and is now back to the 1930
figure. All this is to the good. There is one
doubtful factor, and that is whether rubber restric-
tion is going to do what I hope it will do for as,
or not. It is my firm conviction that our basic
I not a should be higher, but even as we are we are
far better off with restriction than without. With
a reduction of world stocks and slightly improved
prices for robber, and I hope for copra too, this
Company will be out of its difficulties and on quite
a good wicket."
Wives in Pawn.
In Peiping the ricksha coolies, finding business bad owing to the economic depression, are actually pawning their wives. By the terms of the contract they regain possession of their ‘'property” on payment of the loan.
While the loan is outstanding the pledged wife acts as a domestic servant, without wages, in the pawnbroker's household.
And some of the "pledges'' are so satisfied with their new surroundings that they decline to be , redeemed when their husbands arrive with the ransom money.
The husbands are complaining to the authorities, but as there is no law on the statute book which exactly fits the situation matters for the time being are at a deadlock.—Sunday Tribune
films of the Month.
The high lights of the month at the Slyvia Cinema were two costume plays. The Private Life of Dan Juan, starring Douglas Fairbanks and Merle Oberon, and The Affairs of Cellini. with Fredric March and Constance Bennett. In the former, Alexander Korda's superb production reconciled one to the rather pointless story : the costumes and sets had obviously been designed by an artist and one, moreover, who knew his period, which was the unfamiliar one of early eighteenth century Spain. Why is it. incidentally, that Spain fades out of all English history books after the Armada? One hears of the country again, certainly, in connection with Trafalgar and the Peninsula War, but the average Englishman knows less I him nothing about the life of the people from 1600 onwards. Don Juan gave us a glimpse of this life. The balcony scenes. the scenes in the inn court-yard, and the slots of the sham Don Juan's funeral were fine examples of the kind of photography that we have come to expect from the maker of The Scarlet Pimpernel and The Private Life of Henry VIII. And if. as we have remarked, the plot was rather thin, it did not seem to matter very much. Dougins Fairbanks strutted and leaped with grace, and Merle Oberon was her usual ravishing self.
A costume plav attracts two entirley different audiences : one. highly critical, is always on the look-out for the slightest anachronism or departure from historical truth : the other is not interested in accuracy of detail, but judges the play by the enter-tainment it provides. If we adopt the second (and surelv the most sensible) view-pomt. then The Affairs of Cellini was a delightful fantasy in a most attractive setting. Constance Bennett can act as well as look prettv. and although Fredric March never became quite real as the scape-grace gold-smith. Frank Morgan gave a really admirable per-formance as the Duke of Florence. It was worth going to see the film just to watch him act. For the rest, the story went through the usual gamut
of sword-play and dare-devil love-making. with
I Morgan providing the comic relief. An amusing'
hash-up of renaissance Italy as the SabaUni fans
imagine it.
In The Devil and the Deep, Charles Laughton
had a part after his own heart as the insane sub"
marine commander who is prepared to sacrifice fifty
lives, including his, own, to satisfy his private
vengeance, Tallulah Bankhead made a welcome
re-appearance on the screen as his faithless hut.
much-tried wife, and Gary Cooper did his usual
strong man stuff as her lover. Laughton proved
I again what a fine actor he can be. and his por-
trayal of an obsession of jealousy culminating ill
I mildness was disturbing in its unpleasant realism.
The scenes in the sunken submarine showed to
perfection the use that the cinema can make of
I machinerv to produce effects that cannot even be
attempted on the legitimate stage; the maze of
dials, lubes, and levers in action, when accom-
panied by the right und effects, was singularly
. impressive. and heightened the emotional effect
tense situation. Not always does of an
naval Officer. driven to suicide by insane jealously,
find Ins wife and her lover at his mercy under the
All the actors made the most of a good opportunity
George Arliss, though he goes from strength to
Strength. remains always George Arliss, and any
film in which In' plays is worth seeing for his ,performance alone In The Man Who Played God,
however. some of his thunder was stolen by Evan
1 Simpson. Who. as his secretary, showed acting that
has rarely been surpa-sed on the screen. The idea
of the life of a rich and celebrated musician, who lives
i onlv for his music, being blighted by deafness was
a good one. as also was the discovery that a new and
equally full life existed in doing good suneptitouly
to others: hut it was an idea that needed a very
delicate touch, and one that could be only too easily
spoilt by the least excess of false sentiment. Unfortunatelv. this was the ease. and the story outdid
Dickens in his worst ,’Cristmas Carol Vein. But.
again. It was dominated by the personality of Arlies,
and as long as he held the stage, which luckily he
did for most of the play, nothing else seemed to
matter.
Moulin Rouge, in which we. Another good film was
were asked to believe that a husband could make
his own wife under the impression that she love to
was someone else Once this thumping improbabilty
valued. the film became rattling good was
entertainment with Franchot Tone and Constance‘
Bennett, lending enchantment to the two chief ,parts.
Chance was a rather disappointing British war
who never ..picture starring Douglas Fairbanks .Jr
fit in with quite came to life, somehow he does mud. blood. and the trenches. Aren’t We All was
another disappointing British film in which a stage
play was transferred bodily to the screen without made to adapt it to its new being any attempt
of Gertrude Law: *' The unique personality
rence does not get A fair chance on the screen, and
tors, tough each capable enough in their the other
own field, were nut given a chance by the director,
what unimaginative production A good example o
can do to a promising story.
In Stage Mother Alice Brady was reallv admirable
as a hard-boiled American actress whose one ambition
was a career, not for herself, but for her
!daughter. What, an amazingly good actress she is
honourable mention must he accorded to La Cucaracha an excellent short film in colour
Mainly About Nothing.
AFTER GRACE, MEAT: AND AFTER MEAT	A very large sheep-farmer in North Wales, to whom the Welsh language comes more easily than the English, at last decided to have a holiday, and he went to a big hotel for the first time in his life. He was rather surprised to find dinner at R o’clock al night, but he determined to go through with it. and sat himself down. Along comes a waitress. “Would you like a menu, sir?” says she. “Indeed. 1 would,” says our hero, looking at her carefullv. “I would, indeed! But let me have the dinner down me first.”
(Manu. my dear, is Welsh for woman.)
—'Dalesman' in Horse and Hound.
TOENAIL.
Near Binghamton. N. Y.. Zena Brown went swimming with red painted toenails, suddenly fell I something bite off her right big toe. Her companion. Colonel Elmer E. Johnson, explained that ’ a snapping turtle or big fish had been deceived by i the punted toenail.
Time, August -26th. 1935.
The Pobble. whose historic swim across the Bristol Channel was immortalized by Edward Lear in the sixties of the last century would, of course, have j win ted his toe-nails red,—if he hail had any. But since, owing to an unfortunate malformation, he lacked both toes and toe-nails, be was reduced, as readers of this paper will no doubt remember, to wrapping his nose in a piece of scarlet flannel. It was fortunate for him that there were at that time no snapping turtles or carnivorous fish in English waters, otherwise his swim might have had a very different ending.
One cannot, indeed, he loo careful about paint when in the water, as was abundantly proved at Geneva recently. A certain Mrs. J. Sedbohm Catnip, an enthusiastic Internationalist and League supporter, entered the lake clothed only in a series of transverse stripes of red, mauve, green
gold and purple paint. Across her rump were ! painted the words ‘The Spirit of Abyssinia,’ and her action was intended to be a gesture designed to call attention to the wrongs of that unhappy country. Unfortunately, though, just as she was swimming slowly past the offices of the League Secretariat (to the intense delight of a crowd of tourists on board one of the lake steamers), she was savaged by a shoal of trout, who were apparently under the impression that she was a monster Swiss roll provided for their refreshment by the local branch of Our Dumb Friends’ League.
She was only rescued with difficulty, and was unconscious when hauled up on the beach. A
I quart of dill-water was brought, however, and afforded instant relief. Interviewed later at her hotel. Mrs. Catnip stated that in future she would
I confine her gestures to demonstrations in favour of the International Vegetarian Association, since it was unlikely that even a fish would mistake her for a nut cutlet.
First Division News.
September.
One hundred and nine civil and forty criminal cases came before the Kuching Courts during September. Of the latter, thirteen were for breaches of Municipal By-laws.
Mr. W. P. N. L. Ditmas. who had been temporarily attached to the District Office. Knelling, returned to Simanggang on September 7th. Mr. E. H. Elam. Assistant District Officer. Sadong. remained in Kuching for medical treatment during the greater part of the month.
The Officer-in-Charge. Bau. reports that there was no serious crime in his district during September.
Three hundred mid sixty-three persons were treated at the Bau dispensary and hospital during the month. Two hundred and forty-nine N'.A.B. injections were given.
A dresser visited Kampong Singglii. since much sickness had been reported there. Forty-three deaths had taken place during the month, these being mainly due to pneumonia following influenza.
On His Highness the Rajah’s birthday. which v as observed as a public holiday, seventeen Long Service Decorations were awarded to Government servants at Bau.
It has been reported from the Sonali district that Land Dayaks from Dutch Horned have been causing trouble on this side of the border near Kampongs Simuti and. Tepoi. It is also said that they have removed the boundary marks and replaced them further into Sarawak Territory in order to gain more farming land. It is hoped to arrange a meeting on the spot with the Dutch authorities in order to look into this matter.
The Dayaks in the Bau district. especially up the left-hand branch, were late in planting their padi this year. However, the planting is practically all finished now, and the burning off seems to have been
quite satisfactory.
A fire occurred at Paku on the night of the -20th- — 21st September, which resulted in the almost entire destruction of the bazaar. Only the Police Station at one end and two or three houses facing up the bazaar at the other end were left standing. An enquiry was held on the following day. but without result there was no evidence of arson. The cause of the fire is unknown, but seeing that the bazaar was built mainly of leaf attap and that the fire followed three very hot. dry days, a carelessly discarded match or cigarette would have been enough to start it.
Government assistance has been given to those who were considered deserving.
The production of gold for August. 1935. created a new record, the total amounting to 3.096.369 oz. The Sarawak Mining Syndicate easily headed the list with the astonishing figure of 1.016.S4 oz.
The price of gold has now dropped to between $59.10 and $59.30 per tine ounce.
One Mining Lease, one Exclusive Prospecting Licence, one Panning Licence and three General Prospecting Licences were issued at Bau during September.
The Thai Thoong Gold Mining Syndicate have now transferred their lease to The Kim Hong Gold
; Mining Syndicate, which will be opening up this month. A new mining syndicate. The Boring Gold Mining Syndicate, has been formed and intends to start operations in Chop 'Ted N’yan's rubber garden at Boring. Bidi.
The Native Officer, Sadong, reports with regret the death on September 2nd of Haji Merosin. Tuan Khatib of Sadong Mosque. Haji Merosin had occupied this position for about nine years.
The Court Writer. Lundu, reports that the health of the district durinn the month was fair, there being no epidemics.
The Tua Kampong of Telok Serabang visited Lundu on September 9th. and reported that no Japanese fishing vessels had been seen in Datu Bay.
Gersik Re Setia Jaya Club.
TENNIS TOURNAMENT—(HANDICAP).
On Saturday the 5th, Their Highnesses the Rajah and Ranee, accompanied by Mr. L. N. Reynolds, Commissioner of Sarawak Constabulary. and Mrs. Reynolds, proceeded to Kampong Gersik by kind invitation of the Datu Mentri on behalf of the Club members to honour them by witnessing the conclusion of the Annual Tennis Tournament.
At 1.30 p.m., the Datu Mentri was "at home” to Their Highnesses at his house, where tea was served. Later, they proceeded to the Tennis Court at Bukit Mentri, where they were met by several Tua-Tua Kampong and members of the Club.
The tennis ground had been specially decorated with Sarawak flags, and various other decorations were set up at every corner.
Crowds of spectators came from various Kampongs to watch the game, which was enjoyed by both players and spectators alike.
After one hour's play, the game came to an end. The winner of the first prize was Mohd. Joblie, .second prize Ben Jomil, and the prizes were kindly distributed by Her Highness the Rajah; afterward three cheers and “Slamat” were called for by His Highness the Rajah, and were echoed by everyone.
In conclusion , the Hon. Secretary read a few words of thanks to Their Highnesses.—Contributed.
The Sarawak Chinese Athletic
Meeting.
—
After a lapse of four years, the Sarawak Chinese1 Community held their Athletic Meeting for the second time on the Song Kheng Hai Recreation ( Ground. Padungan Road, on Thursday. October 10th, 1935. the occasion being the celebration of tin: i Chinese National Day. The ground was kindly placed at their disposal by the Municipal Commissioner.
This year the sports were held on a more elaborate scale. On the western side of the field, two long rows of grandstands were built to accommodate the guests, in addition to which another long stretch of grandstands on the north was specially built for the school children and com-
petitors. With a tasteful decoration of flags and
bunting on the buildings and well laid-out track,
the field looked perfect in every respect and presented
a brilliant spectacle.
The preliminary heats, for selection of competitors
to appear in the final day. were run off on the 6th
and 8th October, 1935. There were about 120 girls
and 320 boys who took part in the competition.
They all displayed keen enthusiasm during the heats',
with a feeling of intense zeal on the final day. Their
enthusiasm, as well as the interest of the spectators,
was not in any way dampened by the shower of rain
which occurred in the latter part of the afternoon.
There was no individual championship cup offered,
but all competitors had put all their efforts into the
events and times set up for the various events were
fairly good in spite of the wet condition of the ground
marred by the afternoon rain.
One event on Pole Vault. Division A—Open was
unfinished as the wet ground proved useless for
further attempts, since one of the competitors had
a minor mishap when the pole slipped and broke.
The prizes were eventually divided into 2 firsts and
2 seconds.
There were 42 events on the programme, which
started off in the morning at ‘J o'clock, when the
opening ceremony was introduced by the singing of
the Chinese National Song, sung by the contestants
after parading round the field headed by the Hokien
School Band. This was followed by a Mass
Physical Drill performed by 220 Boys and another
Drill by 64 Girls.
Among the thousands of interested spectators were the Chief Justice, the Acting Secretary for Chinese Affairs, the Principal Medical Officer. Datu Amar, Datu Hakim and others. Mr. Ong Tiling 8 wee. c.S.s., gave away the prizes at the conclusion of the programme. On the whole, the Athletic Meeting was a great success, and the Organising Committee hopes to make this meeting an annual event. - (Contributed).
The following wore the results :—
50 Metres Flat Race.—Boys’ Division D.
1. Law Song Peng. 2 Kho Peng Slang. 8 Wong Jun Kong.—Time 0 secs.
50 Metres Flat Race.—Girls’ Division D.
1 Chai Ah Joon. 2 Liong Soon Foon. 8 Wong Phui Jin.—Time '9 secs.
50 Metres Flat Race.—Boys’ Division C.
1 .Lim Hain Yaw. 2 Leong Soon Foon. 3. Ho Ah Chuan—Time 7 secs.
50 Metres Flat Race.—Girls' Division C.
1. Chong Fong Jin. 2 Owl Gek Bue. 3 Koh Nyuk Ngo. —Time 9 secs
50 Metres Flat Race.—Girls’ Division B.
1 Lim Sook Nyuk. 2 Yong Chew Jun. 8 Wee Peng Lam,—Time 10 sec,..
100 Metres Flat Race.—Boys’ Division B.
1 Kho Eng Seng. 2 Wee Cheng Siang. 3 Yap Lav Seng.—Time 13 secs.
'75 Metres Flat Race.—Girls' Division D,
1 Chai Ah Joon. 2 Lioug Soon Foon. 3. Leong Kui Jin.—Time 14 secs.
75 Metres Flat Race.—Boys' Division D.
1 Kho Peng Siang. 2 Law Sivan Peng. 3 Whan Yong Kwan.—Time 13 secs.
100 Metres Flat Race.—Girls’ Division C.
1 Chong Fong Jin. 2 Yong Choc Moy. 3 Owl Gek Buc.—Time 16 secs.
100 Metres Flat Race.—Boys’ Division C.
1 Lim Hian Yaw. 2 Jee Ah Lah. 3. Leong Thung Hian.—Time 15 secs.
100 Metres Flat Race.—Girls’ Division B.
1 Lim Book Nyuk. 2 Kho Num Chin. 3 Wee Pong
Lam.—Time 15 secs.
50 Metres Potato Race.—Girls’ Division B.
1. Wee I’hek Luan. 2. Lim Su Nyak. 3. Kho Soh Ngo.
50 Metres Egg & Spoon Race.—Girls’ Division C.
1 Gok Hue. 2 Kheng Hun. 3. Heng Ngo.
200 Metres Flat Race.—Boys' Division B.
1Kho Eng Seng. 2 Wen Chen Siang. 3 Tan Eng
Hock.—Time 20 secs.
100 Metres Relay Race.—Boys’ Division B.
1 Bian Son's learn. 2 Min Tock's team. 3 Koon Min'a
team. -Time 1 min.
100 Metres Flat Race.—Division A.—Open.
1 Law Him Chong. 2 Chi Choon Leong. 3 Lim Chiok
Kui.—Time 11 secs.
High Jump.—Boys' Division B.
I Kok Ah Khian. 2 Chia Ilian Kong. 8 Ila Pah
Chiang.—Height 4 ft. 6 ins.
High Jump.—Boys' Division C.
1. .Jee Ah Lah. 2 Hock Seng. 8 Bong Ah Aug—Height
21 ft. 6 ins.
Putting the Weight (12 lbs.)—Girls’
Division A.—Open.
1 Chua Ah Bee. 2 Law Ai Goh. 3 Worn.’ Chen Eng.—
Distance 28 ft. 5 ins.
100 Metres Men Teachers' Flat Race.—(Post Entry.)
1 Kho Eng Seng. 2 Jee Foh Seng. 3 Yeh Swi Yon.
200 Metres Flat Race.—Division A. - Open.
1 Law Han Chong. 2 Lim Chiok Kui. 3 Lim Puk Kui.—Time 271/2 secs.
Long Jump.—Boys' Division C.
1 Jee Ah Lah. 2 Lee Shung Syn. 8 Ah Chuan.—Dis-
tance 11 ft. 6 ins.
High Jump.—Girls’ Division A.
1 Low Hong Phiu. 2 Ong Ton Siu. 8 Sim Nyuk Eng
Height 8 ft. 0 ins.
50 Metres Thread & Needle Race.—Girls'
Division B.
1 Wee Phek Lian. 2 Lim Soo Nyuk. 3 Kwong Poli
Chin.
50 Metres Candle Race.—Girls' Division C.
1 Liew Jin Moi. 2 Kui Lang. 3 Yan Gek.
High Jump.—Division A.—Open.
1 Edmund Ho. 2 Tan Bonn Syn. 3 Frederick Tan.—
Height 5 ft. 2 ins.
Long Jump.—Boys' Division B.
1 Kho Eng Seng. 2 Wee Cheng Siang. 3 Chong Shak
Kui.—Distance 16 ft. 3 ins.
50 Metres Sack Race.—Boys' Division C.
1Yon Nee. 2 ( hong Kah. 3 Suan Haw.
30 Metres Rabbit Race.—Boys’ Division D.
1 Klio Peng Siang. 2 Chang Wan Mo. 3 Yong Kee
Hian,
50 Metres Flat Race.—Girls’ Division A.
1 Wong Mong Eng. 2 Lee Teak Chin. 3. Sim Nyuk
Eng.—Time 8 secs.
Long Jump.—Division A.—Open.
1 Frederick Then. 2 Ong Seng Chong. 3. Wee Bok
Hee.—Distance 19 ft. 8 ins.
Putting the Weight (16 lbs.)—Division A.—Open.
1 Chia Bok Geo. 2 Wee Bok Hee. 8 Wee Ah Bee.—
Distance 34 ft. 3 ins.
Pole Vault.—Boys’ Division B.
1 Joseph Chen. 2 Choo Eng Jin. 3 Thian Joon Kim. -
Height 7 ft. 8 ins.
400 Metres Flat Race.—Division A.—Open.
I Law Han Chong. 2 Lim Chiok Kui. 3 Eng Ah
Leng.—Time 1 min. 3 sees.
50 Metres Three-legged Race.—Boys' Division C.
1 Lim Chong Yong and Chua Hun Soon. 2 Law Suan
Hon and Chua Hock Seng. 3 Chan Ah Youg and Tan Han
Siong.
100 Metres Flat Race.—Girls' Division A.—Open.
1 Wong Mong Eng. 2 Sim Nyuk Eng. 8 Low Hong
Phiu.—Timo 15 secs.
Pole Vault.—Division A.—Open (unfinished.)
1 Joseph Fung and Edmund Voou. 2 Frederick Then and
Wee Bok Hoe.—Height 8 ft. 9 ins.
Throwing The Discus.—Division A.—Open.
I Chia Bok Gee. 2 Wee Ah Bee. 3 Chua Kim Han.—
Distance 77 ft. 7 ins.
100 Metres Hurdle Race.—Division A.—Open.
1. Edmund Ho. 2 Lim Pok Kui. 3 Law Han Chong.—
Time 20
Putting the Weight (12 lbs.)—Boys’ Division B.
1 Kho Eug Seng. 2 Tan -Inn Kim. 3 Lucas Chin.—
Distance 32 ft. 61/2 ins.
Throwing The Javelin.—Division A.—Open.
1. Kuvk Meng Hong. 2 Ong Seug Chiang. 3. Wee Ah
Hec,—Distance 106 ft. 3 ins.
800 Metres Flat Race.—Division A.—Open.
1 Chee Choon Leong. 2 Eng Hcoiig Leng. 3 Mows
Lim.—Time 2 mins. 35 secs.
T.K.C
The Departure of the Reverend
Kong Kwui En from the
Diocese of Labuan and Sarawak.
On 12th October. 1935, in the afternoon, the
Clergy of the Cathedral Church of St. Thomas, Kuching, were at Home at the Bishop’s House, when a large party, about 300 people, consisting
cbiellv of members of the Kuching congregation, was present for the purpose of bidding farewell to
tin Reverend Kong Kwui En, who proceeds to * China shortly on his well-earned holiday. Owing to the state of his health, Fr. Kong has intimated that he may have to slay on in his homeland for good.
The Reverend Kong Kwui En first came to Knrhing from his village near Kowloon in 1898, to join the work of this diocese. He was then catechist under the Ven'ble Archdeacon A. F. Sharp.
The Church work amongst the Chinese gardeners around Kuching and district in those days was nonexistent. By his strenuous and keen efforts, and by the spade-work of bis later years, he not only succeeded in gathering into the fold of Christ those few unshepherded and indifferent Chinese families who immigrated from China, but also gained new converts.
Having thus proved his worth he was admitted to the Diaconate in 1913. and in 1918 he was ordained priest.
He was instrumental in the founding of the largest jungle school of the diocese, the Garland School at the 2nd mile which now has 120 pupils on the roll.
The existence of the Chapels at Siniawan, Buso and at the Pauper and Leper' Settlements is chiefly due to his energy. He was looked upon by the congregation of all these as their pastor.
The proof of the high esteem in which he is held by all. who know him, is to be found in the testimonial presented him that evening, to which they all liberally subscribed.
Before the presentation of the testimonial the Reverend Fr. W. Shelley, C.R., priest in charge of Kuching, gave a short outline of the important work done by Fr. Kong. The Diocesan Registrar, Mr. Kueh Choo Seng, then made the presentation, and Mr. Wong Shin Fon, principal of the Garland School, gave a full account of the many activities of Fr. Kong in this part of the Mission Field.
Fr. Kong then gave a brief description of his life and experiences during his many years’ stay in Sarawak. He concluded by thanking all those who subscribed towards his testimonial and bidding every one farewell.
The party then dispersed.—Contributed.
Tennis.
It is pleasing to note the revival of interest in tennis lately. The Tennis Sub-Committee of the Sarawak Club realize that the tennis courts arc far from perfect, but it is hoped to improve the playing facilities in the near future.
We trust that members will continue to show an interest by entering for the various competitions.
Entries for the Mixed Doubles Championship close on November 10th.
Following are the results of competitions played to date (winners mentioned first) : —
Men's Open Doubles Championship.
First round.—Ah Nyaw A Wee Ah Chew vs. Treehman & Kitto 6—1, 10—8. Wee Bok Hee & Chua Teck Hee vs. Merican & Ben Jomel_ 6—2, 6—2. Kim Hin & Md. Hassan vs. Wan Nawi & Joni 6—8. 6—1- Cargill & Benson (bye), him Ah Bee A Ong Hap Ann vs. Edmund Ho A Lee Chui Chun 6—0, 6—1. Mat & Jobli (bye). H. Brodie & A. Harry vs. S. Mong & Md. Zen 6-3, 6—2. Ng Khin Siong & Stephen Harry (bye).
Second round.—Wee Bok Hee & Chua Teck Hee vs. Ah Nyaw & Wee Ah Chew 6—8, 6—4. 6—4. Kim Hin & Md. Hassan vs. Cargill A Benson 6—0, 6 1. Lim Ah Bee & Ong Hap Ann vs. Mat & Jobli 6—4. 6— 2. Ng Khin Siong & Stephen Harry vs. H. Brodie & A. Harry 2—6, 6 1, 6—3.
Semi-final.—Wee Bok Hee & Chua Teck Hee vs. Kim Hin & Md. Hassan 6—1, 6—1. Lim Ah Bee & Ong Hap Ann vs. Ng Khin Siong & Stephen Harrv 6—3. 7—5.
Final.—Wee Bok Hee & Chua Teck Hee vs. Lim Ah Bee A Ong Hap Ann 6—1, 6—2.
Handicap Mixed Doubles.
First round.—Mrs. Treehman and Kennedy beat Mrs. Philp and Danbeny. Mrs. Black and Kitto heal Mrs. Kelly and Corbin
Second round.—Mm. Pitt-Hardacre and Harding heat Davang Valerie and Black. Mrs. Middlemas and Kelly beat Mrs. Treehman and Kennedy. Mrs. Black and Kitto beat Miss Scott and Birt. Mrs. Daubeny and Summers beat Mrs. Calvert and Benson.
Semi-final.—Mrs. Middlemas and Kelly boat Mrs. Pitt-Hardacre and Harding. Mrs. Black and Kitto beat Mrs. Daubeny and Summers.
The draw for the first round of the Men’s Handicap Singles is as follows
Cargill (Scr) vs. Whale +15.
Mitchell —30 (bye).
Harding (Scr.) vs. Daubeny (Scr)
Corbin (Ser.) (bye).
Benson —15 vs. Philp (Scr.)
Black (Scr.) (bye).
Kitto - 80 vs. Summers (Scr.)
Taylor (Scr) (bye).
Second Division News.
September.
An epidemic of influenza spread throughout the Simanggang district during September. The pupils of the S.P.G Mission School and the inmates of the jail were the chief sufferers, but the Malay Kampongs were also attacked.
The engkabang crop was fairly heavy, judging from the amount of fruit that passed through the Sinianggang bazaar. The price was disappointing, but even so it gave employment, and pocket money, if nothing more, to a good number of ulu Dayaks. The collection of the engkabang crop passed off without any of the usual disputes.
The road contractor at Simanggang maintained his high standard of efficiency, both inside and outside the station.
Some 20 Batang Ai Dayak who came to ask for work were given 10 days’ employment clearing the Government Padang.
On September 16th. a meeting of Chinese traders was held at Simanggang. and the Resident explained the proposed alterations to the Order governing rubber dealers’ licences.
The Acting District Officer, Saribas, reports that on September 28th an inquest was held Io inquire into the death of a Dayak woman from the Paku who appears to have succumbed to toadstool poisoning. The inquest was adjourned for further inquiries.
Very little crime was reported in the Saribas district during the month.
Some ten houses in the ulu Layar and ulu Spak are reported to he suffering from a genuine shortage of food. At the finish of the fruit season the situation may become serious, since none of these houses has any tapable rubber. The matter has been reported to the Resident in view of the possibility of giving these people government assistance.
Heavy rain at the beginning of the month again delayed the burning of padi farms, but towards the end of the month the weather improved, and burning appeared to be in full swing.
Violent storms on September 11th and 15th completely disabled telephones in the Saribas district. A mechanic arrived from Simanggang. however, and three days later all telephones were again in normal working order.
On September 29th. G. Emai, of the Junior Service, was married at St. Augustine s ’ hurch. Betong, to Sendi, daughter of Ex-Corporal Buma- The subsequent reception at Semumuk was attended by a large number of government servants and other friends of the bride and the bridegroom.
149 cases were treated in the Kalaka dispensary during September.
On September 17th. Mr. W. P. N- L. Ditmas took over the affairs of the Kalaka district from Mr. D. C. White, who proceeded on local leave.
Land rent received so far this year for Saratok titles, apart from bazaar lots, amounts to about $4,500 as against about $2,500 in 1933 and 1.31. and proportionate increases have occurred at Rohan and Kabong. These are. not temporary increases, but will be. largely permanent.
The Native Officer. Engkilili. reports one major case of incest between a Dayak step-mother and stepson which resulted in the former being fined two pikulfi and the latter three pikuls. The woman s * fine, of course, is to be paid over as plasi benoa.
With the exception of one long-house, all door tax has now been paid in the Engkilili district
On September 24th, Penghulu Kalong reported that a fierce storm accompanied by heavy hail caused serious damage to rubber gardens at Emplam.
The Assistant District Officer. Lubok Antu. reports that rumours that a violent and infectious illness was abroad in the ulu Menyang.came to his notice about the middle of the month. It was said to be a form of stomach trouble, and all Dayaks from Rumah Jantan and Rumah Itan disappeared into the jungle. The dresser was sent to investigate on the 13th and returned on the 16th to say that the sickness. which bad abated, was nothing more than a form of influenza. The reports made by Dayaks were widely exaggerated, since 20 o r 30 people were said to have died whereas in actual fact the deaths from this epidemic only amounted to seven.
In the early part of the month, the Assistant District Officer, Lubok Antu, was in the ulu in order to keep an eye on Dayaks collecting engkabang. He returned on September 12th, leaving troops still patrolling the ulus of the Lobang Baya. Engkari. and Batang Ai. Corporal Lawang, while patrolling the ulu Akup (Lobang Baya), noticed a padi-farm in the distance which he could not identify. The general opinion is that it was one of the ulu Engkari farms. but it will be looked into further.
On September 15th, the dresser's quarters and dispensary at Lubok Antu were burnt to the ground. All the dresser’s personal property and the whole stock of drugs were destroyed.
Third Division News.
September.
Forty-five criminal and forty-six civil cases came before the Sibu Courts during September.
Two inquests were held at Sibu, both on Foochows. One. Lu Ka Thai, aged twenty-four, slipped into the water whilst bathing on the floating wharf of his house above Palau Keladi, and. although reported able to swim, was not seen again. Uis both was found five days later in Telok Selalo. The other. Tiong Chii King, aged forty- nine. banged himself in a house near Bukit Lan. It is said that he had domestic troubles and had recently lost his garden in a civil dispute, and it is thought that these things worried him to such an extent that he was constrained to take his own life.
The Katibas chiefs came down during the month to ask permission to go and search for the outlaws by themselves. They intend starting after their padi has been planted, and do not wish to take either constabulary or levies with them. Permission was granted and a certain number of marked cartridges issued, all to be accounted for and empty cases returned.
Geraji. the Dayak who informed Wan Bujang where the heads of the Song victims were concealed, and told him the names of those who had committed I he murder, was paid the sum of $250 as a reward.
Alleged traces of three outlaws were found in the headwaters of the Katibas by the Menyarin patrol in the shape of two or three old huts in small streams near the mouth of the Entabai. These were thought to have been used by outlaws, but more probably they belonged to local Dayaks collecting wild sago.
The garrisons of two blockhouses, Uka in the Poi. and Antaih in the Ngemah, were withdrawn, preparatory to building two new ones in the Ga'at, where things have become a little disturbed, and where it seems certain that the outlaws have been receiving assistance and supplies. The Assistant District Officer, Sibu. accompanied by Abang Ahmat and Penghulu Jugah, started off with the I,wo garrisons on the 16th with orders to proceed to the Ga’at. via the Katibas and the Bangkit, and on arrival to build two new blockhouses, one at N Ramong, and one at N. Stapang, near Penghulu
Grinang’s house. Unfortunately, there was an accident in the rapids below N. Bangkit.. One of the outboards struck an unexpected rock and capsized, losing most of the stores and a few rifles and shot-guns. These latter and many of the other articles were recovered by diving afterwards, and the loss was not nearly so large as was at first expected. The party arrived back in Sibu to re-condition on the 18th. and left again three days later.
The Assistant Superintendent, Lands and Surveys, accompanied the Resident when he went to Rejang to meet H.M.S. Herald. He was also away from the 19th to the 24th visiting substations in the Lower Rejang district.
Mohammed Zainudin returned from the headwaters of the Katibas, where he has been working for the last few months.
Land revenue at Sibu amounted to $4,029.03. Two hundred and three deeds were registered.
Seven cells of the repaired wing of the Sibu prison were finished. Ominous cracks have appeared in the other wing, and it is possible that this may start to sink in the same manner. One can hardly be surprised considering the nature of the soil, and the fact that the two walls of the passage-way are built on a thin layer of cement without any piles.
The first belian groyne above the Sibu waterworks is finished save for bracing and supports. It extends to a distance of sixty feet from the river bank. The staging for the second one. between the waterworks and the arrack factory, is completed. and piling is now in progress.
The Divisional Forest Officer returned from his visit to the Menyong reserve on the 15th. He had bad weather, and on one occasion narrowly escaped a serious accident in the rapids at Pulau Ridan. The outboard engine started to nice, and the boat, losing way, was caught by the force of water and dashed broadside on against a solid wall of rock. Fortunately the damage was all above the water line.
The Menyong Reserve, or rather Protected Forest, is roughly the shape of a diamond, with a. maximum length of approximately twenty miles, and width of eight. The area is in the neighbourhood of 80,000 acres, and it is the only large area of virgin jungle left in the Balleh.
There was an export from Sibu of thirty-four tons of camphor logs to Hong Kong.
Seventy-five persons were treated in the Sibu hospital during September. Of this number fifty- two were new patients. There was one death, and forty-two persons were discharged.
Out-patients numbered four hundred and forty- one. Two hundred and seventy of these were new cases.
Sixty-five N.A.B. injections were administered.
The Resident, accompanied by -the Acting District Officer. Lower Rejang, the Assistant Superintendent, Lands and Surveys, and the Assistant Superintendent of Surveys, Binatang, preceded to Rejang on September 2nd, to meet H.M.S. Herald. He returned by M.v. Rejang the next day.
On the 23rd, the Resident and Mrs. Adams, the Acting District Officer, Sibu, the Acting Assistant District Officer, Kapit, the Divisional Medical Officer and the Divisional Forest Officer, left by s.i.. Chamois for Rejang, where H.H.M.Y. Maimuna was waiting to take the party to Kuching for the races.
On the 24th the Rev. G. V. Summers, accompanied by Mrs. Summers and their two children, arrived at Sibu to take over the American Methodist Mission.
The District Officer, Lower Rejang, reports that on the afternoon of September 6th a Foochow named Wong Ah Loi, or Wong Lee Ting, was found dead and apparently murdered at N. Palai Marieng. The murdered man had just opened a cutch-collecting station and was living alone ; no motive for the crime is apparent, and no clues to the murderer s identity have been found. It is alleged that the deceased was a member of the Secret Society broken up in Sibu in 1932.
All Penghulus in the Lower Rejang visited their respective stations during the month, and reported all well.
Burns in the Sarikei and Binatang areas were not universally successful, and considerable anxiety is fell by padi farmers who fear another failure of their crops.
The new Government offices at Sarikei were completed and occupied during the month.
The new Police station at Jakar was garrisoned on September 15th.
The District Officer. Mukah, reports that on September 27th a Foochow by the name of Sia Chui Seng was taken by a crocodile at Sungei Bulus. The man was apparently on a balang at the lime washing plates, and was knocked into the water by the tail of the crocodile. The whole affair took place under the eyes of the victim's wife, who gave the alarm. A Dayak pursued the crocodile and shot at it ; only then did it relinquish its hold. It is uncertain whether the beast has been killed as no trace of its body has been found. The man’s body was recovered from the water and brought to the Mission, he being a Christian.
On the 29th September a boy named Daud bin Asi of Kuala Balingian, aged about 10 years, was taken by a crocodile while bathing with other boys; his body has not yet been recovered.
The Officer-m-Charge, Oya and Dalat, reports that during September there were two cases of apparently wilful destruction of belian survey boundary pegs. In each case no one could possibly have gained by the destruction of the pegs, and no clue has come to light. It is to he hoped that these cases do not occur often as the trouble caused to Government is extensive, and it is hardly possible to make each garden-owner responsible for his pegs against their destruction by unknown outsiders.
One or two of the Dalat Chinese have been making nuisances of themselves in the kampong, resulting in an assault case. Steps have been taken to remedy the matter, and the Chinese community has been told that if there is any further trouble the community as a whole will suffer; it is now up to the Chinese to see that the less reputable members of their community do not make further trouble.
The Dayaks in the ulu Oya report that farming is proceeding without a hitch, and good burns are being obtained.
The price of raw sago showed a tendency to rise towards the end of the month, and reached 60 cents per passu in Sungei Kut.
Thirty-four vessels totalling 562 tons clean'd Oya during the month, and included in their cargo were 166 koyans of raw sago. 186 piculs of rubber, 91 piculs of jelutong, and 265 piculs of engkabang.
The sudden drop in the price of engkabang caught many people who were buying upriver at the time unawares.
The new Dalat kubu is taking shape, and the roof has now been completed; as the window frames, door frames and most of the other limber-- are already made, the work should progress rapidly.
.An increasingly large number of Melanmis from Kut, Dalat and Tanam. are opening up in the Igan. and at Kelman there is the beginning of a new kampong. The land appears to suit sago, but is in fairly close proximity to at least three Dayak house.-. The Dayaks themselves, it is understood, are taking up sago land, but will not work the sago themselves preferring either to Fell batangs or farm them out on a fifty-fifty basis.
Exceptionally heavy storms and gales were experienced on the coast during the earlier part of the month.
The Assistant District Officer, Kapit, reports that ex-Tuai Rumah Grinsa, of Sungei Musah, died on August 31st from a wound accidentally self-inflicted when a dead branch fell on him. Apparently Grinsa, who was felling a tree at the time, lifted his hand to protect his head ; the branch struck the parang which he was holding, and this wounded him on the side of his head. He died about 9 hours later from exhaustion and loss of blood. Five people were fined one picul each for not reporting the matter, and for not bringing Grinsa back to the long-house.
One hundred and eighty-three logs were rafted from Kapit to Sibu during the month. Very few lugs came down from upriver owing to low water, and the fact that Dayaks were busy on their padi farms and collecting engkabang.
Engkabang shipped from Kapit and Song this season amounted to approximately 6.397 piculs by the end of September.
The R.C. Mission at Kapit closed temporarily during September, the Rev. Fathers Van den Bergh and Bunck proceeding to Sarikei on transfer. The boys are being taken to Kanowit Mission School, and it is understood that Kapit will now become an outstation Mission, and will be visited by the Rev. Fathers from Kanowit.
Fourth Division News.
September.
On the morning of September 26tb, His Highness the Rnjah’s birthday, a ceremonial parade of the Sarawak Constabulary was held at Miri under the command of Mr. W. L. P. Sochon, Officer Superintending Miri Sector. Long Service Decora- lioua were presented by Mr. E. O. Bruce, Acting Resident, to a number of Government servants. I After the parade, those present adjourned to the Court House, where the health of His Highness the Rajah was proposed by the Acting Resident.
Niah caves were opened for the bird’s nesting season for two months on September 20th.
The annual .Miri regatta in celebration of His Highness the Rajab's birthday took place on September 23rd instead of the 26th, the day being observed as a public holiday. As a sequel to the regatta, four Chinese were prosecuted in the District Court on a charge of cheating, in that they obtained first and second prize-money by concealing themselves half-way down the course and joining in as the other boats passed them. This ruse has been tried before, notably at Mukah some years ago, where one of the foremost citizens lay in wait with his boat in a side-stream and emerged at the right moment to win in splendid style. The Chinese now probably realize that they were not. so clever as they imagined.
The District Officer. Limbang and Lawas, reports that the principal event of the month in his district w:w I he visit of His Highness the Rajah.
His Highness, accompanied by Dayang Valerie and Mrs. C. D. Adams, arrived at Labnan by s.s. Darrel on September 4th. The same day His Highness and party, accompanied by Mr. H. E. Cutfield, the District Officer, proceeded by Maimuna to Lawas. where the night was spent. His Highness left again at midday of the 5th. anchored for the night at Tanjong Sapo on Pulau Muara, and entered the Limbang river at daylight the next morning, arriving at Limbang at 8.45 a.m. After the official reception. His Highness paid a visit to the Bazaar and Chinese school and dealt with several matters in the office. The following morning His Highness interviewed all who wished to see him. His Highness and party sailed the same evening. Saturday 7th. but owing to very unfavourable weather had to put into Brooketon, where the party were weatherbound until the following Thursday, when they took passage by s.s. Darrel at Labuan.
One Bisayah was sentenced to two years’ imprisonment at Limbang for theft of a buffalo. This comparatively heavy sentence was necessitated by the fact that cattle stealing must be looked upon as a serious offence in a district where the natives depend on cattle to such a large extent for their livelihood.
Seventy-eight out-patients and four in-patients were treated at Limbang hospital during the month. The health of the district was good.
A further sixty-six bags of white pepper harvested on Government subsidised gardens at Limbang were shipped to Kuching during October. The Rev. Father Hopfgartner. of the Agricultural Advisory Committee, paid a visit to the Limbang pepper gardeners in order to advise them and to arbitrate between them and the Government on any small matters that required clarification.
On His Highness the Rajah's birthday, Long Service Decorations were presented by the District Officer, Limbang, to four Government servants in the presence of n full parade of Constabulary, and of boys from the Malay and Chinese schools. One of the recipients was Abang Hamdan, Native Officer, Limbang.
All Government servants attended the ceremony.
The Acting District Officer, Bintulu, reports that his district as a whole appears Io be more prosperous than it has been for a long time, since there is plenty 1 of employment for all. The natives especially have benefited from the general trade improvement, three hundred Malays having found employment on the new landing-ground, and both the Sebauh sawmill and the Sarawak Timber & Trading Co. are now working at full pressure. The price of jelutong is satisfactory, and engkabang has not dropped so much in price as usual.
'On September 28th, the Tua Kampoug of Pandan reported that a woman from his kampong had been taken by a crocodile. It appears that this crocodile attacked a boat containing six people who were returning from their padi farm; it managed to capsize the boat, and took one of the women. The whole kampong was turned out. and the crocodile was traced and killed; the body of the woman, which was found inside tin- crocodile, was duly buried.
Most natives in the Bintulu district were able to burn their padi-clearings during the month, hut in many cases a very poor burn was reported, owing to lack of dry weather
Natives still continued to work engkabang although the price dropped. By the end of the month there was very little engkabang left in the uhi, since most of it had arrived in the bazaar. The price paid in the Bintulu bazaar at the end of the month was about $2.50 per picul.
Four vessels cleared from Bintulu for Singapore during September, and four arrived from Singapore. Tn addition, m.v. Kim Chin Seng made two extra trips from Kuching to collect the overflow cargoes which could not be taken by ships on the regular run.
Work on the landing-ground at Bintulu continued to make satisfactory progress during September. By the end of the month about two-thirds of the area had been roughly stumped and burnt. A provisional programme of work was drawn up in collaboration with Mr. C. E. O. Wood, Superintendent Civil Engineer from Seletar, but it was decided that apart from burning and stumping nothing much could be done until the perimeter drains had been made, and temporary cross drains dug.
Lawas (Sarawak) Estates, Ltd., exported 83,600 lbs. of dry rubber during September.
His Highness the Rajah, accompanied by Dayang Valerie. Mrs. C. D. Adams, and Mr. H. E. Cutfield, visited Lawas on September 4th and 5th.
The Assistant District Officer, Lawas, reports that natives in his district have taken full advantage of the drought to complete the burning of their padi clearings. The price of engkabang is not proving attractive, and many natives have ceased to collect it in spite of the fart that the crop is fairly heavy.
CORRESPONDENCE.
[The Editor w not responsible for the opinions of correspondents. ]
Cave At Twelfth Mile.
Kuching,
27th October, 1985. The Editor,
The Sarawak Gazette,
Kuching.
Dear SIR,
Your local readers may be glad to hear- that I here is an interesting cave in the vicinity of Kuching heretofore very little known to local residents. It is situated near a rubber garden owned by a Chinese on the left-hand side along the Rock Road, at the 12th mile.
Recently, on a Sunday morning, we were brought there by the owner of the rubber garden above mentioned. We had to fight our way through a jungle with our parang before we came to a stream where a tree was especially felled to serve as ft bridge for us to get over. It was not far from there that we found the eave. The entrance of the cave is a considerable dimension and was covered with shrubs and foliage where we saw it. However, we did get into it. There we found a cavern about 50 feet wide and 10 feet high, and the walls showed the possibility of its ignoneous in nature. The sunbeam crept through the precipice and made the sight inside wonderful. With torches in our hands, we crept through a hollow and thus went on about half a mile, trying to get to its end but our effort was in vain.
Yours truly,
Yeh.