The Sarawak Gazette
July.
We are privileged to print this month an account by Her Highness the Ranee of her flight home from Singapore. Her Highness’ description gains in vividness from the fact that it was written during the actual course of the flight.
His Highness the Rajah and Dayang Valerie sailed from Marseilles by s.s. Naldera on July 12th, and are therefore due to reach Singapore on August 2nd. His Highness is accompanied by Mr. and Mrs. C. D. Adams.
On July 3rd a telegram was received from the Secretary to His Excellency the British Agent for Sarawak, Singapore, to say that Mr. A. W. D. Brooke had been successfully operated upon for appendicitis. Mr. Brooke bad been in perfect health until the morning of July 2nd. when he complained of a pain; acute.appendicitis was suspected at noon, and the confirmation of this diagnosis at 2.0 p.m. necessitated an immediate operation. Fortunately, there were no complications, and Mr. Brooke’s progress was entirely satisfactory. We are sure that all in Sarawak will join us in congratulating both Mr. Brooke and His Highness the Tuan Muda on the happy outcome of this operation.
THURSDAY. AUGUST 1st. 1935.
Mr. A. W. D. Brooke has been appointed Private Secretary to the British Adviser, Kedah.
Birth.
Corson.—At Kuching on 14th July, to Phyllis, wife of Thomas Corson, & daughter.
Mr. H. B. Crocker, Acting Government Secretary, was admitted to hospital on July 4th, and resumed duty on the 10th.
As the Gazette went to press last month, 1 The flying-boat returned to Pending on news was received of the commission of a July 18th and left for Singapore the next brutal outrage in the Third Division, a morning, taking Mr. Middlemas as a Chinese pepper planter, his wife and two passenger. Mr. Middlemas returned to children having been murdered by Dayaks Kuching by the Darnel on the 22nd.
near Song. The heads of all those killed were , This flying-boat is one of the Short Singa- taken. pore machines which recently arrived out
The sole survivor of this appalling crime from England, and is considerably larger was a small boy aged 8, the son of the than the Southamptons formerly used for murdered couple,"who managed to escape from these trips, besides being of much more the house and hide in the undergrowth as soon advanced design. We understand that Air as his father was attacked; from his place of Commodore Smith has offered to fly His High concealment, the poor child had the dreadful ness the Rajah and Dayang Valerie over from experience of seeing the murderers wash them- j Singapore on August 2nd or 3rd.
selves and his parents’ severed heads in a near-	by stream.
Police investigations commenced immediately, and on July 22nd two Dayaks from I the Ngemah, who were believed to be the murderers, were arrested in a house at Lobang ! Bava, Second Division. At their trial they ; pleaded guilty, and were sentenced to death on July 30th.	'
His Highness the Tuan Muda has personally congratulated the officers responsible for the arrest on an excellent piece of work.
Mr. S. G. Hansom, who has been appointed Assistant District Officer, Sibu, left for that . station by the Rejang on July 15th.
We record, with deep regret, the death of , Dayang Hafidah binti Abang Zulkifli, wife of the Datu Imam and niece to the Batu Shah- I bandar, which occurred in Kuching on .July 7th. An obituary notice appears in another column. r - -
Mr. J. G- Watson, head of the Malayan Forest Research Institute, Kepong, paid an unofficial visit to Kuching during the month on his return from a short tour of the Brunei ; forests. Mr. Watson was much interested in belian, engkabang, and jelutong pa ya trees which are not found in the Malay Peninsula.
H.M.S. Herald is expected to arrive at Kuching on August 30th or 31st. She will leave shortly afterwards for Rejang, where she will commence the survey of the Rejang River.
Apropos of what we said last month about Malayan ignorance of Borneo’s geography, a letter was recently received at the Secretariat addressed to “the British Adviser, Sarawak, Jesselton, British North Borneo.’’ The sender had lived in Malaya for many years.
On July 15th R.A.F. flying boat K3594 arrived at Pending, bringing as a passenger Air Commodore S. W. Smith, Air-Officer Commanding the Royal Air Force, Far East. The flying-boat lefts for Sibu the following day with Messrs. Edwards and Middlemas on board, and later paid a visit to Bintulu; for the return trip between Sibu and Bintulu its passenger-list was increased by three, namely rs. P. M. Adams, D. C. Huddan and Dr. A. D. Hutchison, thereby bringing the total complement of the plane,—officers, passengers, and crew—up to twelve, two of the crew remaining in Sibu.
Reports from all over the country indicate that the tapping holiday has worked satisfactorily, cases of non-observance of the holiday being rare, as far as is known.
Capt. A. C. Benfield left Singapore on furlough by the .Mantua on July 5th. Capt- R. EBorton, who comes from the Kam-par and is well known in all the Rejang River ports, has taken command of the Vyner Brooke during Capt. Benfield’s absence.
The Administration Report for the State of Sarawak has now been published. Copies may be obtained from the Secretariat, Kuching.
The Rev. Bishop Edwin Lee, of the Methodist Episcopal Mission, Singapore, and Mrs. Lee, visited Sibu and Kuching during the month, with other members of the Mission.
Mr. G. A. C. Field, of the Customs Department, returned from furlough on July 8th, 1935, and proceeded to Sibu the following week. Mr. Field will take over the duties of Superintendent of Customs. Third Division, from Mr. W. Lowry, when the latter goes on leave at the beginning of August.
The prize for conscientiousness as regards the rubber census must go to a Lundu Land Dayak, who walked twenty miles to register a holding consisting of a single tree.
The London correspondent of the Straits Times writes as follows :—
“Another interesting event last week was a bowls match between a Sarawak team and the Royal Navy College, Greenwich, whose side was captained by Lieut. Leonard who is, I believe, well-known in your part of the world. The play was very closely contested and resulted in a narrow victory for the Sarawak team by 14 points, and neither side found the alleys easy, as may be gauged by the fact that Mr. J. B. Archer's score of 108 was the highest of the day. After the match, there was a dinner at which Mr. R. Binnie presided, and hopes were expressed that it might be possible to play a return fixture in Borneo.”
On August 26th the Sarawak Gazette will celebrate its sixty-fifth birthday.
We are pleased to be able to print this month an article from one of our Malay reader we take this opportunity of informing all Malay readers of the Gazette that contributions from them are most acceptable, and will always be welcomed.
Sarawak Association Dinner
and Reception.
Lowe. Mr. and Mrs. c. p. Lowe, Mr. G. T. M. MacBryan, Mr. J. O. Maddocks. Mr. and Mrs. F. A. w. Page-Tamer, Miss D. Parnell, Mr. and Mrs. O. E. Pascoe and Mr. George Rees, Mr. A. A. Rennie, Mr. Harry Roy, Major and Mrs. H. w. V. Scott, Mr. J. A. Smith, Mr. P. J. Stewart, Mr. and Mrs. J. C. Swayne and Mrs. Birley. Mr. and Mrs. A. B. Ward, Dr. Wellington, and Mr. E. M. Woodward.
Sarawak Association Dinner.
His Highness the Rajah
(In the chair).
The Rt. Hon. the Earl of Inchcape, C. D. Adams. H,C, P. Adams, R. Y. Ames, H. D. Aplin. J. B. Anher, J. R. Barnes, R. D. Binnie. F F Boult, J. G. V. C. Brooke, F. G. Camcnter. H E. Cooper, Sir Percy Cunynghame, P. H. Blood-rage, Dr. C. O. Gange, K. H. Gillan, W. Harnack, S. W. Harris. E. Hoso, H. C. Brooke Johnson, H. La Chard, R. E. Le Sueur, A. s. Lowe, Captain C. P. Lowe, G. T. M. MacBryan, J. o. Maddocks, S. R. Maw, C. McAlpine, B. F. McMnrtrie, F. A. W. Page-Turner, C. E. Pascoe, A. A. Rennie, Commander L. R. Rickinson, Major H. W. V. Scott, w. F. de V. Skrine, J. A. Smith, W. H. Smith, Peter Stewart, .7. c. Swayne, G. J D. Walters. A. B. Ward, and E. M. Woodward.
A WELCOME lNNOVATI0N.
'!’he Sarawak Association dinner was preceded this year by a reception during the afternoon at which ladies were present. This function was held as a result of suggestions from some meml,er8 that ladies should be invited to the annual dinner; it was considered, though, that a reception would be more appreciated, and we are informed that it was a great success. Iler Highness the Ranee received the guests.
Both the reception and dinner, at which His Highness the Rajah took the chair, were held at the May Fam Hotel on June 26th. We give below’ lists of the guest at each function.
S.ARAWAK Association Reception.
His Highness the Rajah.
Her Highness the Ranee.
Dayang Elizabeth.
Dayang Valerie.
Dayang Anne.
The Rt. Hon. the Earl and Countess of Inch- cape, The Rt. Hon. Eleanor Countess of Esher, Mr. and Mrs. c. D. Adams, Mr. and Mrs. H. A. Adams and daughter, Mr. H. c. p. Adams and mother (Mrs. M. s. Adams), Mr. and Mrs. R. Y. Ames, daughter and son, Mr. and Mrs. H. D. Aplin, Mr. J. B. Archer, Miss Backus, Mr. and Mrs. R. D. Binnie and Miss Pox, Mr. and Mrs. F. F. Boult. Mr. J. c. ’ c. Brooke, Archdeacon and Mrs. Champion, Miss Christie, Sir Percy and Lady Cunynghame, Mrs. Dick, Mrs. G. A. c. Field, Dr. and Mrs. c. o. Gange, Mr. and Mrs. K. H. Gillan, Miss M. F. Gillan, Mrs. Gussrnan, Commander and Mrs. T. E. Halsey, Mr. s. W. Harris, Mr. and Mrs. H. La Chard, Mrs. Oliver Lang, Mr. R. E. Le Sueur, Mr. and Mrs. A. s.
From Singapore to London by Air..
By HER HIGHNESS THE RANEE
OF SARAWAK.
We leave the Singapore Air Base at 6.1. . It is still dark, but a we rise higher and higher we come into the dawn. The effect is very lovely. The name of our plane is “Astrae,” the name of the Pilot Captain Youell. There are only two other passengers—Mr. Loel Guinness, and Mr. Bertram. They are both charming. Mr. Bertram has with him a cage full of Australian birds, the most gorgeously coloured little creatures imaginable. Every time the plane bumps, he rises patiently and refills their water bowl. Mr. Loel Guinness is evidently a well-seasoned traveller, for the first ting he does on entering the plane is to unscrew the table in front of him and remove it so that he can stretch his long legs easily before him.
We pass ever the famous Singapore Naval Base. The Floating Dock is all lit up, and there is a flotilla of destroyers anchored close by. Away we soar, over sea and jungle, occasionally there are air pockets that toss us to and fro, but on the whole the passage is quiet.
It is a little hot and stuffy in the plane, but not uncomfortable.
At 8 o’clock our breakfast baskets are handed to us. Hard boiled eggs, chicken and ham, rolls and marmalade, butter, fruit and steaming hot coffee is given us from the little kitchen on board.
It is now 9.45, and we are nearing Penang. We have come down from 4,000 feet to 2,500, a rapid descent that has deafened arid numbed our ears. It fact this ear trouble is the most trying part of the whole trip, and nothing that one can do will really prevent it.
The padi fields are like bright billiard tables
amidst a setting of palm trees, the visibility over I
Penang is misty’, but I can see the outline of the
famous hill. The sea is like a blue mirror, with US
reflected over sea and jungle and the little shadow
of our plane in hot pursuit.
We arrive at Alor star at 10.30. where, we find
the Resident and his wile waiting Io meet US. There
is a charming Best House, where we wash and
smoke and drink gin-and-gingers. We are very gay. :
The pilot. Captain Yonell is quite charming and docs his best to keep US cheerful and good-tempered.
We start again at 11.30. It is very bumpy and
it is impossible either to write or read, as we are
jerked right out of our seats. It is not a sickening
motion but exhilarating, because it is in a way terrifying. We climb and climb 7,000 feet, the earth looks like a miniature garden below us; roads :
like ivory ribbons thread in and out of plains and ;
trees, and soft loose clouds float in detached groups ;
like broken cotton-wool. At last the bumping is I
over, and we soar smoothly and evenly towards .
Bandon. We land at a place called Kokluk to refuel.
The real name of this place is Pracbualikhirikun;
it is only a remote fuelling station upon parched
and arid sand. We arrive at Bangkok at 5.30 p.m.
after a beautiful flight over perfect sea and little
soft, islands dotted about on either side.
Darkness is descending upon Bangkok, but there is just light enough to see the town. I am taken
for a drive round, but I am not impressed with
Bangkok. The prettiest things about it are the ,
"streamline" temples, they are slender and graceful
and beautifully coloured. We stay at the Oriental
Hotel on the edge of the river,—a dreadful hotel
with a glorious view. There is only one decent
bedroom ill the hotel, which I am given. The other
rooms are indescribably bad.
We leave the hotel at 5.30 a.m. and the aerodrome ,
at 7.0. We rise to 12,000 feet on our way to Rangoon. It is cold, large clouds of a dazzling I
whiteness are below as, and below tho clouds there
arc undulating blue-black jungle trues. The time
goes back one hour. At 9.15 we come upon 1
Rangoon, and fly low. about 2,000 feet so that we
can see the beauty of its lakes golden temple,
and the green trees on the sand. Then “it is gone and we are at the aerodrome beyond Rangoon where breakfast is supplied and the plane refuelled. In an hour we are oil again on our way to Akyab, three
hundred and eleven miles from Rangoon. It is bumpy now until we fly over the sea. Akyab itself I
is charming, with friendly people who have arranged
tables and chairs beneath some trees and I
provided tea; Flying is still quite a novelty to the \
natives there, and'they crowd round US staring and '
grinning. They are an ugly race and do not look
very clean, but they have nice teeth and soft
dark eyes.
As soon as the plane is refuelled we start again
-pense No land any p\ across a limitless ex
where, just the sea like miles and miles of silver
mirror. Lunch is provided on the plane packed in
mahjong cases, and the wireless operator brings US
some barley water which is really good.
The mouth of the Ganges a network of little
rivers coiling in and out of what appears at this
altitude to be smooth green plains and moss.
Bunches of trees and native houses are scattered
about , but we are so high above them that they
look like toys.
We arrive at Calcutta at 5.30 p.m. The aero-
drome is about fifteen miles away from the town.
Calcutta is one of the big disappointments of my
life; I had always imagined it with .fine white
buildings and impressive streets, but as I drive
through the town I find myself saying oyer and over
again : "Can this possibly be Calcutta?"
Bullocks are asleep on the pavements. Thousands
of Indians throng over the narrow streets. The
buildings are square and ugly, even in what is called
the principal street. There is no real beauty of con-
struction. It is unbelievably, unquestionably drab.
We spend the night in a beautiful house where
English flowers grow in profusion,—hollyhocks,
snapdragons, phlox, and carnations. The Saturday
Club is opposite this house, and we go for a swim
before dinner. Unfortunately there is no time to
see more of Calcutta, for we are off next morning
at 3 a.m. We are flying over flat plains that
stretch as far as the horizon on either side. Dull
and uninteresting, but safe-feeling. We land at
Gaza at 8 o'clock to refuel. It is a God-forsaken
spot. Then in half an hour on to Allahabad. The
aerodrome again is some way away from the town,
so we cannot see much. It is 11.30, and we have
breakfast. After that, on again to Cawnpore to
refuel, The country is still flat and uninteresting,
and there is a strong head wind. The way from
Cawnpore to Delhi is hot and bumpy. As we near
Delhi, the whole area round and about us consists
of rice fields. Immense eagles fly straight at our
machine, and the pilot is obliged to dodge them.
We descend at the Delhi aerodrome and have a
meal, half tea, and half lunch. Delhi itself looks
lovely from the air.
It is now 6.45 , and we are on our way to
Jodhpur. I do not think we can go any further
than that. We are night flying. We pass over
tiny lit-up villages. We arrive at Jodhpur at
8.30—very, very tired. All we can see of the town
is a fairyland of lights. We descend by the help
of flares and find a really nice hotel, small, but
extraordinarily comfortable. It is 10 o'clock before
we have dinner, at 11.30 we are in bed. At 3 a.m.
we are up again, leaving the aerodrome at 4
o'clock. It is very beautiful watching the night
turn into a scarlet sunrise. Our progress to
Karachi is slow, since there is unfortunately a strong
head wind against us. Eventually we arrive and
have breakfast, and it is here that we change
planes, from the "Astrae” to the “Hamo." The
new plane is infinitely larger than the other and
more comfortable; Captain Spalford is her pilot.
There are three other passengers, two males and a
female. We fly over the sea to Gwada. arriving
there at 12.20 to refuel. Owing.to the strong head
wind we are obliged to descend again at Juinri to
refuel, and from there a long, long flight to
Shariah where we arrive at 7..50 p.m.
Sharjah can only he described as a vision of the
fort in Bean Geste. It is grim and weird and
unreal. Outside the fort is an armed guard of
Arabs in gorgeously-coloured robes. The gates
clang behind US after we have entered. The little
bedrooms line the lower walls. In the centre
square is a patch of garden, and two little fallow
deer follow US about and rub their soft noses against
our coats. It is a weird sensation sleeping here one is conscious of the gruff whispers of the Arabs,
and the snuffling of the deer.
We leave at dawn. It is very cold and dreary.
A flat mist is lying low, like a great white sheet
drawn across the sea. We are flying over the
Persian Gulf, and I have never seen so many sharks
or water-snakes before. One cannot help picturing
what a crash would mean, and what short work
those long black shadows would make of US. It is
with intense relief that we leave this shark-ridden
sea and pass over Quator hah is very flat and
consists chiefly of rich gold sand.
We land at Bahrein at 9.20 where we breakfast.
It is really lovely here,—bright sunshine and a
fresh breeze. We have breakfast in a small tent,—
grape-nuts, fried fish, kidneys and bacon, and a
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, AUGUST 1, 1935.
191
mushroom omelette not a bad meal for a tent upon the sands. From Bahrein we go to Al Kuwait, where we arrive at 11.35, and refuel. Al Kuwait is like a grey pack of cards propped up upon a golden carpet. We ship the mail and push on to Basra, The wind has begun to rise, and the going is bumpy and uncomfortable. We are at Basra at 12.4.5 where there is a storm. The sand is blowing about into our eyes and down our throats. We leave Basra at 8.130 a.m., in a dense fog, but as we near Bagdad we emerge into blue sky and sunshine. As we pass over Bagdad I long to stay. It looks romantic and beautiful. The aerodrome is ,I little away from the city, but over here there is atmosphere and romance. It is like a miniature Croydon, in fact so much like Croydon that it makes one's heart leap as one lands.
We leave Bagdad in its sunshine and beauty and fly straight into a sandstorm. I am not air-shy or even remotely afraid as a rule, but r must confess this fifty-mile-an-hour gale gels me down and I find myself stiff with terror. Our plane feels just like a kite in the air. tossed hither and thither so that we ate flung from side to side, and right out of our seats up to the roof. There is sand every- where—thick, thick as a London fog. The. wings of the plane are covered with it. Waves and waves of sand hurl themselves at our machine, '!'he wind plays with this four-engined giant as if it was a toy. Are we scared, or are we not'1 Well. I don't know how the others feel, but I hardly dare draw breath. I watch the face of the pilot. He registers our safety. If he smiles all is well with us, but during this storm his face is very grim. Then, just, as my endurance is at its end Captain Spafford laughs. Oh. it is good, that laugh of his. I We all look at each other and smile and relax. The danger is passed, Little patches of sky emerge out of the sand, sand that is still drifting over 3,000 feet up.
It seems a lifetime before we get to I Rutbah at 2.45. and it is here that Captain Spafford informs us the storm is too violent for us to continue our journey. “We may be able to push on at dawn," he says, "but only if the wind drops, and not on- less.” It is not until this moment, that I realize the endurance and courage and good-nature of the pilot. We six passengers are furious at the delay, and a little unnerved by the howling of the wind, but Captain Spafford turns what might so easily have been a tragic evening into a gay and happy party. We find some darts and a dart-board, mid we play a tournament. We find dice and cards. It is almost twelve o’clock before we go to bed. The storm still rages outside, but we are too tired to notice it now.
The next morning we are roused at 6 o'clock a.m. by a sweet little foreign waiter who asks if "my sieepings have been well.’ He also informs us that the weather has nicely turned.
It is windy. We fly low until we get to the hills. We see the river Jordan (so disillusioning and disappointing!) flowing sluggishly beneath US. Jericho and Jerusalem are lovelier than the Bible tells us. and the Dead Sea could not have a. more appropriate name. Then Carya, where we land at 10.15 and breakfast amongst gorgeous flowers and a perfect sun. we take a lot of photographs of our- selves and then resume our journey.
We arrive in Cairo at 1..30 and drive by car to a glorious hotel. Here we find a band and Parisian food, and for the first time I begin to feel grubby and unsinart. T am a little depressed, as well, because we have parted from our pilot and our plane Luckily We have no time to brood, as we are hustled into a train and on to Alexandria. Arrive Alexandria at 6.30 and sleep the night there. At 6 o'clock we leave Alexandria in the flying boat "Satyrus," apd we are due to arrive at Brindisi at 3-30. We halve sausages and bacon on the plane out of a thermot box, and the passage is the prettiest we have ye.' been on—Crete- Athens, it all looks superb in the sun. and we have will US for the first time a strong following wind.
We arrive at Brindisi at .3.35 and from there we take the train to Paris. This entails a railway journey of two days. We arrive in Paris. Wednes- day 20th. 7.30a.m., and be Bourget 9.:30. Croydon 11.30 Just nine days after leaving Singapore.
Now when I am asked what my sensations were on a. trip of this kind I can only answer this—You need health, and courage, and good-nature, because every part of your body and mind are at straining point. I shall always return from the blast by plane., and each year there will be more improvements and more comforts.. But always I imagine it will be tiring on account of the noise. The only part of you that really suffer is your ears, and for two or three days after arrival I was a little dazed and very deaf. But this soon wears off and you then feel extradinnarily proud of yourself. It is a wonderful thing to have done. and one to do again.
SYLIA OF SARAWAK.
The Blessings of Civilisation.
The Sphere has recently been publishing a series of articles on British Guiana which are of great significance to anyone interested in primitive tribes. They are written by Mr. William La Varre, an American explorer as the result of an expedition into the tar interior of the country, and the article which appeared in the Sphere of June 8th is so remarkable that we feel justified in reprinting the greater part of it.
In this article Mr. La Varre deals tren-chantly with the causes that, in little more than half a century, have reduced the abori-ginal population of the colony from 100,000 healthy and happy natives to a degenerate remnant of less than 12,000. These figures are taken from a survey of the tribes in the interior made in the late 1870’s, and an actual census taken recently. After describing the flourishing condition in which the first survey found the aboriginals, Mr. La Varre con-tinues as follows:—
"Then, as Dr. W. E. Roth has so dramatically reported in his study of the Arts. Crafts and Customs of the Guiana Indians (Smithsonian Institution, 1917), 'civilization’ began creeping up from the coast into the jungle. The opening up of the interior, or rather the spasmodic attempt to grab wealth from interior resources, by ephemeral enterprises of the timber-getter, balata-bleeder, rubber-gatherer, trader, and rancher, spelled ruin, degradation, and disappearance for the aboriginal Indian.
“An economist might argue that primitive races always have to give way to industry and civilized expanflion. but in the case of British Guiana, although various schemes have been promoted, nothing in the way of hinterland development, either mineral, agricultural or otherwise has been a I Listing excuse for the wiping out of the aborigine. One after the other various 'rushes’ have taken ' place, for rubber, for balata, for gold, for diamonds, for the purpose of gaining wealth through cattlerising on the interior savannahs, but the sum total of them all is that the aboriginal in each case has been left holding the empty bag of disillusionment. Had there been one lasting, growing, profitable industry, which, expanding as the Empire builders pyramided their African companies. the aboriginals might have been gradually developed as a healthy, substantially better off, and increasing interior population asset. But with a shoe-string company going broke with the first lean year, and leaving their interior camps for the jungle to reclaim, the Indian, had under much persuasion given up his native pursuits and crafts and become a contributor to the European's out- post. had his new-found sustenance pulled out from under him.
“When T first surveyed the hinterlands of British Guiana I found the Indian men, for example, all skilled with spear, tow and arrow, or blow-pipe. Here and there I found a man who had a trade- gun. but these were never used or relied upon exclusively. Every man was capable of taking a spear, bow and arrow, and blow-gun. going off ! into the forest and returning loaded down with fish and game. The women were skilled in the weaving crafts. Wearing no clothes except the i finely-woven bead aprons which hung from their ' waists, they provided all the other household and i personal needs from native cotton or tucun palm fibre. I could go into village and find plenty of food, fruit, game, and vegetables.
“But little by little first one enterprise and then another began 'bringing boatloads of trade cloth, implements, machine-made hammocks into the jungle, as trade-goods to pay the Indian for his labours. The men stopped hunting and became, for as long as the company lasted, day labourers. The women stopped weaving hammocks or cloth, because the things which the trade-store displayed were much gayer-coloured. The children grew up wanting a gun instead of learning how to use a bow and arrow. A whole tribe would gradually grow into absolute dependence upon the rubbergatherer, the balata-bleeder, the rancher, the timber-cutter. Then suddenly the rubber-gatherer, balata-bleeder, or rancher went broke, and ran out of both the jungle and his obligations to the Indians. Meanwhile the Indian had contracted various diseases, among which influenza was the most devastating. He caught influenza, but there was no medicine left behind for him. so he and often his entire family took to their hammocks and quietly died.
"In February, 193-1, I was in the country of the i Wapisiana and Makusis. Indians were starving and dying with influenza throughout the whole ! interior. The officers of the British Boundary Commission Expedition were delayed for months because of the fact that sufficient Indian porters could no longer be obtained, and black labourers had to be brought up from the coast.
"Of the Waiwai tribe, upon which they hoped to depend for carriers during the last stages of their search for the source of the Essequibo River, only fifteen members remained—all diseased, dirty, and emaciated.'’
If the facts as stated by Mr. La Varre are correct, then it would appear that British Guiana is a perfect example of “how not to do it” as regards colonial development And yet because the Rajahs of Sarawak have resolutely and consistently set their faces against just such a policy of hasty and ill-considered exploitation, Sarawak has frequently been stigmatised as “backward.’ — by those who are incapable of visualising any motive for governing primitive races other than profit. And by the word profit, incidentally, they do not mean profit for the natives, but for a handful of alien capitalists. If to kill off nine-tenths of the aboriginal population and leave the remainder diseased and demoralised is “progress,” let us hope that Sarawak will remain “backward.’ for many years to come.
CHINESE PARENTS.
That enlightened Chinese parents are trying to bring about a wider understanding of the modern attitude towards the child is shown by Dr. Lim Eng Hae’s address to the Singapore Rotary Club.
That attitude, briefly, is that the child’s individuality must be respected, that he must be allowed to live his own little life as spontaneously as possible, and that parents must distinguish clearly between discipline which is necessary in the child's interests and discipline which is merely a manifestation of adult selfishness or egoism.
Most young parents who have harkened unto A. S. Neill and Ethel Mannin have found them- selves hopelessly at sea; but still, these extremists have done go I, in that children growing up to-day arc ver) much freer and less repressed, and consequent!) happier, than those of Victorian and Edwardian times.
MALAY METHOD.
It has always seemed to me that the Malay met hod of bringing up children is as near the ideal . as one could hope to find.
The Malay child is never nagged with everlasting ‘don’ts” and fussy supervision: yet he has perfect manners and poise; and his environment of river, sea and countryside gives him ample opportunity to do all the things a normal and healthy boy loves to do.
Winstedt says : "Children the Malay loves, and though he indulges and never strikes them, his ' method of upbringing produces paragons of perfect manners and filial love and obedience.”
Swettenham says: “The Malay child wears no clothes and does as it pleases. When the parents are well-to-do there are several people running , about to attend to the child’s wishes. I never saw I a Malay child slapped, and they never seem to cry unless they are ill. ‘Anak Singapura’ in the Straits Budget.
The Young Hopeful.
Just One Little Drink Can’t
Do Any Harm.
I	J JL - OR HUW THE SNAKES WASHED BOTTLES.
TA’ BOLEH !
"On the path in front of their verandah a little European boy was playing. Behind him walked his listless Babu, monotonously forbidding him to do whatever he happened to be doing. 'Don t	it isn’t allowed.’
"Tho child took not the slightest notice, but once when his Babu roused herself from her lethargy and pulled him away from the ice-man’s cart he began to cry loudly, to kick and punch. Then he poured out a flood of insults in Malay-
"The nurse suffered his behaviour passively, and a moment later, when he had quietened down again, she resumed her monotonous chant : Don t	it isn’t allowed.'
" 'We shan’t bring up our children like that, Marian,' said Frank. 'I can understand now why children born in the Indies are always so intractable.’ ”
(From Madelon H. Lulofs’ novel "Rubber.' )
I
I had twelve bottles of whisky in my cellar, and I my wife asked me to empty the contents of each and every bottle down the sink, so I proceeded to 1 do as my wife desired. I withdrew the cork from the first bottle and poured the contents down the sink, with the exception of one glass which I drank.
I then withdrew the cork from the second bottle and did likewise, with the exception of one glass which I drank.
I then extracted the cork from the third bottle, emptied the good old booze down the bottle, except one glass which I drank.
I pulled the cork from the fourth sink and poured the bottle down the glass.
I pulled the bottle from the cork of the next and drank one sink out of it and threw the rest down the glass.
I pulled the sink out of the next cork and then poured the bottle down my neck.
I then poured the hole into out of my throat and poured the cork down the sink, all but one sink which I drank
I pulled tile next cork from my throat and poured tho sink down the bottle and then drank the cork.
I next drew the sink up through the hole, bottled the cork and drank what was left.
I then poured the home into the cork, bottled the k and .swallowed the glass.
COUNTING THE HOUSES.
Well, by this time I had them all emptied, and 1 steadied tile house with one hand and counted the bottles with the other, There were 24. So I counted them again, when they came around the next time, and made it 74, and, as the houses came around, I counted them also, and finally I had all the houses and bottles counted and proceeded to wash the bottles. But I could not get the brush into the bottles, and as I was about to turn them inside out and wash them. I noticed bunch of snakes swishing around inside the bottles and thought it would be a good idea to let them finish the work.
Feeling tired,I emptied myself into bed and it seems someone had put roller skates under the bed, posts, since 1 had no sooner got in than tho bed began to whirl around. So I watched my chance, and the next time the bed wont by my wife, I asked her to take the skates off and let the bed steady down so I could go to sleep. She said the bed was not whirling around, and I knew at once that she was either tanked up or blind. So I called the Doctor on the telephone at three A.M. and he got sore and asked me if I saw snakes. I informed him in a quiet manner that the snakes were downstairs clean-ing out the bottles and that I was O.K. but there was something wrong with the wife, as the bed was whirling around and she could not see it doing so. So he got fresh and said he was not night clerk at the Admiral Beatty, and before I could get a good sarcastic crack back at him he rang off.
I then got up for a little clean-up. washed my face and hands with some tap. turned off the soap and went back to bed again. T drew my feet up over my head, struck my blankets out at the foot, being careful to protect the right as 1 have a sore toe on that blanket, and soon was asleep.
In the morning when 1 awoke. I could truthfully say, as 80 many have said before—"Well T certainly know how to handle my licker.,,—Contributed.
Malayan Jingles.
IX.—THE CADET.
He comes from a very respectable school, Perhaps from the 'Varsity—cultured and cool;
He wears a bright blazer which shows you his
His exploits extols till you beg him to stop.
You've been young yourself, and you know what talk's'worth,
And are not too sure he's the salt of the earth.
But he has no doubts, and though still in his 'teens,
He scorns the *'old stagers”—the * good old has- beens.”
He “calls'' at '’Carcoea" and Government House His pittance of pay soon produces a grouse;
He joins all the clubs, and acquires a two-seater, And gets into debt (and what process is fleeter?) For "on first agreements no fellow can save’' (Too true when we see how some fellows behave!).
But promotion comes quickly, and then there’s the pension.
To spare the Cadet any glum apprehension.
At first to the backwoods our hero must go
As Deputy Acting Assistant D. o.
If Fortune should smile he may serve with great honour
As clerk (or "P.S.”) to some pompous Class 0ne-er.
From "Class', unto ”Class” doth he plod on his way.
At length he's a Resident, stately and grey. Or a Governor e'en, in some land wholly strange. Known only by name—but ”it’s always a change.”
And the King decorates him with letters galore For work he is paid for (though't might well be more!)
At fifty a C.M.G. should come his way. And later he ought to he good for a ”K.” At fifly-and-five it's all over at last— He joins the "old gang” who all live in the past. And over their cocktails they join in regrets For the sorry shortcomings of modem Cadets!
"Quiz" in the Singapore Sunday Times.
Songkok Kebangsa:an Melayu.
sedang sahaya menatap-kan pandangan sahaya mengidari segala suntingan yang tergobah di-dada halaman Serawak Gazette yang bertarikh pada 1.6.36—Aleh tersambar-lah kepada lintasan peman- dangan sahaya kepada muka 84 di-chelah ruangan 10 di-mnna *didalam-nya mengandongi suatu ren-chana dengan bahasa Ingris ia-lah yang meruntunkan perasaan sahaya pada mengambil pulang bag! membantang-kan ka-pengtahuan rami sepaya men- dapat sebulat2- persetujuan pekatan um-nya.
Wahi saudarku ench2 pemuda Kuching I tidak- kah ter-insaf bagi diri kita'? Bilal-kah lagi masa- nya yang kita boleh bangun dan sedar daripada kelalaian kita selama ini? Choba-lah saudaraSku perhati-kan dengan pemerhatian yang di-halusi,— jika di-timbang-kan dengan akal fikiran yang tenang bahkan dapatlah kita mengaku dengan terns terang- nya bahwasa-nya ini-lah sa-elok2 teguran yang ekhlas kepada enchi pemuda2 kita dan seruan yang berherga kepada pembesar Melayu yang ternama yang berhak berkuasa pada menjalan-kan akhtiar atau nasihat2nva, istimiwa tuan ketua Ugama yang ter-mustahak sekali menjalan-kan ka-wajib-pan-nya yang her-kena-an dengan perhubongan ini.
Films of the Month,
Sylvia Cinema,
The month started propitiously at the Sylvia Cinema with Murder al the Vanities, a film which provided excellent all-round entertainment in the shape of songs, dances, and stage spectacles, with a judicious leaven of thrills. Kitty Carlisle and Gertrude Michael sang and danced with more than ordinary grace, to the accompaniment of Duke Ellington’s orchestra, and there was some amusing back-chat between Jack Oakie and Victor McLag- len as a theatre manager and bone-headed police “lootenant” respectively.
The great popular success of the month was undoubtedly Tarzan and His Mate, which played to packed houses for a week. So great was the interest aroused by this film that crowds began to assemble outside the theatre early in the afternoon, and stayed there until the last performance was over; and at almost any time of the day one could see groups of “fans” standing about and gaping at the posters. It is easy to understand tins film’s appeal to a predominantly native audience, and certainly the photography was of an exceptionally high standard, and that overworked word 'sensational' can be truthfully applied to some of the effects, notably the fight between Tarzan and the lion. We should have liked, though, to have seen a little more swimming by Johnny Weis-muller, who took the chief part.
In Emperor Jones, Paul Robeson gave an Admirable performance as the negro pullman porter who becomes king of a remote West Indian island, but the film did not grip one to the same extent as the play, possibly because the pilgrimage by night through the jungle, which was the whole of the play, was only one episode in the film, and Consequently lost much of its dramatic value. Stamboul Quest was an excellent spy-film well- acted, well-cast, and with a really ingenious plot. It was spoilt though, as an artistic entity, by the bathos of a conventional happy ending, which was ludicrously out of place and which robbed the plot Of all its point. The stars were Myrna (what a woman !) Loy, and George Brent.
Yam Seng, a musical play about Hollywood and a girl’s efforts to get into the film industry, was amus-ing enough, and contained some tuneful songs. In Kid Millions, the Cantor formula was repeated ; the inimitable Eddie, who this time was not given a fair chance by the producers, started off in the slums fas usual), Ring some excellent songs surrounded by bevies of ravishing beauties (as usual), blacked his face (as usual), and finished up in marble halls (also as usual). A disappointing film, after The Kid front Spain and Itoman Scandals; Eddie can do better than this, and should be given a chance to show his metal.
If Johnny Weismuller can fill the Sylvia Cinema, Bing Crosby can most effectively empty it, and did go with We’re Not Dressing, a deplorable piece of rubbish about a yacht and a desert island in which he starred. This was followed by Stand Up and Cheer, a piece of propaganda for the N.H.A. featuring Warner Baxter, John Boles and Shirley Temple, and containing some excellent songs.
Black Magic, a film about Bali, acted by the natives themselves, was notable for some really lovely photography, and for numerous interesting ‘shots' of native ceremonial. A film well worth seeing.
Provisional Schedule of Programme.
.August. 1935.
1935.	Day.	Film Title
1st 2nd Thursday 4 Friday
3rd & 4th Saturday 4 Sunday
Sth & 6th Monday 4 Tuesday
7th 4 8th Wednesday 4 Thursday
9th to 11th Friday to Sunday
12th & 13th Monday & Tuesday
14th &15th Wednesday A Thursday
16th & 17th Friday & Saturday
18th &19th Sunday & Monday
-20th & 21th Tuesday & Wednesday
29th &30th Thursday & Friday
24th to 26th Saturday to Monday
28th Tuesday 4 Wednesday . 27th
29th Thursday & Friday
31st Aug. &
1st Sept. Saturday 4 Sunday
Bolero
George White's Scandals
Barratts of Wimpole Street
1 cover the Waterfront
Treasure Island
Reserved for Chinese Film
Jack Ahoy
Scarlet Pimpernel
Melody Cruise
Reserved for Chinese
Film
Charlie Chan's Courage
Hollywood Party
Reserved for Chinese
Film ’Take a Chance
The Cat's Pu
Mainly About Nothing.
HAUTE ECOLE' AT GENEVA.
The horse plays a great part in international politico. Therefore anybody who tries to belittle the horse is doing a great disservice to mankind, and is, moreover, not telling the truth.”—Lord Beatty, reported in the Press.
It has been found in practice that although Shire horses make the bet Foreign Secretaries, owing to their equable temperament. Blood Arabs are more .suitable for the Diplomatic Service, where breeding and appearance must necessarily count for more than mere intelligence. Geldings, too, are chosen wherever possible, since they are happily free from those distressing propensities that have done so much to mar successive" postwar conferences. It is, how- over, a fact that a gray mare named Betsy Prig' was instrumental in concluding an extremely satisfactory commercial treaty’ between the United Kingdom and Poland, and the preference at present enjoyed by British goods in Uruguay is due almost entirely to the far-seeing statesmanship of a Shet-hind pony called ’Queenie.’ But., then, as my Aunt Mabel used to observe, ’It’s the exceptions that prove the rule,' though I don't quite see how this covers the fact that a certain piebald stallion, who shall be nameless: would undoubtedly have been included in Air. Baldwin’s cabinet after the recent re-shuffle if he had not been under contract with Captain Bertram Mills’ circus. ’ The sawdust ring,” he told me, with a cheerful neigh, ”may not bring one the same honours as the wider arena of Jtfditics, but financially it is certainly a better proposition.”
First Division News.
It has now been definitely decided to move the headquarters of the Sadong district from Simunjan to Srian at the doth mile, Simanggang Road. The erection of a European officer's bungalow, derks’ quarters, and Government offices at Srian has been completed.
As a result of complaints received about the Sengghi boundary on the Mntang Reserve, Mr. J. R. Outran and Native Officer Abang Haji Adenau walked along the boundary from Sengghi to Sungei Tengah on June 27th, and submitted a report on various points raised by the complainants.
Two inquests were held in Kuching during the month, one on the body of a Chinese child who died from cyanide poisoning, the other on the body of a Chinese fisherman who died in his kotak off Kuala Sadong.
Mr. s. G. Hansom, who was appointed to do duty temporarily in the First Division, visited Lundu from June nth to 14th in connection will farming disputes, calling in at Santubong on his . way there and back.
The Court Writer, Simatan, reports that there has been no further appearance of Japanese fishing vessels in Datu Bay.
Fifty-five criminal and eighty-two civil cases came before the Kuching Courts during toe month.
Dahan Rubber Estates, Ltd., harvested 22,000 lbs. of dry rubber during June. The rainfall on the estate amounted to 12.26 inches.
Mr. R. G. Aikman, Census Officer, was in the Bau district from June 5th to 19th in connection with the ”rubber garden cena. Considering the short notice given, planters have responded very well First Division News.
It has now been definitely decided to move the headquarters of the Sadong district from Simunjan to Srian at the doth mile, Simanggang Road. The erection of a European officer's bungalow, derks’ quarters, and Government offices at Srian has been completed.
As a result of complaints received about the Sengghi boundary on the Mntang Reserve, Mr. J. R. Outran and Native Officer Abang Haji Adenau walked along the boundary from Sengghi to Sungei Tengah on June 27th, and submitted a report on various points raised by the complainants.
Two inquests were held in Kuching during the month, one on the body of a Chinese child who died from cyanide poisoning, the other on the body of a Chinese fisherman who died in his kotak off Kuala Sadong.
Mr. s. G. Hansom, who was appointed to do duty temporarily in the First Division, visited Lundu from June nth to 14th in connection will farming disputes, calling in at Santubong on his . way there and back.
The Court Writer, Simatan, reports that there has been no further appearance of Japanese fishing vessels in Datu Bay.
Fifty-five criminal and eighty-two civil cases came before the Kuching Courts during toe month.
Dahan Rubber Estates, Ltd., harvested 22,000 lbs. of dry rubber during June. The rainfall on the estate amounted to 12.26 inches.
Mr. R. G. Aikman, Census Officer, was in the Bau district from June 5th to 19th in connection with the ”rubber garden cena. Considering the short notice given, planters have responded very well 408 persons were treated at Bau dispensary and
hospital during June.
Five general prospecting licences and one
: panning licence were issued at Bau during the
The total production of gold for Upper Sarawak
during May amounted to 2.5.59.469 OS. This
figure has only been exceeded once since the
present mines started work, the figure for June,
1934, being 3,057 ounces. The following table
shows the gold obtained by the various companies
The Court writer, Lundu, reports a number of thefts of rubber cups in the district. One Chinese planter has gone to the trouble of having hie cups specially made in Kuching and marked with his "chop.
A number of Land Dayak chiefs visited Lundu during the month in connection with the rubber garden census. According to them, all gardens have been reported to the Census Officer.
A large majority of the pepper gardens in the Lundu district have been attacked hy black-fruit
Lundu is well served by motor-schooners now a days, five different vessels having made a total of thirteen trips between Lundu and Kuching during
The Assistant District Officer, Sadong, reports that as a result of the Supreme Court decree in the ppial of Kampong Semabang against e decision dispute has beau taken over by Government and divided equally between Semabang and Lobang
Native taxes arc coming in well in the Sadong district, especially at Tebekang. Land revenue for the last two months amounts to $1,691.
M.V, Kim Chin Seng cleared from Sadong for Singapore on June 16th with scrap iron from Sadong Colliery.
1 has been decided that no more of the high' land at the 381 mile is to be alienated, since it may be required later for Government purposes.
The Resident, First Division, visited Serian on June 21st when Sadong river towkays drew lots for fifteen sites for shophouses in the new bazaar. The romaining seventeen sites, which are open to Kuching towkays and late applicants,will be drawn for on August 2nd
A Mission Occasion.
GOLDEN JUBILEE OF THE REV. MOTHER HELEN.
MOTHER PROVINCIAL OF SARAWAK.
Ou the evening of July 8th, a concert was given ut St. Teresa’s Convent, Kuching, to celebrate the fiftieth anniversary of the arrival in Sarawak of the Rev. Mother Helen. Mother Provincial of Sarawak.
Mother Helen, who was born in 1860 at St. Helens, Lancashire, joined Mother Francis Ingrain (foundress of the Missionary Sisters of St. Joseph) at the age of sixteen. She worked first at Rochdale, at social work and night classes, but after a few years she was invited by Cardinal Vaughan to take charge of domestic affairs at his missionary college at Mill Hill.
In 1885 the Cardinal appointed her Provincial of the Sisters in Sarawak and British North Borneo. She came out at the head of the first band of sisters shortly afterwards, arriving in Kuching on July 5th of the same year. At first she rented a Chinese bungalow, which stood on the site now occupied by the Hokkien School, but Inter on she was able to build the first convent. Mother Aloysius, one of the sisters who first came out with her,’ is still alive in England.
When Mother Helen arrived in the country, she encountered great popular prejudice against the education of girls. This she gradually overcame, attracting girls in the first place by leaching them sewing, and before long there was no lack of pupils for her school.
Mother Helen has founded convents at Kuching. Singghi (now closed), Kanowit, Sibu, Dalat, Mukah and Miri in Sarawak, and at Sandakan, Jeaeelton, Penampnng and Papar in British North Borneo; the Miri Convent was founded only last year. Eight years ago she founded the congregation of "The Little Sisters of St. Francis," which now has twelve professed sisters and several novices, both Chinese and native.
Mother Helen, who is now over seventy years of age, has never in her life been seriously ill, though about five years ago she sustained considerable injuries as the result of a fall down a flight of stairs in the convent. We hope that she will long be spared to continue her valuable work for the Church and for Sarawak, and we shall look forward to celebrating her Diamond Jubilee in 1945.
Golden Jubilee Fund For The Rev.
Mother Helen.
We are asked to give publicity to the
following letter, and to the list of subscribers
to the above fund :—
Kuching, Sarawak.
11th July, 1935.
Dear Rev. Mother Helen,
With the kind help of a few friends I have raised
a fund from generous donors to commemorate your
Golden Jubilee (July, 1885—1935).
I now have pleasure in enclosing a cheque for
$245 which amount you can utilize at your discretion.
A list of subscribers is also enclosed herewith,
which I intend to insert in the next issue of the
Sarawak Gazette, as an acknowledgment to nil kind
donors.
Rev. Mother Helen thanks all the generous donors and also to those who kindly sent private donations to her direct .
The subscription list is now closed, and those (especially her old pupils) who have )lot done Iheir bit and are willing to show their appreciation to Rev. Mother Helen may do so by sending their donations direct to her, when same will be acknowledged through the medium of this paper
SARAWAK TURF CLUB
Minutes of Committee Meeting of The Sarawak i
Turf Club held at The Sarawak Club
ON 9th JULY 1935, AT 6.15 P.M.
Present.—Messrs. E. s. Holl, Chan Qui Chong.
Tan Sum Guan. Wee Kheug Chiang,
G- T- Bates and Datu Shahbandar.
present.—Messrs. H. B. Crocker, c. D. Adams,
-I. B. Archer, p. M. Adams and
B. -T. c. Spurnay.
Chairman.—Mr. Tan Sum Guan.
(1)Minutes.—The Minutes of the previous
meeting were read and confirmed.
(2)Programme.—Decided to call Race No. 3
First Day “THE HANKERS' PURSE" subject to -
the Banks contributing.
(3)Entries.—Entries to be in by 31st August,
.1935
(4)Handicaps.—For 1st Day to be posted on the ;
Notice Board at the Sarawak Club on 7th September.
1935, and for the 2nd Day on 22nd September, 1935.
(5).Scratching .—For 1st Day before .5 p.m. on 20th September.
For 2nd Day before 5 p.m. on 22nd September.
(6)Couric.-Opens for training Saturday, loth ,
August.
(7)Unlimited (Sweep.—Mr. Bates informed the
",eeting that he had heard it said that 20% de:
duction for file club was too much.
fr. Chan Qui Chong proposed that the Club
deducts 20% as usual. He Minted out that with
the exception of last meeting loss had been made for
om time and it was our chief source of revenue.
If a large profit was made the - could make
a contribution to the Jubilee Fund. This was seconded by Mr. Wee Kheng Chiang.
(8)Unlimited Sweep Prizes.—Mr. Wee Kheng Chiang proposed that 2 First, 2 Second, 2 Third and 2 Prizes for each starter be given this year as an experiment. Tins was carried by 3 Votes to 2, the Chairman abstaining. The Secretaries were in- structed to get the views of the outstation members of the Committee.
(9)Selling Lotteries.—)fir. Chan Qui Chong proposed 3 Selling Lotteries for each day's racing. This met with no support.
Mr. Bates proposed that the first three races on the first day are Selling Lotteries. Mr. Wee Kheng Chiang seconded. Passed 4 Votes to 1, the Chair- man abstaining.
(11) Parking (;round.—Decided to put a layer of stone on the ground already cleared.
(ID Serulching of burong Gruda.—The Datu Shahbandar explained that at the last meeting Burong Gruda had lo be scratched sliortly before the race owing to going lame. Decided in the circum- ; stances to refund the part entrance fee.
(12) Measuring New Ponies.—Mr. Chan Qui Chong raised the question of measuring new ponies. After some discussion it was decided that New Ponies must be measured as soon as the course is opened for training for the meeting.
Sarawak Rubber Estates, Limited.
The Directors 3lst March, 1935.
have pleasure in submitting the Audited Accounts for
the year ended
Account*.—The year's working, after making provision for depreciation, shows a profit of	...
Add Amount at credit at 31st March, 1934
£5,606 6 7
1,155 4 2
Making a total of
£6.761 10 9
which it is proposed to appropriate as follows:—
Dividend for the year of 5 per cent., less tax as under
Interim Dividend of 2 per cent., paid 21st January, 1935
Final Dividend of 2 per cent., payable 1st August, 1935
...£2,325 0 0
... 2,325 0 0
Carry forward
£4.650 0 0
2,111 10 9
£6,761 10 9
Area.—The total area of the Estate remains at 3,476 acres, of which 2,621 acres are under rubber, all of which is mature.
Crop.—The crop for the year amounted to 698,981 lbs., as compared with 771,661 lbs. during the previous year.
The output was adversely affected by a prohibition on the collection and manufacture of Scrap Rubber during nearly four months of the year, and also by abnormal rains.
Labour and Health.—The supply of labour remains sufficient for all present requirements and the health has been good.
Estate — The condition of the Estate has been most satisfactorily reported upon by our Visiting Agent.
Directorate.—It is with much regret your Directors have to record the death, on 24th December, 1934, of Mr. Sidney Morgan, who had been a Director of the Company for nearly six years.
In accordance with the Articles of Association Mr. J K. Henderson retires from the Board and. being eligible, offers hnnaelf fur re-election.
Auditors.— Messrs. Turquand, Youngs & Co. retire and offer themselves for re-appointment.
On behalf of the Board,
J. K. HENDERSON, 1 n-
J. HARVEY,	Directors
SACKVILLE House,
143/149, Fenchurch Street, London, E.C. 3,
4th July. 1935.
Auditors’ Report to the Members of Sarawak Rubber Estates, Limited.
We have audited the Balance Sheet set forth above, and have obtained all the information and explanations we have required. We have compared the Balance sheet with the hooks and vouchers of the company in London, and with the signed returns from the Estate in Sarawak. In our opinion such Balance Sheet is properly drawn up so as to exhibit a true and correct view of the state of the Company’s affairs, according to the best of our information and the explanations given to us, and as shown by the books of the Company and the signed returns from abroad referred to above.
London, 5th July, 1935.
Junk.
The organisation of the Tapping Holiday and Rubber census in the Second Division was arranged at a meeting held at Simanggang at the beginning of the month, which the Commissioner of Trade and Customs kindly attended. Also present were all District Officers and every available Native Officer from each station throughout the Division, and also all penghulus, Tua’ Kampong, and the principal Tuai Rumah of the Simanggang district.
Temporary officers, who had been recruited to help with the rubber census, were later coached in their work and commenced operations in each river and district, the administrative boundaries of the various Penghulus being followed.
The Cadet’s bungalow at Simanggang, which was completed and occupied during the month, is of a very convenient and suitable plan, and has been exceedingly well constructed and finished off by the local contractor.
In the Second Division, only one Resident's Court case came up for hearing during the month. This t was a land dispute appeal from the District Court. The judgment of the Lower Court was upheld, and the appeal dismissed after an examination of the land by the Magistrates.
A number of Dayaks from the Engkilili district moved to Baram towards the end of June.
A padi mill has been installed at the Hong Mong Sawmill at Simanggang. A number of Dayaks and some Malays now get their padi milled for 10 cents a pasu.
Two consignments of belian telephone posts were received during the month from Kuching by lighter, for renewing all the posts on the Engkilili to Lubok Antu section of the system. The old posts were all of soft wood and nearly all were rotten.
Thirty-seven Dayak levies returned from the Third Division via Lingga on the 23rd.
The census of population of the Second Division was completed during the month, revealing a total of 78,03!) of all races. Of this total. Sea Dayaks provide 62,141, Malays 18,786, and Chinese 6,666.
Probably as a result of the forthcoming census, there were about 70 applications for titles at Engkilili in respect of existing rubber gardens.
Mr. G. R. H. Arundel!, Travelling Assistant District Officer, Lubok Antu, reports as follows regarding his recent journey to the Ulu Lobang Baya and Batang Ai :—
“I left Lubok Antu on May 30th on a surprise trip to the Ulu Lobang Baya and Batang Ai, having received information from the Dutch side that the rebels had left the Lebuyan, Mensiau and Kanyau rivers for the Ulu Batang Ai and were said to be in the neigbourhood of Penghulu Bamba’s house. Leaving Lubok Antu on the morning of May 30th, I spent the night at Krangan Mong R. Lajang) and went the next day to R. Sali (N. Tutong), Engkari. I chose this way for the sake of secrecy. Leaving N. Tutong on .Tune 1st, I ramped that evening on Tinteng Ngeruang near Kalan Lumpang, which is between the Ulu Telaus, the Ulu Tutong and the Ulu Keluit (patch Lobang Baya). On June 2nd. I arrived at R. Abong, having split my force at N. Lumpang, one half under L/Cpl. Kalom going to N. Mujan by way of R. Bnngkong, and the other, with myself, to R. Abong. On June 3rd I again divided my party, sending one half under S/C Angong to N. Mujan by way of Ulu Biong (tree left bauk of Batang Ai) and some to P. Bamba’s farms while 1 myself went with the remainder by boat to N. Mujan. I stopped at N. Bedegum on the way and sent four or five men to look at Rantai’s, Ngin- dang's and others' farms in the neighbourhood of Ulu Bedegum. Unlikely though it sounds, I believe my arrival was really unexpected.
“After a thorough examination of the countryside round Nanga Mujan, 1 returned to R. Abong to await the arrival of fresh stores. I also paid a visit to R. Bnngkong.
“On June 9th I walked to R. Sengalang in the Jingin, and the next day to R. Mngu, Delok. From there T went to R. Pcnghulu Jiinhnn and on June 12th arrived at R. Kain (Bila Sedi, Menvang.) From R. Kain, coming by way of the Empran (Dutch Borneo), 1 arrived in Lubok Antu on June 14th at about 10.10 a.m.
"Except for a few minor cases, there in nothing to report apart from the incident of a man seen on Ngruang who bolted at sight of as, and could not be found. This I have already reported.”
252 patients were treated at Belong Hospital during the mouth. 1,668 vaccinations were performed and 99 N. A. B. injections were given.
The Acting District Officer, Saribas, reports that a tour of the Layar and the Spak has confirmed his earlier reports on the failure of the padi harvest. The hill crops failed completely, many doors harvesting barely sufficient for next season's seed requirements. Unfortunately, up to the time of the drought the padi appeared so healthy that the Dayaks omitted to plant root-crops. The situation therefore causes some anxiety.
Engkabang and durian are scarce in the Saribas district, though other fruits appear plentiful.
The Acting Assistant District Officer, Kalaka, reports that many Dayaks in his district are already haying Siamese rice in the bazaar, and this within a short period of harvesting the local padi crop, such as it was.
Third Division News.
.TUNB.
Forty-six criminal and twenty-eight civil cases camc before the Sibu Courts during June.
S.L. Chamois made two journeys to Lingga, returning sixty-two Second Division levies, who had resigned. There are now only thirty-three of the Simanggang levies left in the Third Division.
Owing to the shortage of rice amongst Dayaks in the Kanowit district, it has become necessary for Government to render assistance, and 10 koyan of sago have been obtained from the Kut, and are being distributed to those in need.
Two Dayaks from the Ngemah, who have admitted that they are the perpetrators of the outrage at Song in which a whole Chinese family was murdered, were arrested at R. Bnngkong, Lobang Baya (Second Division), on July 22nd. The crime was committed on June 29th. The two Dayaks are at present at Sibil under sentence of death.
Three Mukah Malay fishermen sank in a squall near the month of the Igan. They were rescued, fed. clothed and taken back to their home by Igan Malays.
Certain Dayaks in the Ngemah were reported to be assisting Kendawang and other members of the outlaw band, to whom many of them are related, by giving them food and shelter. Arrests were made but nothing could be definitely proved. Those who assisted him have been dealt with, and the effect on the Dayaks has been considerable.
Land revenue for the Sibu district during June amounted to $11,710.36. One hundred and eighty- three deeds were registered.
The following table gives the trade figures for Sibu for June :—
1935.	193-1.
Foreign Import ...	$ 153,151	$139,928
Exports	...	249.683	216.419
,,	Imports	to	date	1,042.951	788.039
,,	Exports	to	date	1,297,099	961,319
Rubber exports from the Division for June were
as follows :—
Piculs. Pct cent.
Smoked sheet ...	13,256.60	86.48
Manufactured scrap ...	864.88	5.65
Unmanufactured scrap...	1,206.67	7.87
15,328.15 UOO.OO
Various Government quarters were repaired at Sibu, including the Dayak Rest House. The kitchen of the latter is being enlarged and partitioned off for the use of the Dayak Native Officer, when he arrives.
The interior walls of one wing of the prison were demolished by prisoners, since they were in danger of collapsing, having been built without foundations or piles. The work of driving piles and rebuilding the walls will be done almost entirely by prisoners.
Both the Sibu and the Kapit 32-h.p. Johnson outboard motors are out of commission again, and have been sent to Kuching for examination and adjustment.
Lighter Big Bill, though still on charter to the Sarawak Steamship Co., was used twice, in the absence of the Wullie in Kuching, for transporting sago from the Kut to Kanowit. It is reported that the hull is leaking badly, and that she will have to come up to Sibu for repairs.
Mr. B. J. C. Spurway, Divisional Forest Officer, 1 returned from his visit to the Pala Wong district on the 9th. Amongst other things, he Tias been attempting to unravel the upriver logging trade, the chaotic conditions of which are traceable to two factors, both the fault of the sawmills and their upriver agents—prodigality in advances, and the low remuneration offered for the logs when they are delivered. He has drawn up for trial a specimen form for registered agreements, in which there is a time-limit clause and a definite statement as to the number of logs required. Logs will he paid for on a sliding scale, with higher prices for early delivery. —
The stock of ammunition and percussion caps in Sibu liuzaar was taken over by Government as from the first of the month.
Ninety-five persons were treated in Sibu Hospital during the month; of this number sixty-three were new patients. There were five deaths, one transfer to Kuching, and fifty discharges. Outpatients numbered four hundred and twenty-two, two hundred and twenty-four of these being new cases. Forty-eight N.A.B. injections were administered.
Dr. A. D. Hutchison, Divisional Medical Officer, visited Kapit from the 6th to the 8th. Dresser Edward Domingo arrived back from the headwaters of the Rejang on the 19th. He had accompanied the Acting Assistant District Officer, Kapit, on his annual visit to the Kayan country above .Belaga.
Dresser Leong Ah Heng arrived from Kuching, and was immediately sent up-river to investigate the continuous rumours of epidemics. On his return he was sent down the Igan, and, later, to Daro and Matu.
Haji Gapor, Native Officer, Sibu, was temporarily transferred to Kanowit while Wan Bujang was i away on annual leave.
Abang Elijah took short leave from Song, and,
while in Sibu, was instrumental in the discovery
1 and arrest of the Dayaks who harboured Kenda-
wang in the Kaman.
The Court Writer, Kanowit, Kim Chai, was down with influenza for some days. Wong Cham Chin, who was on leave from Oya, went up as emergency clerk, no one else being available.
The Acting Resident, Third Division, accompanied by the Acting District Officer, Lower Rejang, investigated the proposed site of the new station at Entabai in the Kanowit. It was found to be unsuitable in every way, and another site was provisionally selected at' the 'mouth of the Melnan further downstream. This latter site was confirmed later, and Abang Abu Seinan, Native Officer, is now there collecting timber for the fort, and clearing the site.
The Acting Assistant District Officer, Kapit, reports that trade in general is looking brighter in his district. A sum of $8,295 has been paid out in T.T. remittances at Kapit during the last two months.
The Hock Lam School at Kapit gave a most enjoyable entertainment on June 16th and 18th. The school-teachers are to be congratulated on the excellence of the performance, seeing that they have only been at Kapit for 4 or 5 months. The daily attendance of the school is now over 50 pupils.
The Acting Assistant District Officer, Kapit, was away for the greater part of the month visiting Pala Wong, Belaga and the Baloi. During the course of this trip, the Kapit outboard motor broke down and had to be sent down-river for repairs ; this is hardly surprising, since this particular motor has done 684 hours’ running since it was delivered at Kapit in April, 1932, this being the equivalent of about 6,000 miles.
Rice is very scarce at Belaga, and the Kayane and others races in this area again had a bad harvest.
A prahu containing three Kayans and three Kaja- rnans, which escorted the Acting Assistant District Officer on his tour as far as Pala Bayun on July 1st. capsized in the Bakun rapids while returning the same evening, one Kajaman. Tuai Rumah Tama Balan Ketan, being drowned. Apparently the Kajamans did not wish to shoot the rapids, but the Kayans dared them to do so. the result being that the boat capsized. Three of the occupants managed to cling to the boat, and two others were picked up by a prahu waiting at the foot of the rapids, otherwise they would certainly have been drowned. The remaining Kajaman, however, was drawn under by a whirlpool, and was not seen alive again. Government has paid out $60 patch nyawa to the relations of the deceased.
The District Officer. Lower Rejang, reports that one of the criminal cases heard during the month concerned six Dayaks who had stolen clothing from Chinese. He remarks that the prevalence of this form of crime appears to be growing.
At Daro, a number of offences against the Rubber
Restriction Order were dealt with.
1,748.57 piculs of rubber, and 170.80 piculs F.A.Q.
pepper, were exported from Sarikei during June.
Work on the Sarikei wharf and godowns is nearing
completion. Good progress has been made with the
new Government offices, and the Wireless Depart-
ment was able to move in at the end of the month.
The Binatang wharf was opened on June 26th.
Work on the Repok Road was held up by the
installation of the telephone line to Jakar, Rusa and
Banin.
The Matu herd of cattle was sold for $892, the best individual price realised being $68 for one cow.
The Mukah Mosque is in danger of fulling into the
river, and a subscription list has been opened with
a view to obtaining the funds required for repairs.
The District Officer, Mukah. reports that nothing
further has been heard of the engkabang crop in his j
district beyond a rumour that the fruit is falling too early.	The efforts made by Mukah traders to open a sago
factory in Kuching have fallen through owing to the
opposition of the Kuching sago "ring.*’ For the
same reason, the local traders are fighting shy of the
Kut sago factory scheme, fearing that if they parti
cipate, they will* he boycotted by the ring. There is.
however, one trader, who, since he trades on a cash ;
basis, is. comparatively speaking, a free agent, and
who may therefore take an interest in the Kut ,
scheme if some form of direct transport to Singapore t
is guaranteed. Tie is afraid, even than, that the all-
powerful ring will defeat him in the end. Action on
his’ part, though, would be a great step towards
breaking the power of this ring, which has hung like
a blight over the Coast for so many years.
The Balingian Fort was completed and occupied .
during the month.
Forty-one vessels entered Mukah, and forty cleared the port during June. M.L. Leonora proceeded to Kuching for docking in tow of H.H.M.YY . Maimuna.
Land settlement appears to be proceeding very well in the Mukah district, considering the many difficulties encountered. Settlement has noticeably facilitated probate work in the areas concerned.
The Officer-in-Charge, Oya and Dnlat. spent most of the month touring upriver Dayak areas. He reports that there has been a serious epidemic of influenza in the Ulu Oya, hardly any houses being unaffected, and many Dayak infants having died as a result. This disease has been rife, indeed, throughout the whole district, and has caused several deaths among adults.
During the course of his upriver tour, the rules governing the tapping holiday and rubber census were explained tn all Dayaks, temuku being left in all houses in connection with the former. Tt is interesting to note that the Dayaks all appear to realise the necessity for the tapping holiday, and they also point out that since they will all be busy farming during the period concerned, they will not he put to any hardship.
Engkabang has fruited fairly well in the Baku, but
I in the Ulu Oya and S. Tamin areas it has /ailed
entirely, and will hardly be worth collecting. Fell-
1 ing for padi-farming is progressing steadily up river
! and in many places is.completed.
Raw sago has been steady throughout the month
at 52 qents per passu (S. Kut price).
Fourth Division News.
June.
H.M.S. Herald made an unexpected visit to Miri I on June 10th in order to transfer one of her officers
to hospital.
A conviction under Order No. M—3 (Mui Tsai) 1931 was recorded at Miri and a woman named Wong Lui was punished both for importing a mui txai, and for assaulting her. Arrangements have been made for the future custody of the girl. Owing to the vigilance of the Secretariat for Chiueue Affairs, cases of this nature are extremely rare in Sarawak. At present there is only one mui tsai registered in the State.
Mr. J. R. Combe, District Officer, Limbang, returned from local leave and resumed duty on June 20th. Mr. 1’. Scott, who had been in charge of the Limbang district during his absence, then returned to Lawns.
Twelve thousand acres of protected forests at Beseri, Suai, and 13,695 acres at Spegang, Bintulu, were constituted during the month.
A small Japanese fishing boat arrived on 29th June off Kuala Miri flying 3 yellow flag. Exactly what the flag signified was not ascertainable, though it was certainly not quarantine. The vessel came in order to collect one of the small boats left at Kuala Baram last month, when part of the crew had Io row ashore from a fishing trawler which was lying out to sea disabled.
The District Officer. Miri, records with deep regret the death on June 25th of Miss F. A. Jones, a nursing sister in the Sarawak Oilfields, Ltd., Enropenu Hospital. Miss Jones only recently arrived in Sarawak.
A bad ease of attempted murder occurred at
Pujut on June 17th. The victim, a Chinese, is
lying seriously ill in hospital with a cleft skull, and
although he is conscious, he is unable as yet to
speak, so the affair remains a mystery.
Reports from Sibuti state that there were many
cases of fever in the district during the month.
Two coroners' inquests were held at Miri during June, verdicts of suicide being returned in each case.
The following table gives the Miri trade figures for the month of June : —
June, 1935
June. 1934
Total to June, 1935
Total to June, 1934
Imports.
$ 439,99-1
403,276
2,703,997
2,037.880
Exports.
$ 635,193
867.939
3,874,896
3.799,527
The District Officer, Bintulu, reports that the general health of the district appeared to be excellent during June, except in Sungei Jelalong, where several deaths were reported from what seemed to be pneumonia.
Dayaks in the Tatau district are still indust-
riously working damar, the price of this product
being satisfactory. All natives seem fairly well off, I
since there is no shortage of work for them; logs,
although they have dropped slightly in price on the Singapore market, are still a good proposition
for native workers. The fact that there was very
little tax outstanding in the Bintulu district at the end of June gives some indication of the prosperity of the natives.
The following table gives the Bintulu trade figures for May :—
1935.	1934.
Exports for May
Imports for May
$'21,643.00 $16,810.00
19,542.00	30,980.00
A Land Inspector was employed in the Sebauh district demarcating Dyak gardens. There was a little difficulty at first, since the Dyaks resented this demarcation, being under the impression that the application tickets which they held represented titles to land. As soon as it was explained to them that demarcation would involve them in no extra cost, they were satisfied.
The Sarawak Timber and Trading Company are extending their mill at Bintulu, and should soon double their present output.
The District Officer, Limbang, reports that Messrs. Smith and Watson of the F.M.8. Forestry Service paid a short visit to Limbang, arriving on the* 23rd and leaving for Brunei on the following day.
The widening and regrading of the Golf Course Road at Limbang was continued during the month, but was rather hampered by wet weather.
Lawas (Sarawak) Estates, Limited, exported 17,696 pounds of dry rubber during the month. Rainfall at Lawas totalled 25.35 inches.
Mr. G. Clifford, the Manager of the Lawas Estate, and Mrs. Clifford returned from leave on June 14th.
CORRESPONDENCE.
[The Editor is not responsible for the opinion* of Correspondents
To the Editor, Sarawak Gazette.
“Sport.”
Sir,
The football season in Kuching has produced its usual crop of bitterness, jealousy and intrigue. The matches of the Kuching league have been marred by continual "incidents,"—fouls, disputes with the referee, and undetected dirty play, and on one occasion a minor sensation was produced by a whole team walking off the field because they disagreed with a decision of the referee. And the "fans" have not stopped short even at intimidation, since as soon as
a certain team started to lose, its players were
threatened with physical violence (and by members
of their own community if they dared to take the
field, and as a result they had to withdraw from the
league !
If this is "sport," then let us stop football—or
at least, league football,—in Kuching altogether,
since its main effect seems to be to accentuate inter-
racial feeling and embitter the relations between
different factions and communities. I believe that
on every occasion that the league system has been
tried in Kuching it has proved a failure, and has
given rise to endless unedifying squabbles. Is it
not time that it was allowed to die a natural death?
And will anyone mourn its loss? No one, I
imagine, except those who are financially interested
in the results of the games, and who therefore have
no scruples about encouraging every form of
crooked play likely to bring about a win for the
side they are backing.
Yours faithfully,
Clean Sport.
Weight-Lifting as a “Pick-Me*Up.”
I The Editor,	Padungan Road,
Sarawak Gaxette,	Kuching,
Kuching.	12th July, 1986.
SIR,
Through the medium of your paper, may I have the honour to ask you to publish the following article:—
Many health seekers do not realize the actual value of weight-lifting, and to them I would not hesitate to advise that it is the best medium for a "pick-me-up/’ because it tones the entire system and keeps one vigorously alive.
Some one usually impressed that weight-lifting is a game for the "Strong" only, and this clearly shows how little they know the game. It should be borne in mind that not all strong men are born such, for they acquire their strength through gradual practice with the weights, thus eventually attaining general physical perfection. Perseverance counts a great deal in one’s quest for health and strength and if this is adhered to, one will, in the course of a short time reap the golden harvest. A weakling is transformed into a robust he-man via weight-lifting and with it, dynamic personality. The majority of the physical degenerates resort to drugs and patent medicines as a remedy for their ailments; such people are more to be pitied than blamed, and if there is not a single drop of medicine in the world, the death rate will lie lower. Should one only reflect for a moment, the value of one’s health, one will certainly endeavour to better one’s physical outlook and not to remain contented with life as it is. Therefore, my final advice is "Get out of that physical rut" and live a new life of dexterity, where one can gain implicit happiness.
May I mention, there is an athletic club at Central Road East, which is for public welfare. A visit will convince you.
Yours obediently,
Chia Box Gee,
Malayan 11 stone and Singapore Middleweight champion weight-lifter. 193911933.
The Editor,
Sarawak Gazette,
Kuching.
Sir,
May I have the honour to ask yon to allow me a little space ill the medium of your paper for the undermentioned article.
Yours obediently,
Chia Bok Gee.
Sarawak Badminton Association?
Will this association come to life? Ere this is published, negotiation is going forward in response for its maturity. To encourage the game, will all those badminton secretaries realize it is high time to form the above-mentioned association, to organize I am official championship meeting in the State of I Sarawak, when we can decide the individual and double champions for the said State. Why such meeting has never been taken place? Is it through selfish attitude? To those would-be champions, I extend to them my heart-felt sympathy and they are not to be blamed for not securing premier honours and believe those intending organizers or proposers are responsible
Kindly give us a helping bairn and together with mutual co-operation, we hope this association will be formed with ease. Who knows, in future, Sarawak will be able to send a couple of representa-tives to Singapore or Malaya to compete for the Singapore and Malayan titles.