
Kuching, Wednesday,january 2nd, 1935
Local and personal.
December
On New Year's Eve Their Highnesses the Rajah and Ranee invited the whole European community of Kuching to a fancy-dress ball at Astana. After dinner dancing took place , until just before midnight, when buglers of the Sarawak Constabulary sounded the Stand To. At midnight a gun was fired from Fort Margherita, and the guests, who had formed a large ring in the ballroom, took hands and saw the new year in to the strains of ‘Auld LangSvne" and many a rousing cheer. Dancing continued until the early hours of the morning, an excellent programme of music being provided by Mr. G. Solosa and his ; band. The costumes, especially those of the ladies, were both tasteful and ingenious. Amongst many that deserve special mention are. Her Highness the Ranee, in Malay dress . of beautifully blended colours. Mr. and Mrs.
R. L. Daubcny as Charles II. and Nell Gwyn, and Mr. E.O. Bruce as “Something that had to be seen to be believed”.
If the New Year proves as prosperous as this party was enjoyable, we shall, indeed, be in luck.
A most enjoyable dance was given at the Residency by the Resident, Mr. W. F. Dick, and Mrs. Dick, on Christmas Night. The approaches to the Residency had been decorated with long lines of coloured lights, and with a Christmas Tree, balloons, music and lashings of liquid and other refreshments, all went to make a very happy and enjoyable evening.
A salute of seven guns was fired from Fort Margherita at 6 p.m. on Friday the 7th December, to announce the commencement of Bulan Puasa.
At the thirty-fifth Annual General Meeting ; of the Sarawak Union Club held on Saturday, December 29th, 1934. the following I gentlemen were elected office-bearers for the year 1935President: The Bishop of Labuan and Sarawak; Vice-President: The Archdeacon of Sarawak; lion. Secretary : i Mr. Tan Kui Choon ; Hon. Treasurer : Mr. Kuek Choo Seng: Committee Members: ' Messrs. C. Mason, Chan Weng Yen and Chin Shin Sen; and Hon. Auditor: Mr. Tehee Foong Hee.
We are informed that the Poppy Find collections for 1934 are as follows : -Kuching $314.00, Sibu and Simanggang $346.16. A draft for £77.5.6d has been forwarded to the Organizing Secretary, British Legion.
It is with deep regret we have to report the deaths of Datu Haji Abdullah, at Bintulu on the 8th December and Pangiran Azit bin Pangiran Mohamad, Native Officer of Roban. at Kuching on the 13th December. We take this opportunity to tender their families our deep sympathy in their sad loss.
Amongst visitors to Kuching during the month were Messrs. E. O. Bruce. G. F. J. Pegler. F. L. G. Crossley, and W. S. B. Buck I and Mrs. Buck. Mr. W. II Kelley returned from home leave by T.s.s. I yne.r Brooke on the 24th December, and is to be stationed at the Constabulary Depot, Kuching, we under stand. By this same vessel Mr. K. B. Brotchie arrived as the guest of Mr. N. E. Hughes. Mr. Brotchie is the Manager of the Ipoh branch of the Asiatic Petroleum Co., Ltd
We wish our readers A Very Happy Christmas and Prosperous New Year
Imperial Airways.
We are informed that the comparative
timings of the three air services in the East
are as follows
Thus a letter posted by Imperial Airways
Service to the present terminus, Singapore,
reaches its destination in a shorter time than
by any other.—Advt.
List of Films due to be Screened at the
Sylvia Cinema
During January, 1935.
Sir Arthur Conan Doyle's
“The Speckled Band.”
Jack Buchanan in
"Yes, Mr. Brown.”
Kay Francis in
“Storm at Daybreak.”
"Night Flight.”
"The White Devil.”
William Haines in
"Fast Life.”
T.ilian Harvey in
"Congress Dances.”
Wheeler and Woolsey in
“Diplomaniacs.”
Douglas Fairbanks in
“Around the World in 80 Minutes.”
Notice.
It has been brought to the notice, of His Highness tin' Rajah that certain unauthorized persons have been using His Highness' bungalow at the 23rd Mile. The public is therefore reminded that thia bungalow and the road leading up to it are His Highness' private property, and that permission to use both the bungalow and the road can only be obtained from His Highness the Rajah or Hie Highness' Private Secretary.
Square Face.
Looking at old European graves in this country, one cannot help wondering sometimes how many men were brought to an untimely death by boredom and drink.
Here is a picture of planting life in Perak forty I years ago, when life was haul and monotonous, and ' a bottle of square-face gin cost only fifty cents :
"Many line fellows now sleeping in Western Hoad cemetery, Penang, are there because they drank not wisely hut- too well.
“I have seen many of them in those days. It was all horse work over flat sugar-cane areas. The men would take out every day two square-face gin bottles filled with [intent gin-sling, swallow this between six and eleven a.m., and repeat the dose in the afternoon.”—(Straits Budget.)
The Late Dr. J. Th. Erb.
Dr. J. Th. Erb who died on 24th October, 1931,
was the pioneer of the Sarawak Oilfields. He was j
one of the earliest geologists in the service of the Royal Dutch Company and started work in 1900 .
in the Dutch East Indies. It was in 1908 that :
Dr. Hose interested the Anglo-Saxon Petroleum
Company in the oil prospects of Sarawak and
Dr. Erb was loaned to make I he preliminary 1
investigations on which was based the decision to
drill for oil. He arrived in Sarawak in July 1909
and spent almost a year carrying out the geological
researches not only around Miri but in other parts ,
of Northern Sarawak. The only European now in
Miri who remembers him is Father Jansen who was I
then established in Baram.
As a result of the favourable report made by I
Dr. Erb it was decided to commence active drilling ,
operations at once. Referring to the Sarawak
Gazette of 1910, 1911 and 1912 frequent references
are made to the landing of material, building of
houses and the drilling of I he first wells. In the
Sarawak Gazette, of January 16th, 1912, there is
the record that No. 1 had struck oil and was capable
of producing 40 tons a day. The development of
the Oilfield from that date is well known.
Dr. Erb was of Swiss nationality and studied geology at Zurich University. Ho was one of the I
first Petroleum Geologists and one of the most
distinguished. He became head of the Geological j
Department of the Royal Dutch-Shell Group in
1913, and was appointed a Manager of the Royal 1
Dutch and Bataafsche Petroleum Companies in
1921. He became a Director of both Companies *
in 1929.
In his early days in the Dutch East Indies he
did a great deal of pioneer work some of which in
the Achin country was attended by considerable risk. He worked in practically every country in
the world where oil has been found and many [
discoveries are credited to him.
He was a man of middle height, sturdily built. ,
and in his younger days most happy when on a
long difficult geological exploration. In later years
office work look a great part of his time but even
ns late ns 1927 he visited the Far East including
Miri. He was a most charming travelling com
panion with a fund of good stories and interesting 1
adventures. He was much loved by his assistant geologists for whom he always had time even in i
his busiest days.
Dr. Erb’s death robs the oil business of one of ;
its most distinguished men. -A. H. N.
The Truth About Short Wave
Reception.
With the steady increase in numbers of broadcast listeners here it would perhaps be appropriate to have a short treatise on the subject of short wave reception, particularly for the layman who knows little or nothing about Short Waves and who has grown to expect a little too much from them. A careful study of what is to follow hereunder should go a long way towards encouraging radio fans” to participate in the enjoyment of this phase of broadcasting with a resulting greater pleasure and intelligence.
I Nothing in radio to-day offers such interesting possibilities as short wave broadcasting and reception. With short waves, programmes are heard from tremendous distances. Short waves
are what aviators use when communicating over long distances with one another and with ground stations. It is with the use of short waves that television is being developed. In other words, many things are possible with short waves that are not [Possible with longer bands, over similar distances with the same power output of the transmitters.
Unfortunately, however, too much has come to be expected of these short waves. Many a radio listener believes that with a short wave receiving set he can bring in stations from London, Paris, Berlin, New York, Sydney and other distant punts at any hour of the day or night and that the programme always will come out of his loud- speaker dear and strong. Such a listener is doomed to disappointment.
Along with their many positive advantages, .short waves have very definite limitations, especially at the present stage of the development of radio science. These waves act very differently from the longer hands, and their points of difference have provided engineers and other scientists with some of their most interesting problems—problems which have not yet been fully solved However, they have learned some facts about what the short waves will do and will not do—facts which everyone interested in getting the maximum enjoyment out of radio ought to know.
For use in the home, designs have been made for a whorl wave receiving set or a short wave attachment to a receiving set which would bring in entertainment programmes satisfactorily. Sometimes these sets give good results; sometimes, indeed, they give no results at all. When short wave reception seems to fail, however, it is not necessarily the fault of the receiving set; more often it is due directly to the peculiar conditions winch go with the sending of short waves through the air.
Suppose you had a super-heterodyne radio receiving set—H good set—here in Sarawak. On this set, we will say. you.were able sometimes to bring m a station in Europe. You would be highly pleased when you brought in that station, and you would not hold it against the set if you could not bring it in every time you turned the dial to il. Conditions on some days might not be right for your set to get that station. In just the same way you cannot expect to get "round-the- world" reception every day, in all seasons, on your short wave set. Sometimes conditions are not right, and it makes no difference how well your set has been designed, installed and operated.
There are many different conditions that govern the transmission and reception. Some of them are rather surprising. Day-time reception, for example, is better on certain short waves than is night reception, although in other short wave bands rhe night time is better. Where you have a wave that is below 25 metres in length, you find that it is in the day time that you get your best results. On the other hand with wave-lengths greater than 50 metres, night-time reception is better. Sometimes the situation is complicated by trying to bring in a station so far away that it is night-time where the station is. but day-time where you are. In this connection it has been learned by experiment that wave-lengths below 20 metres can be heard only when the path between the transmitting station and the receiver lie entirely in daylight. For wave-lengths between
2(1 and 35 metres, reception is best where one of
the instruments, either the transmitter or the
receiver lies in darkness, while the other instru-
merit is in the daylight.
It is important to keep the time of day in mind i
when you are receiving short waves. You cannot j
get good reception simply by turning the dial. You must know not only where to find the stations,
but you must know, also, when they are on the air.
With all broadcast waves, reception is known to
be obtained by two paths from the transmitting
station—by the ’‘ground wave" and by the ‘‘sky
wave." The reception you get from the ground
wave of the transmitter is extremely reliable, but
yon can get it over only a comparatively short
distance. On the other hand, the reception that
you get from the path of the sky wave which the
transmitter sends out may be at a considerable
distance. This sky wave reception, however, is
very tricky. It changes from season to season It .
has day and night changes. It may even develop I
"skip distances.” where the station cannot be heard i
at. all. By skip distance is meant the distance to points in a certain area outside the ground wave
range which the sky wave may not touch, making
reception in that area impossible. The locations
of these skip distances are not fixed; they may
shift considerably from hour to hour and from day
to night. The theory of the sky wave and the
theory of the skip distance explain why short wave
reception may be good one day and poor the next.
The reception you get over the ground wave
ought to be uniformly good at all timec unless, of
course, there are buildings in the way that absorb
the waves, or unless there is too much local inter-
ference such as that front passing motor vehicles,
electrical household appliances and other disturbing
things which come under the heading of man-
made interference” in the neighbourhood of your
receiving set.
The distance yon can get sky wave reception
varies slowly from season to season but very rapidly
from day to night. The skip distance' area is .
smallest at noon and greatest at midnight The ,
greatest, reliable distance for the short wave is not
fixed, however, at any particular hour of the dav,
for such things as static, sun spots and magnetic
storms enter into way of short wave reception.
There is one which affects short wave reception,
however, over which we have some control and that
is in the receiving set we use. The fullest enjoy-
ment depends upon the type of receiver, upon the
care with which it is installed and the conditions
surrounding the set. As with long waves, we find
there is considerable fading, especially when the
programme is brought in from a considerable dis-
tance, and with short* waves this fading is likely
to spoil the quality of reception much more than
fading on the standard broadcast wave band.
For proper short wave reception, the aerial
installation is especially important -much more so
than with a standard broadcast receiver. It must
be better insulated, it should be as high as possible
and it should be spaced as far away as possible from
other metal.
Thus, it is plain to see that many factors affect
short, wave reception. Some of the influences are
beyond human control and we cannot expect con-
sistently reliable reception at all times. Under
favourable conditions, however, it is possible to
receive distant stations clearly and accurately,
especially in locations remote from metropolitan
areas or areas where man-made interference is
slight. But to do it, it is essential that you have
a receiving set that is properly designed, well built
and carefully installed.—H. G. Gray.
Unusual Jobs in Hollywood.
Yon've heard of freckle removers, weight
removers anil ink eradicators, but how would you
like to be a Footstep Remover? Believe it or not,
the I'aramomit Hollywood Studio has a man whose
sole job it is to see that all footprints are removed
from highly polished floors before filming starts.
Then there is the Fly-Chaser. Not the kind that
Ruth is, but the chap who goes around with a
vapour gun, chasing pesky insects which annoy
players and buzz around the microphone.
The Studio Sob Absorber has’a thankless task.
He is the crying-towel boy who must be on hand
when temperamental stars burst into tears.
Perhaps you'd like the combination job of High-
light and Insurance Salesman Abolisher. The
purpose of this position is to keep shiny glares out
of the camera's eye by painting bright objects with
talcum powder or some such thing, and also to
keep persistent salesmen out of the performer's
hair.
Each studio also has a Squeak-and-Echo
Eliminator. This fellow goes around with a long
pole, a roll of burlap, a pocket full of nails and a
hammer. He nails down noisy floorboards and
uses his cloth to muffle unwanted reverberations.
This is quite a scientific problem because each
stage has a different echo frequency.
The hotelier, the baker and the candlestick
maker may find the sledding a hit tough when
they try to crash the movies, but the fellow who
can do the unusual will always click. A good
example is the. man who makes an excellent
living teaching screen stars’ dogs to sit down in
three languages.—(Malacca Guardian.)
Singapore-Australia Service.
Commencing on Monday, 17th December, 1984, the General Post Office, Singapore, will clime air mails for despatch every week by the aircraft of the new Singapore/Auatralia service which will operate in connection with the Imperial Airways England/ Singapore service
2.Correspondence for the following places will be included in these air mails:—
Australia	...	Ocean Island
New Zealand	...	Papua
Netherlands Indies ...	Raratonga
Fiji	...	Samoa
Gilbert &, Ellice Islands ... Solomon Islands Nauru	Tahiti
New Caledonia	... Tonga
New Guinea	... Other Islands in
Western Pacific.
New Hebrides
3.The latest time of posting at the General Post Office, Singapore, for ordinary unregistered correspondence will be 7 p.m. on Sunday*. Correspondence posted elsewhere must be posted in time to connect with mails reaching Singapore not later than Sunday evening
4.Parcels, insured letters and insured boxes may not be accepted for this service.
5.The combined Air Mail fee including postage will be :—
Letters per I’ostcnnis
J ounce.	Each.
cis.	cts.
Netherlands	Indies	...	16	8
Australia. New	Zealand	25	15
and other places.
6.Enquirers regarding this service should be informed that the mails are due to reach Batavia and Sourahaya on Mondays and Darwin on Tuesdays. Mails for the capitals of the Eastern Austialian States which will he conveyed by internal feeder services will arrive within 2 or 3 days (according to destination) after leaving Darwin. Mails for Western Australia will reach Perth on Fridays. Mails for New Zealand and other places beyond Australia will be forwarded from Australian ports by ordimuy mails.
7.In the reverse direction, air mails from Australia are due to reach Singapore on Saturday evenings commencing on Saturday. December 15rh, 1934. This correspondence will connect with me up night-mail despatches from Singapore on Saturday nights.
OLD SARAWAK.
From the Sarawak Gazette
62 Years Ago.
SARAWAK GAZETTE
No. 59 SATURDAY, MARCH 1st. 1878. Price 6 cents.
The month of February 1878 will be remembered by the occurrence of one of the heaviest freshes known within the ; last six or sevsseven years in the Sarawak river. After a moderately dry monsoon, with few down-pours which lasted more than a day or two together, a steady fall of rain commenced
I on the evening of the 14th ult.' and continued almost without intermission until the evening of the 20th, recommencing on the next morning and tattling throughout the day. These heavy mins brought down an immense volume of water from the hilly district in Upper Sarawak, entirely ! swamping the low-lying country near the river. At the upper end of the bazaar at Kuching the Hood covered to a considerable depth the Datu's road leading to the Kling Masque and the Malay kampong, and extended upwards from the Oilice as far as the Government Hospital, the road between thia point and the river being several inches under , water. Parlt- of the baxiuir mar the Fish-market. at the head of Ah Why's creek were aho Hooded.
Accounts from Upper Sarawak relate that at Busan the inimdaidon rowto the r ofa of the Malay houses near the landing-place. some of which were carrier! away bodibodily by the stnAm. The furnaces .it the Borneo Company’s works i 1 were Hooded, and part of the tramway leading to Jambusan.
At the Letter place the whole of the extensive flats between the antimony works and the Siniawan creek and part of the Tegora road beyond were completely covered, and all camiunnicution was stopped between Jambusan and Tegora.
The country between Paku and Siniawan wax also inundated, and much di.nmge wax done to the houses and crops near the banks of the main river. The Sungie T&ngah i i I clearings presented the appearance nf a vast lake, and some of the Chinese gardeners are said to have been driven for refuge to the hills nt some distance from lhe stream.
The amount of properly destroyed mid damaged is hardly known an yet. but besides the injury to the rice crops and gardens, the Malaya have lost thirty-two head of cattle by drowning, and those at Busan have had their houses entirely ' swept away.
Rainfall in Kuching.
Forty-six indies of rain fell in Kuching this
month,'and the rainfall for the year amounts to I
214 inches, only exceeded in 1917 by 218 inches, I
in 1930 by 220 inches and 1882 by 226 inches.
Such a wet December is remarkable, as January !
is reputed to be our "star" month; in 1918 62.3
inches were recorded for it, in 1917 54.4 inches, I
the palm, however, going to 1881 with 69.2 inches
and 1872 with C2.S inches.
Kuching certainly gets all the rain it wants in
the landas during December and January but the
rest of the year is comparatively line, the average
annual rainfall amounting to about 160 inches, of
which nearly two thirds falls during the landas. a
similarity shared by the East Coast of Malaya and .
the North Coast ' of North Borneo. In Miri, ;
Brooketon and the Northern part of Sarawak as '
well as on the West Coast of North Borneo the i
landas starts a bit earlier, about November, and is I
perhaps less severe, but a second and still lesser i
deluge occurs again about May after an appropriate
intervening dry period, the average annual rainfall
being much about the same as Kuching though
the seasonal rainfall is so different.
One may therefore choose Io have the annual
rain in one big dollop or in two patches, doubtless
by a little judicious moving' around one could be
wet all the time; but the wisest course is due
West to Singapore for a little leave in the New
Year.
Kuala Lipis was the coolest place on the plains
in Malaya last month with a maximum meau temperature of 86.5 and a minimum mean of 70.9.
Kuala Lumpur and Kota Bahru came, next with
89.6 and 71.9 and 83.9 and 72.8 respectively.
Cameron Highlands had mean temperatures of 71
and 56.7 the’ lowest registered being 50. Fraser's
Hill was not so cold but had more hours of bright
sunshine.—(Straits Budget.)
Golf.
Memento Mori.
Tombstone Competition.
It is said that those whom the Gods love die
young—and if there is any truth in thia cliche,
most of the competitors in this competition must
stand high in the affections of the Immortals.
All died valiantly, especially the pair who having
exhausted themselves cutting a rmtis through the
lalang at the sixth, managed with their last dying
gasp to sink most appropriately into oblivion in a
large and unpleasant water-hole at the seventh.
The Slough of Despond (or the arong before the
seventh green) was negotiated by the remaining
competitors, but the effort was now telling, and
the eighth saw many a handsome corpse strewn on
green and fairway.
A few hardy souls still survived this epidemic
ami launched themselves across the sodden wastes
of the ninth to expend their energy buttling up
the cliffs of Hill Difficulty.
Here Edwards and Kelley holed out, only to
find that Gascoigne and' Middleman, having
remembered their Pilgrims Progress, had shed
their packs, negotiated the ninth in three, and pro-
ceeded to the first green, where they expired in
solitary state.—(Contributed.)
Second Division News.
Engkilili District.
November, 1934.
The Assistant District Officer, Mr. E. H. Elam,
reports:—
Agriculture.—The young padi over the whole
district seems to be in good condition except in
places where large caterpillars have eaten up the
shoots and forced the people to nugal a second time.
Belong Regatta, 1934.
What is believed to have been the first open
regatta on the Saribas was held on Monday,
November, 12th, organized by Mr. J. J. Hill.
Great interest had been aroused and Dyaks and
Malays crowded the Betong bazaar and Kampongs.
j The Resident ami Mr. A. R. F. Griffin came over
from Simanggang. and the former presented the
[ cups and prizes to the winning crews.
Heats were paddled off on Friday and Saturday.
' On Monday there were ten races for six cups and
prize money to the value of nearly $400. Thirty
; boats were entered in classes for 15, 8 and 5 paddlers.
With one. exception the boats were locally owned,
though most of them had been made by Balau Dyaks
and in a few cases had Balau crews. The one out-
ride entry Sambang Laul from Sebuyow won four
races including two cups. Of the remaining firsts,
two went to Malay boats and four to Dyak owned
bonis. The Saribas Championship Cup, given in
the longest race of the 15 paddle class, was secured
by Sri Kilat Terbang with a crew of Dyaks from
Bengang.
Results:—
Race No. 1.—Tup. Deiiak Stake. 15 Paddlers.
From Namja Ban to Fort Lili.
1st ... Mnrasian Muara Paku Abang Hassan, Spaoh.
2nd ... Tedong Kumbeiir) Gran J. S. Tinker, Betong.
3rd ... Sri Sungin Chinta
Brahre ... Draheo, Bungin.
Time—4 minutes 25 seconds.
Race No. 2.—Tim Poba Stake, 8 Paddlers.
From Semumuk to Fort Lili.
1st ... Sri Kalu Bangru	... Bunga, Entanak.
2nd ... Happy X'man	... Badiman, Stern bak.
3rd ... Sri klinyak Enghubang Juli, Mnpoh.
Time—6 minutes 55 seconds.
Mukah District.
November, 1931.
The Acting District Officer. Mr. L. K.
Morse,
reports :—
Trade. The price of sago fell from forty to thirty cents a passu during the month. I understand that this is dne to the fact, that the bounty hitherto paid by the Shipping Company is being withdrawn.
/’.It ./!.—The erosion of the river bank between i’asar Linlang and K. Pcnakub continues, and the old road has disappeared. At high water, boats can cross the site of the old road in many places, and it is only a question of time before the new road is attacked.
Oya and Dalat.
.November. 1934.
The Officer-in-Charge, Mr. D. R. Lascelles, reports :—
Trade.—Until almost the very end of the month raw sago averaged the relatively high price of sixty-two cents per passu in the Kui. The price then suddenly dropped to forty-five cents in the Kut. This disconcerting fall is supposed to be due to the withdrawal of certain shipping bounties formerly granted to shippers of raw sago.
Fourth Division News.
Bintulu District.
November, 1934.
The Acting District Officer, Mr. J. G. Anderson,
reports :—
Dyak and Native Affairs.—Very high floods, usual at this season, are said to have swamped all low lying padi especially in the lower reaches of this river. It is feared that many Dyaks will in consequence lose most of their crops. There is apparently nothing to be done about this as there are no hills within tins area.