The Sarawak Gazette. SATURDAY, MAY 1st. 1937. Birth. REED.—On 10th April, 1937, at Batu Gajah, F.M.S., to Penelope, wife of Dr. J. G. Reed, a son. Total and Personal. APRIL. On April 29th His Highness the Rajah presided at the twenty-fifth triennial meeting of Council Negri, which was held at Astana. A full account of the proceedings will be found in a supplement to this issue of the Gazette. His Highness the Rajah visited the Kalaka District, Second Division, from April 13th to 16th. His Highness, who travelled in H.H. M.Y. Maimuna, was accompanied by Mr. E. Parnell, Government Secretary, and a small party of Europeans. We understand that His Highness the Rajah, who leaves for England on May 3rd, expects to return to Sarawak towards the end of September, or early in October. A dinner followed by a dance was given at Astana on April 2nd in order to give Dayang Valerie's friends an opportunity of bidding her farewell. Dayang Valerie, who was accompanied by Mrs. F. H. Pollard, sailed for Singapore and England the following morning. Three very welcome visitors to Kuching during Council Negri week were Mr. J, Oberman, Resident of Dutch West Borneo, and Messrs. B. J. Kuik and J. Ozinga, both of the Netherlands Indies Civil Service, who arrived in the Netherlands Government vessel Deneb on April 27th and left on May 1st. An account of their visit will be found in another column. Mr. A. Macpherson, District Officer, Nanga Meluan, arrived in Kuching on bis way home on furlough on April 2nd and sailed for Singapore by s.s. Darrel on the following day. Messrs. D. C. White and R. G. Talbot, who were also going on leave, were passengers in this vessel, having embarked at Miri. Another Government officer to proceed on furlough during the month was Mr. R. E. Edwards of the Public Works Department, who sailed by s.s. Circe on April 6th. Mr. J. C. H. Barcroft took over Meluan District from Mr. Macpherson on March 27th, having been relieved at Betong by Mr. F. A. Moore. Mr. A. W. D. Brooke, who has been temporarily in charge of Lubok Antu, will not be returning there, since we understand that he is to go to the Fourth Division early in May. His place will be taken by Mr. G. R. H. Arundell. who is due to return from furlough about May 10th. Race week visitors started to arrive on Friday, April 23rd. the contingents from the Second and Third Divisions reaching Kuching in the early hours of the morning. The Fourth Division contingent arrived by the Straits boat on the following day in time to be present at a most enjoyable, dance given at the Residency the same evening. The Resident and Mrs. Dick were ‘at home' to the entire European population of Kuching on this occasion, and the dance started Race week off with more than its usual swing. The thanks of all the guests are due to Mr. and Mrs. Dick for a most delightful evening. Visitors from outstations for Council Negri and the races included : from the Fourth Division, Mr. R. L. Daubenv, Mr. and Mrs. E. O. Bruce. Mr. and Mrs J O. Gilbert, Datu Abang Haji Suhaili. Bujang bin Anchi. N.O., Abang Ali. N.O.. Abang Hamdan. N.O.. Tuanku Talia, N.O., Tuanku Mohammed, N.O.. Mohammed Zin Galau. N.O., and Penghulu Tama Tingling Malang; from the Third Division, Mr. J. B. Archer, Mr. and Mrs. J. G. Anderson, Mr. R. G. Aikman, Mr. J. C. H. Barcroft. Mr. D. R. Lascelles, Mr. G. A. C. Farrelly, Datu Abang Haji Mohideen, Abang Enjah. N.O., Abang Abdul Gapor, N.O., Abang Ahmat, N.O., Pengiran Haji Mohammed, N.O., Francis Ansin, N.O., Abang Haji Gapor, N.O., Haji Yaman, N.O., Penghulu Temong- gon Koh and Pengarah Nglambong; from the Second Division, Mr. H. E. Cutfield, Mr. A. W. D. Brooke, Mr. N. Mace, Abang Zin, N.O., Abang Bujang, N.O.. Abang Draup, N.O.. Abang Abu Talip. NO., Abang Samsudin, N.O., Abang Medaut. Pengarah Nyalu, Pengarah Isek and Orang Kaya Jaul; and Mr. and Mrs. L. K. Morse and Mr. E. H. Elam from the First Division. The Spring Race Meeting, which took place on April 24th, 26th and 28th, was very successful, and the Turf Club is to be con gratulated on providing three days’ excellent sport. A full account of the racing will be found elsewhere in this issue. Excitement ran high over the unlimited sweep, which furnished two first prizes of more than $7,000. Both went to outstations. The cash sweeps were also well worth win ning. the first prize usually running to the maximum of $800, and the tote paid out some good dividends, the best being one of $27.50 on White Label. It is a remarkable fact that if a punter had backed every horse in every race on the first day, he would have ended up by showing a profit. Dr. R. D. Fitzgerald, Director of Medical Services, Straits Settlements, was in Sara wak from April 17th to 24th. Dr. Fitzgerald arrived from the north after visiting Labuan, Brunei and Miri, and during his stay in Sarawak was able to pay a short visit to Sibu. We welcome Mr. K. N. Black, of Messrs. Mansfield & Co., who arrived in Kuching on April 30th in order to take over the direction of the Sarawak Steamship Co., Ltd., from Mr. G. S. Miller, who leaves for Singapore shortly on transfer. Mr. Black is of course well known in Kuching, since he was in charge of the Steamship Company’s affairs from 1934 to 1935. Visitors to Kuching during the month included Mr. K. Oseki. a Director of Messrs. Nissa Shokai, Ltd., Mr. R. I. Wells of the Air Ministry, and Squadron Leader and Mrs. T. F. Moloney. R.A.F. Her Highness the Ranee in Japan. A reader sends us the following extracts from a letter received from Mr. T. Nishi kawa. who has been appointed President of Messrs. Nissa Shokai, Ltd., in succession to the late Mr. Yorioka, whose death occurred a few weeks ago. Mr. Nishikawa is well known in Sarawak where he lived for several years, and where he has many friends. Although Her Highness the Ranee’s stay in Japan was so short, she seems to have seen a great deal in the time at her disposal, thanks to the kindness and forethought of her hosts. "Now 1 shall proceed to give you a report of the Ranee's movements in Japan, in which, I am sure, you are both interested. “We were sorry that her stay m Japan was so short, and we had to crowd in so much that she had a pretty busy time of it. But I am glad to say that she seemed to enjoy her visit. ‘'As scheduled, the Empress of Japan arrived at Kobe on the morning of the 28th February, and Kondoh, Hayashi, myself and others from Nissa office went to the pier to meet the Ranee. "The officials of the ship were exceedingly courteous to Her Highness. When the ship came alongside the pier and the gangway was put down, they closed the passage and did not allow anybody —not even the wife of the President of the Philippine Republic—to land or come on board, except a few pressmen and Nissa people, until Her Highness the Ranee left the ship. “The Osaka Mainichi, the biggest newspaper in Japan, took a moving picture of her walking on deck, escorted by us. They made a fine news film of it with the Empress of Japan slowing down her speed, ready for the pier. Copies of this film were distributed to all cinema houses throughout Japan. "We escorted her to the Tor Hotel where Mr. Yorioka and other directors and their wives and daughters—most of them once residents of. or born in, Sarawak,—were waiting to have the honour of greeting her and say a hearty “Tabek, Ranee !" "As you are aware, Mr. Yorioka has been con fined to his rooms on account of ill health for the last few months, and although he was well enough to be about the house his physician would not allow him to go to the pier to welcome Her High ness in person on her arrival, which he regretted very much. However, he managed to come to the Tor Hotel on the previous night and slept there under the watchful care of his nurse in order that he might receive our guest. "In the hotel parlour, which was decorated taste fully with flowers and Sarawak flags, the Ranee gave audience to our President Yorioka and his son and three of his daughters; Mr. Kondoh. bis wife and daughter; Mr. Hayashi, bis wife and daughter; Mrs. Oseki; Mrs. Nishikawa and the younger employees of Nissa Shokai. The daughters of Mr. Kondoh and Mr. Hayashi presented a bouquet each to the Rance and Miss Manu and we nil drank to the health of the Ranee and of the Rajah and to the prosperity of Sarawak. "Then we started for Kyoto by train, the Ranee and her secretary, Kondoh, Hayashi, Mrs. Adachi (one of Yorioka's married daughters), Yoshida of Suzuki & Co., known to the Ranee in London, my wife and myself constituting the party. "Arriving at Kyoto in due course, we drove to the Miyako Hotel where rooms in the newly-com pleted annex on the top of the hill were engaged for the Ranee and her secretary. "After a little rest and a light tiffin at the hotel we went to the Nijo Detached Palace to which we had previously obtained a permit from the Imperial Household Department. Only Mrs. Adachi, Kondoh and myself were admitted to the Palace besides the guest. "Although it was Sunday, they had a special order from the Tokyo Department and were await ing our visit, and an English-speaking guide was detailed to show us every room of the Palace. I though it was remarkable that they did not ask us to take off our shoes as they usually do. "We went through the old castle where the Emperor Meiji lived up to 1868, when the seat of Government was moved to Tokyo soon after the restoration. The Ranee seemed to be deeply impressed by the plain old-fashioned building, and appreciated seeing paintings on the partition screens and ceilings by the old painters of the Kano school. "Then we drove to Banker Otsuji's villa at Saga where various methods of flower-arrangement were exhibited and explained by an old master. The skilful arrangement of flowers seemed to interest the Ranee very much, as she learned and remem bered the three cardinal points of the art, namely : Ten (heaven), Chi (earth) and Jin (man), which she repeated several times on the following day on the train, and in Tokyo, whenever she saw flowers arranged in the Japanese way. "After seeing the flower-arrangement we were conducted to the tea room, where powdered green tea was served in strict accordance with the clas sical custom of the Cha-no-yu ceremony, with the Ranee and Miss Mann ns the principal guests, my wife and 1 as companion guests, the banker Otsuji and his wife as the host and hostess. The ideals and practice of the tea cult were explained by an old sosho, the tea-master, who is said to be a des cendant of the originator of the Rikyu school of tea, which flourished in the time of Taiko Hideyoshi and the Tokugawa feudal lords four centuries ago. "Mr. Otsuji was very proud of having had such a distinguished guest from a far away country and begged the Ranee to have a picture taken in the historical four-and-a-half mat tea room. He intends to have the picture hung together with those of the members of the Imperial family who Wore entertained in the same room on former occasions. "Towards evening we drove back to the Mikado hotel for a rest, visiting the city on the way, and stopping at Maruyama Garden to see the famous old cherry tree, which was not yet in bloom. "In the evening we went to Tsuruya, a restau rant in Okazaki, noted for its landscape garden and quiet surroundings. "Here Mr. Taisho Okada, one of the foremost painters of the Shijo school, painted a few pictures in the presence of the Ranee and showed her how the Japanese painter manipulates his brush. If my memory serves me right, some of Taisho’s paintings are in her possession in London. "Then the regular Japanese dinner was served to which all the ladies of the company and a few men including Mr. Eiji Yorioka, the husband of Mr. Yorioka’s eldest daughter, were invited to have the honour of partaking on this great occasion. In the coursc of the dinner we presented Maiko dancers with Sarawak flags, in their exquisite kimono and gorgeous obi sash, and also Geisha dances to the accompaniment of shamisen, drum and tsuzumi. "The dinner went off very smoothly under the skilful leadership of your old friend Mrs. Nakakimi, who is always present on such occasions. "A cine-kodak picture was taken of the party and the Maiko and Geisha dances, and a few amusing scenes such as the exchange of a sake cup between the guests, the Ranee and I making a polite bow or two in the manner of the Japanese salutation. We intend to send one film to London if the picture turns out well enough. "We had instructions from Kuching and Singa pore to the effect that we were (1) introduce the Ranee to the classical arts of Japan; (2) entertain her with chicken sukiyaki; (3) show her a kabuki play, if possible; (4) let her sleep in a Japanese hotel. "As to (1), we followed the instructions as best we could in Kyoto, and as to (2) and (3) we carried them out in Tokyo as I will describe later, but the last order (4) we thought was the most difficult for us to obey. "You people living in the tropics cannot imagine how cold it is in Japan at this time of year, especially in Kyoto. The very idea of letting a delicate lady sleep in an unheated Japanese inn on the floor at the coldest time of the year made us shiver. It is true that the sleeping room may be heated with an electric heater, but one has to travel a long distance to the bathroom barefoot through a corridor as cold as. Siberia in winter. Even we, who are used to Japanese life, would not put up in a Japanese inn in winter time if we could find a European hotel where the entire building is pro perly steam-heated. "Kondoh went around the city a few days before the Ranee's arrival in quest of a Japanese hotel where the rooms were properly heated, but his labour was in vain. "The following day, March 1st, wo took the early Tokyo Express "Fuji” leaving Kyoto at 7.55, and arriving at our destination at 3.25 p.m. I did not like the idea of making the Ranee get up so early, but we could not do better as the other trains were all very slow and would have got us to Tokyo after dark and so would not have given her a chance of having a glimpse of our capital "You know she had to go on board ship that night, for the Empress of Japan was to leave Yokohama at 1 o'clock a.m. March 2nd, which amounts to practically the same thing of March 1st. Thus the Ranee had only two days and one night ashore. "It was a great disappointment to us that Fuji yama did not show her snow clad head on account of its being cloudy when the Ranee's trains passed round the foot of the mountain. But she did have a glimpse of the real unwesternized Japan through the windows of the day coach. So all in all it was a very enjoyable trip.—at least it was for me. “On our arrival at Tokyo, Marquis and Lady Tokugawa and other notables met the party. Marquis Tokugawa had teamed of the Ranee’s visit by a telegram from his old friend, the Sultan of Johore, T suppose, and that is why they came to the station to welcome her. The Marquis and his Lady were kind enough to join our party and go to the Mitsukoshi Department store where the Ranee did some shopping. “Thence by the Ranee’s special request we pro ceeded to the Meiji Shrine, dedicated to the memories of the Emperor and Empress Meiji, where she paid her respects to our great maker of new Japan. After this we drove to the Imperial Hotel for a short rest. “Then we went to a Kabuki threatre which was the only one going on at the time, though it was not by any means of the first-class. We could do no better, however, because it being out of season, no first-class theatre was open. “The theatre people, however, were exceedingly "kind, and held up the raising of the curtain until the Ranee's arrival. The proprietors met us at the gate and led us on to the stage behind the curtain, all the actors being in position for the Ranee’s inspection. "As soon as our party crossed the stage, they rang for the raising of the curtain, and the pro prietors of the theatre ted Her Highness to the green-room where the leading actor was ready for the stage in his exotic robe. "They then took a picture while the Ranee was shaking hands with the grotesquely-attired actor, and surprised the Ranee by presenting this photo graph developed, dried, printed, and mounted before she left for Yokohama that night. "In the play we saw that night we did not see any beauty of acting nor grace of movement which are the chief characteristics of Kabuki. It was nothing but a presentation of the spirit of the time,—the strife between the governing class and the governed in those remote feudal days. "We were, of course, very much disappointed that there was not much to this play in the way of a plot or historical background. It was no more than a satire. I suppose this play reminded the Ranee of a Dayak war dance more than anything else, but I hope sho got some idea of Kabuki about which she had read so much before. "Thence we went to a chicken sukiyaki dinner at Suehiro, the best sukiyaki house in Tokyo. Of all the Japanese dishes, which are generally too light for those who are accustomed to the rich European cuisine, the Ranee appeared to enjoy sukiyaki most. “.After the sukiyaki dinner at Suehiro we went back to the Hotel and left there at 10.45 p.m. for Yokohama in order to get her on board the Empress of Japan, which was waiting for her alongside the pier. It was about 2 o’clock in the morning when I got back to the hotel. "The following day we received a radio message from the Ranee saving, "Still dreaming of Japan, love. Ranee.” Thus ended her very busy days in Japan, which in its own way is as unique as her own Sarawak, and I am grateful that she did not show any sign of fatigue when we said our “Sayonara" to her on the ship. I hope she is now enjoying her voyage across the Pacific.” COUNCIL NEGRI DAY. APRIL 29TH, 1937. Council Negri Day opened in bright sunshine which fortunately continued throughout the whole day, thereby enabling the varied programme of events to be carried through without a hitch. At 8.30 a.m. members of the Council Negri and guests invited to attend the meeting began to arrive at Astana. Members and guests were in their places in the Council room by 9 a m., and a few minutes later His Highness the Rajah took his seat and delivered his speech. At the conclusion of the speech His Highness con ferred the title of Datu Patinggi of Sarawak upon Abang Haji Abdillah, Datu Shahbandar, and announced the promotion to the rank of Dat'd of Tuanku Mohammed bin Tuanku Tibu and Tuanku Taha bin Tuanku Haji Drahman, both of Baram. Members of Council were then sworn in and the proceedings terminated, the members and guests taking leave of His Highness after a group photo graph had been taken. During the afternoon a very successful sports meeting for the pupils of Kuching Malay schools was held on the padang of the Maderasah Melayu, which was gaily decorated for the occasion. The Organising Committee are to be congratulated on the programme, which included events for girl pupils from the Sekolah Permaisuri and which provided entertainment for a large concourse of spectators. At 8.30 p.m. dinner was served at Astana to nearly eighty European and Asiatic guests, among whom were several Sea Dayak and Kayan Peng- hulus. As the guests arrived at Pengkalan Batu to go across river they were met by a brilliant spectacle, the central portion of Astana and the Astana pengkalan being picked out in coloured lights. The illumination, which had been very well carried out by Messrs. The Sarawak Electricity Supply Co., Ltd., was most effective. After dinner an exhibition of Malay dancing was given on the lawn in front of Astana, the programme having been arranged by a number of Kuching Tua Kampongs. This was accompanied by a most effective firework display, which was much appre ciated by large crowds on the bund and elsewhere. Appointment of Datu Patinggi. REVIVAL OF AN OLD SARAWAK TITLE. We print below the speech delivered by Abang Haji Abdillah, Datu Shahbandar, on receiving his patent of title as Datu Patinggi of Sarawak from His Highness the Rajah at the Council Negri meeting on April 29th "Ampun Tuan Rajah beribu-ribu ampun. "Sa-sunggoh-nya dengan sa-penoh-penoh. kas ika an yang tiada terhingga, dan ka-gemaran yang tiada terharga di-hati hamba pada hari ini, melafadz-kan sa-tinggi-tinggi uchapan terima kasih kapada ke- murahan dan ka'adilan Seri Paduka Duli Yang Maha Mulia Tuan Rajah, Sir Charles ‘Vyner Brooke, G.C.M.G., yang telah mengurniai' pangkat kapada hamba, dengan gclaran "Datu Patinggi" mulai' pada hari ini. Maka di-atas gelaran yang terma’alom itu, hamba sifat-kan akan dia sa-perti sa-buah kemala yang amat di-hargai’ dan yang amat chemerlang chahaya-nya, muga-muga dengan sinaran-nya yang amat chemerlang itu kelak boleh menerang dan menyuloh-kan kapada hamba, dan jua kapada hamba ra’ayat sakalian. “Pada ingatan hamba, ini-lah sa-mulia-mulia dan sa-tinggi-tinggi gclaran pada zaman dahulu. Maka dengan sebab kamurahan dan ka'adilan Seri Padnka Duli Yang Maha Mulia, maka menjelma-lah nama yang amat di-hargai' itu pada dewasa ini, kapada hamba. Oleh yang demikian, hamba junjongi'lah nama itu di-atas batu kepala hamba, serta di-iringi dengan ba-ribu-ribu terima kaseh. Sa-nya bcrsetia- lah hamba dan mengaku ta’at di-atas serba serbi berkena-an dengan apa-apa jua hal ihwal yang mus- tahak kapada hamba, pada masa ini atau-pun pada masa yang akan datang kelak. Hamba ulang-kan lagi ba-ribu-ribu menerima kaseh di-atas lernpah ka-murahan Seri Paduka Duli Yang Maha Mulia, mcmandang berat di-atas ka- turunan hamba dari beberapa zaman dahulu hingga masa ini, dan pada masa yang akan datang. Hamba harap mereka itu kelak boleh bersetia, ta’at dan berserah nyawa dalam pernerentahan Seri Paduka Duli Yang Maha Mulia, dan mudahan dapat menge- ringi’ bagai-mana yang telah di-laku-kan oleh datu nenek hamba pada zaman dahulu. “Had ini hamba menadah tangan kapada Tuhan seru sakalian alam, mudah-mndahan di-negrahi-nya Seri Paduka Duli Yang Maha Mulia berlanjutan asia, dan kekal menjadi Rajah di-atas takhta Keraja- an Negeri Sarawak, dan di-naiki-uya kapada pang- kat darjat yang lebeh tinggi. Amin." Gang Robbery at Jugan. SMART WORK DY THE CONSTABULARY. On the night of the 9th/10th February six men with blackened faces and armed with heavy sticks broke into the house of a Chinese named Fu Chon Shin in his rubber garden at Jugan near Buso. Fu Chon Shiu was asleep in the house with his wife and children; he was awakened by the noise of the door being broken in and got up to investigate, whereupon lie was beaten to death by the men with their sticks. The wife and children were attacked, but managed to escape without serious injury to a neighbour’s house nearby and raise the alarm. In the meantime the robbers broke open a steel trunk and took from it money and jewellery to the value of $1,000. Subsequently six Chinese, five Khehs and one Cantonese, were arrested in connection with the crime and in the Resident's Court, Bau, on April 1st, were convicted and sentenced to death, subject to confirmation by the Supreme Court. Three of the accused confessed to the crime in Court. The convictions and sentences have since been confirmed. The prompt arrest and conviction of the men responsible for this brutal crime, following so shortly after the round-up of the gang-robbers concerned in the armed hold-up of a car on the Bau-Kuching road, ought to do much to discourage activities of this nature in the future. The Constabulary are to be congratulated on an excellent piece of work. An Account of A Recent Visit to China. BY S. B. AH KOON.—(Continued.) TO KIUKIANG. At the wharf there were the usual girls disputing with the examining officers, saying that their luggage contained nothing that was forbidden. The examining officers made no reply, however, but continued their examination of the various trunks and boxes. We went to stay at the Tung Nan hotel at Hsiakuan, taking a room at $1.40 per day. On the morning of the 30th we went out for a long walk and to look round the walled city, after which we had our midday meal. We walked for hours and felt foot-sore, so we climbed into rick shaws and rode back to the hotel. Both of us were feeling very tired and slept without dinner. On the 31st we spent most of our time in the hotel, and in the evening we went out for a walk in the town of Hsiakuan, trying to get some cloth. We went into several shops and in each shop there were displayed so many kinds of cloth that we found it very difficult to make our choice, and at last bought nothing and returned to the hotel. On the morning of June 1st we hired a motor car and went straight to the Chung San Mausoleum to view the body of the late Dr. Sun Yat Sen. Many people, including young girls, soldiers, and people of other walks of life came pouring in to the mausoleum to see the embalmed body of the late Chinese leader. We thought we were the earliest to arrive, but on arrival there were already several motor cars there waiting for the return of their respective passengers. We went up the steps in haste, and on reaching the top we wen quite breathless and rested fully fifteen minutes before entering the building. We registered our names and went into the inner building to see the tomb. We thought the embalmed body was on view, but we were disappointed, since only the coffin was to be seen. The tomb is a round opening below about live feet deep, and we could see the coffin from above. On the top cover of the jade coffin was a statue of Dr Sun. Inside this coffin lies the embalmed body of the most famous man of modern China. There is only one unarmed soldier there on guard. We went out after spending some- twenty minutes there, bought some post-cards from the nearby shops, and returned to the hotel, calling at the Treasure Exhibition. These treasures had been once exhibited in England; the Examination Yuan buildings were used for their exhibition. Hundreds of people were already there, viewing the various treasures, which consisted of ancient bone weapons, drawings, caligraphy, porcelain, brassware, writing, etc., etc. Each article was marked in Chinese and English, with names, the place where it was fonnd, year made, and used for what purpose. Many were as old as B.C. 1766. There were so many curious things to see that we spent nearly three hours to have a casual look over the four sections. There were many men and women attendants and many firemen were also there, but their services were luckily not required. I regret that I was unable to take note of any thing that I saw as we were in a hurry to finish going through them that we only glanced casually at many of the things. There were many photographs of ancient articles. The originals had been sold to Europeans, and now only the photos are exhibited in China. This exhibition does certainly prove that the Chinese civilization is not young. BACK TO SHANGHAI. Early on June 2nd we got up and packed our luggage and sent it off by train, and at 7.10 a.m. we went in a rickshaw to the railway station. The train was full of passengers, and no seats were left unoccupied. Some of the girls’ dresses were ultra modern, and of a style which has not yet been seen among the Chinese girls in Sarawak. Shyness is unknown to these girls; many of them will just sit next to any male passenger, and no exception was made in the case of the writer. By 2.30 p.m. we were in the Ya Chow hotel to which we proceeded by motor car. We were tired and feeling home-sick, so we remained in the hotel, passing our time by reading newspapers. OFF TO AMOY. On the 3rd we remained in the hotel the whole morning. We bought tickets to Amoy, through the hotel at $22 each. The hotel management also supplied us with letters of guarantee, and stood security for us at $2,000 each to the effect that we were good citizens and not pirates. This is one of the many ways taken to safeguard against pirates. After dinner we packed our luggage and at 10.30 p.m. we went to the steamer Tai Yuan in a motor car. Here again hawkers were many, and we bought some of their articles. At about midnight, we slept, and were awakened at 3 a.m. by the Chun Chew who came to collect our letters of guarantee. The steamer was still loading cargo and making a good deal of noise. At dawn on the 4th we said good-bye to old Shanghai City and the Tai Yuan steamed slowly to the sea. Food on board consisted of two meals and tea and biscuits three tones a day. When the Tai Yuan was out the sea began to get up and I felt rather uncomfortable, though the feeling was very slight. (In the 5th the Tai Yuan was still eating up her mileage towards Amoy. The people on board, passenger- and boys alike, whenever they shut the cabin doors, had to do it with a mighty bang. Their habit of spitting everywhere was also most disgusting. During meal-times many people appeared with only their bathing costumes on. The state-rooms for Chinese passengers do not deserve the name, since they are nothing more than a hunk. As usual, they were all barricaded from the other parts of the ship. IN AMOY. On the 6th in the early morning the Tai Yuan arrived at Amoy town and at 7 a.m. came alongside the wharf. At 9 a.m. we ’phoned over to Mr. Chuan Chuan who was staying in the Cheng Sen village inform ing him that we were going over to his village for a visit. Soon his brother and another man came to our hotel to fetch us. After lunch we boarded a tambang boat, and left for Cheng Sen village. We arrived at the pangkalan at 2 p.m. and came to Chuan Chuan’s house after walking for about ten minutes. After refreshment, we went round the village, which is not a large one, and saw what village life looked like. We went into the school which was an eye-sore, and which was kept in a filthy con dition. Though the education is free few children will take trouble to attend school. The teaching staff comprises a man and his wife. We found that Mr. Chuan Chuan was to be married on the morrow, and he invited us to attend. We politely declined his invitation as both of us thought that the sooner we returned the better, as our finances did not allow us to remain longer. Cheng Sen village is not well populated and there are many houses in a dilapidated condition. Our guide told us that the villagers tried their very best to find work from their own village so as to avoid conscription. The villagers work in the fields in the daytime and every night from 7 p.m. to 9 p.m. they have to attend drill under a military student who treats them in by no means a mild way. As the tide by then was too low to use a boat from the village pangkalan, a man was supplied to us by Mr. Chuan Chuan as a guide who took us to the Tong Su village pangkalan which was reached after half an hour's walking. Our guide engaged a boat for us at $1 to Amoy, and he also accom panied us there. The wind was blowing and we sailed to Amoy in a short time and by 5.10 p.m. we were in the hotel. We enjoyed our dinner with bottles of beer after which we slept like babies till next day. Standing at the window in the morning, I saw Towkay Chua Chong Khuan of Chop Guan Ann. Sibu. It was a great pleasure to see an old acquan- tance among strangers in Amoy, so I called him up to our room. At 9 a.m. we went to Lam Pho Toll monastery and had our photo taken at three places. This monastery consists of-several fine buildings very daintily painted. We climbed up to the very top of the hills from which we had a good view of the outlying country. This temple has a buddhist school attached to it. I am unable to state the number of monks living there, but a peep at the dining room showed that there were about 98 pairs of chop-sticks lying on the dining table with two cups to each pair. All these were laid out on the table apparently for the monks. There were plentv of young girls worshipping there, and the joss- sticks. papers, candles, burnt there every year must cost an enormous sum of money. There is also a food-shop belonging to the monastery. Payments for the edibles here are not asked for or fixed, and partakers pay according to their own free will, which means of course that usually, they pay several times more than the value of the food. After midday we went out again on foot just to see what we could buy, and ended up by buying nothing. On the 8th we bought our tickets for Hong Kong, taking second-class passages in the s.s. Hai Yang. We left the hotel at 2 p.m. and boarded the Hat Yang and by 4.30 p.m. we were steaming for the south. As we went out of Amoy the sea began to toss and I slept straight off before it was dark. SWATOW. Next morning at 9 a.m. we arrived at Swatow town, where we landed in a sampan. We walked round the town and bought some cloth and during our stroll we saw a motor car knock down two children. Fortunately neither of them were killed, but both bled considerably. A policeman ordered the car to stop and take away the injured; the mother of one of the children (I take it for granted that the woman was the mother) was pulling one of the children into the house, and the policeman was pulling him to the car which was waiting at the place of accident. At last the policeman was reinforced by another, and they won the tug of war. With each policeman standing on the side of the mudguards, the car drove off, I presume to the Police station. To HONG KONG. We returned to the steamer Hai Yang and at 4.30 p.m. we sailed for Hong Kong, with several other male and female passengers occupying all the empty cabins. At 9 a.m. on the 10th we arrived at Hong Kong and after the Customs Officials had completed their examination we handed our luggage to the hotel runners of the The Great Eastern Hotel, and having forced our way through the crowd, went off in rickshaw. In the afternoon we went out on foot for a walk and spent half an hour in Chiew Man Siug's shop. Some fifteen years ago he was a shop keeper at Sarikei, and is now a paper merchant in Hong Kong. We walked round and returned to the hotel for dinner. We paid the hotel bill of $7.55, being for room hire $2.40, landing fee $2.30, dinner $1.35. tea 70 cents and handling charges in hotel cents. These particulars are given in the hope that they may be of interest and use to those readers who may one day visit China. (to be continued). Flying Boats at Kuching. VISIT OF THE AIR OFFICER COMMANDING, ROYAL AIR FORCE, FAR EAST. At 11 on Tuesday, April 6th, four flying- boats of No. 230 (F.B.) Squadron alighted at Pending, bringing with them Air Commodore A. W. Tedder. C.B.. R.A.F. The flying-boats were on their way back to Singapore after a flight to Hong Kong, their return journey having included stops at Manila, Sandakan, Kudat, Jesselton, Brunei and Miri. Since this was the first visit to Sarawak of the Air Commodore, he was accorded an official landing and was received by a guard of honour and a salute of eleven guns from Fort Margherita battery. The flying-boats were met by H.H.M.Y. Mai- muna which brought Air Commodore Tedder and his officers to Astana, where the official landing took place. After inspecting the guard of honour, the Air Commodore was received by His Highness the Rajah; a small reception was held on Astana verandah, in the course of which His Highness welcomed the flying-boats to Kuching, and proposed the health of the Royal Air Force. During their stay Air Commodore Tedder and Wing Commander W. H. Dunn, R.A.F.. who was in command of the squadron, were the guests of His Highness the Rajah at Astana. On the following evening a dinner and dance was held at Astana, The flying-boats left for Singapore on the morning of the 9th. Netherlands Indies Officials in Sarawak. VISIT TO KUCHING OF THE RESIDENT OF DUTCH WEST BORNEO. in response to an invitation from His Highness the Rajah, Mr. J. Oberman, Resident of Dutch West Borneo, arrived at Kuching on the morning of April 27th in the Netherlands Government vessel Deneb. The Resident was accompanied by two officers of the Netherlands Indies Civil Service, namely Mr. J. Ozinga, Coutr leur on his personal staff, and Mr. B. J. Kuik, Assistant Resident of Sintang, N.E.I. During his stay in Kuching the Resident was the guest of His Highness the Rajah at Astana. The Dutch officers were present at the last day’s racing on Wednesday, April 28th, and attended the Council Negri meeting on the 29th. On the same day a team of Kuching Europeans played a team from the Deneb at football, defeating them 6—1. On the conclusion of the match both teams adjourned to the Sarawak Club, where for some time the boys were kept busy fetching beer and other refreshments. Friday, April 30th, being the birthday of H.R.H. Princess Juliana of Holland, the Resident of Dutch West Borneo very kindly held a reception in the Sarawak Club at which His Highness the Rajah and a number of Europeans were present. Cham pagne was served, and when all the guests had their glasses charged the Resident made a short speech h in the course of which he expressed his pleasure in being able to visit Sarawak, and the hope that from now onwards reciprocal visits between Sarawak and Dutch territory would become more frequent. He then addressed the Dutch residents of Kuching in Dutch, and ended by proposing the toast of Princess Juliana, which was drunk with enthusiasm. The Dutchmen present then joined in singing the "Wilhelmus,” the Dutch national anthem. The Government Secretary, Mr. E. Parnell, then proposed the health of the Resident of Dutch West Borneo in a short speech in which he welcomed the Resident and his officers to Sarawak, and hoped that their visit would cement still further the cordial relations which had for so long prevailed between Sarawak and the territory under Mr. Resident Oberman’s administration. After the health of the Resident had been drunk, a short impromptu sing song was held in the course of which full justice was done to a number of songs, both Dutch and English. The guests then dispersed. On the evening of the 30th, the visitors were present at an informal dance held at the Sarawak Club. The Deneb sailed for Pontianak nt 9 a.m. on May 1st, the Resident entertaining the Astana partv as far as Pending. Later in the day the following telegrams were exchanged between His Highness the Rajah and the Resident of Dutch West Borneo :— From Resident Oberman to His Highness the Rajah : "In trespassing the borders of your country we express our most thankful feelings for all the kindness and hospitality we received during our stay in Kuching’' From His Highness the Rajah to Mr. Resident Oberman : "Good luck and bon voyage. Your visit greatly appreciated, and all in Kuching unite in sending all best wishes and in hoping that they will see you and your officers again" From Resident Oberman to His Highness the Rajah : "Many thanks for your kind wishes." We sincerely hope that this visit may be the fore runner of many others in the future. There are already rumours of interport football matches being arranged, and we hope that it will be possible to establish regular fixtures in due course. Nothing but good can come of meetings such as this, which do much to increase friendliness and to promote a better understanding of the problems confronting the two territories. We wish our visitors all good luck and a speedy return; we can only hope that they enjoyed their all-too-short stay in Kuching as much as we enjoyed their presence among us. On Gardening. One of the first things to do is to prepare the beds. This means digging a lot of soil up into a long high ridge, so that the first good rain will wash the soil down and give the gardener the job of putting it back again. On the worn-out pepper gardens and other useless soils on which all houses would appear to be erected, a good dressing of cattle manure will be found essential. As there are usually no cows, buffalo or other cloven-footed animal within a hundred miles, this essential often has to be done without, but it is none the less an essential, as your first crop of flowers will prove, if you get that far. Another essential is some seeds of various kinds. As everyone else in the district has long given up trying to grow flowers, you will probably have to get seeds from Singapore or elsewhere. Not too much Lime need be spent on selecting the type of flowers you would wish to grow as the ones you sow will certainly not be the ones you reap; how ever, this may be regarded as a good reason for an ambitious initial effort. For myself I think not. When you receive the said packets of seeds, you will be surprised what liars nursery-men are. Not only do they tell you about it on the back, I hey even draw lurid pictures on the front. I speak from bitter experience, but even so I may be wronging the profession, for the picture and the written endorsement may not be intended to be connected, the picture being perhaps a mere imaginative decoration. Now being young and hopeful, we may plant the seeds. At any rate, a lottery could be run on the first plant to come up.—anything from resam to engkudok. To get the best results, it is advisable to read the instructions on the back of the seed- packet. To the experienced, the best result will be a good laugh, though a cynical one. To the young hopefuls, the best result will be to chuck their hand in. To the obstinate,—well, presumably they will try and plant again. We find, then, that different flowers need different soil and different treatment. As the only soil available is sandy shale, and as the only difference the plants will get is a drenching by the gardener in the wet weather and a scorching by nature in the drought, we again realize that we are fighting at a disadvantage. Very well then, let’s bung the things in a plant pot full of soil, or say several plant-pots. Three days later, little green shoots will appear in many of the pots. Such is our joy that we feel like ringing up the nursery-man and slapping him on the back for a good fellow. We call our friends in to show them what a little knowledge of the correct methods of gardening, and attention to the instruc tions on the paper wrapper, will do. Their comments will probably be somewhat dis couraging as they point out the similarity between our first shoots of hollyhocks and young lalang, etc., but we shall still believe that time will show the doubters' wrong. Unfortunately, time has other ideas and when we have finished weeding out the plants we never sowed, we probably find the net result of a packet each of Dahlias, Zinnias, Verbena, Hollyhocks, Nasturtiums, Chrysanthemums, etc., nd. lib., is three spindly Zinnias. Realizing that we have on hand several plant-pots of well-weeded soil, manured by the rotted seed of our planting, we plant out our Zinnia triplet there and fill in the long high ridges of beds so enthu siastically prepared some time ago. The triplets will become the pride and joy of our existence till the opening of the first flower. A great dav indeed. Again we will call our friends and show them that our faith was not entirely without justification Sadly our friends will lead us to the and show us the same thing three times the size growing like weeds outside every house. Finally, then, we join the throng of the dis illusioned, and wait for the next newcomer to go through the same experience, ourselves meanwhile confining our gardening efforts to watching the gardener scythe the apology for grass rampant in the compound. — N. M. First Division News. MARCH. The District Officer, Bau, states that the question of the Jago Dayaks who wish to move over to N.E.L. Loader has been referred to the Resident. These Dayaks wish to pay their taxes to the Government and build temporary huts over the border; they desire, however, to retain their Sarawak Kampong, where they live for the greater part of their time, at the same time paying no taxes to Government here. It has been decided that this cannot he allowed. Dahan Rubber Estates harvested 29,300 Tbs. dry rubber during March. Padi crops inspected during visits to Kampongs in the Bau district appeared to be excellent. Harvesting is now in full swing. On March 2nd the District Officer. Bau, returned from Kampong Jagoi Babang (N.E.I. Territory) whither he bad accompanied Mr. R. W. Hammond, having visited Kampong Plandok and Serasot on the way. Mr. J. B. Eijken, Gezaghebber, Benkayang, was met at Jagoi Babang and the question of Sarawak Dayaks farming over the border was discussed. All natives in the Serian District have been very busy on their farms, and thanks to a spell of fine weather at the beginning of the month the harvest should be very good indeed this year. A road in the Malay Kampong across river at Serian was constructed during the month. There are now twenty-two Malay houses here. A surveyor was busy the whole month surveying applications for land on the Serian-Tebekang road. A site for a Malay Kampong at Tamang between Serian and Tebekang has been found and application has been made to the Resident for his approval. It is rumoured that the Nissa Shokai Estate may shortly apply for a large area of land for pineapple growing. The land was examined by the Manager, and when the Malays of Siniawan heard this they immediately made verbal applications for part of the land. First they applied to keep the lend for jungle produce; later they applied for it for farming purposes; and still later they applied for it for sago- planting. Surprise checks were made during March on all shops in the Serian and Tebekang bazars, but no illicit buying or overstoring of rubber was discovered. Nineteen sheets of rubber were confiscated from a Tebekang towkay for buying rubber which had no stencil number on it. Hill padi in the vicinity of Stungkor. Serayan, Sebako, Tembaga (Lundu District) has been harvested. It is understood that harvests at Poi and Tanjong Purun were poor as rats have done considerable damage. On March 9th Native Officer Abang Haji Adenan, Orang Kaya Jumat and V.C. Su'ut proceeded to Simatan to investigate a report made by V.C. Halidi on one Chang Boo who was suspected to have been drowned while crossing the Simatan River on his way to Lundu. The clothes, which were recognised by the wife, were found a few days later, but the body has not been recovered. On March 19th the Postmaster-General, Mr. W. G. Tait, and party arrived at Lundu to carry out the installation of a telephone line between Lundu and Simatan, returning to Kuching on the 23rd. At present the telephone line extends only as far as Puguh. The work, which should be completed at the end of the month, was held up owing to the wire not having arrived from England. St, Thomas’ School. We are deeply grateful to all who have contributed towards makin the appeal a success. The first milestone has now been reached and the amount originally aimed at for the Bursary Fund has been subscribed. Anything over and above this $8,000 will be placed to the credit of the Visible Memorial which was to take the form of a Building to house the school Library or a Grand Stand on the foot ball field. Perlomba-an Murid Murid Sekolah Melayu Kuching. BAGI MULIAKAN HARI COUNCIL NEGERI DI PADANG MADERASAH MELAYU PADA HARI KHAMIS 29 APRIL, 1937. Pendung.—Yang Berhurmat Dato’ Patinggi, Yang Berhurmat Capt. R. E. Le Sueur. PEGAWAI PERLOMBA-AN :— Hakim.—G. B. Tuanku Madhi, G. B. Abang Mohd. Zawawi, G. Abang Abdul-karim, G. Abdul Hamid, G. Abang Malim. Pengatur.—G. B. Abdul-rahman, G. B. Abang Anuar, Mohd Morshidi, G. Ahet, Enche’ Din. Pengambil Bilangan Kemenangan.—G. B. Abang Md. Zawawi, G. B. Saufi. Penjaga Waktu.—G. B. Abang Hamdin, G. Drap, G. Mohd. Nor. Pemangil Budak-budak Berlomba.—G. Mohd. Sujang, Enche’ Abdul-rahman, G. Johari. Pengetahui Kclangkapan Perlomba-an.—G. Mohd. Skol, G. Mohd. Abet, G. Sejeli, G. Zainndin, G. Mohd. Alis, G. Mohd. Gol, G. Mohd. Zen. Penjaga Minuman.—G. Mohd. Kobil, G. Adnan, G. Yahya, G. Ramli, Mohd. Simoh. Penjaga Kelangkapan Perlomba-an.—Haji Ahmad, P. Timun. Jeru Tulis.—G. Mohd. Hashim, G. Mohd. Zen. Setia Usaha.—Haji Bol Hassan. (Akhir pertandingan sekolah Merpati Jepang dau sekolah Kg. Jawa.) Dua buah prisai perak hadiah daripada Dato' Patinggi, Sa-buah-nya ontok bagi murid Sekolah laki-laki yang beroleh kemenangan dari pada pertan- jokan senaman dan sa-buah-nya ontok murid-murid Sekolah perempuan. (Mulai senaman pukol 5 petang.) Pada malam Sabtu 1 May di-adakan jua pertun- jokan senaman dan perlomba-an murid-murid perempuan. Khas yang menyaksikan-nya perem- puan-perempuan sahaja. (Mulai senaman pukol 8.) The Sarawak Turf Club. SPRING MEETING, 1937. APRIL 24TH, 26TH, AND 28TH. When the extra two-day meeting for the benefit of the Jubilee Recreation Fund was cancelled in February owing to the condition of the course it was decided to compensate for this fixture by add ing the odd day to both the Spring and the Autumn meetings. Only once before has the Turf Club staged a three-day meeting, in 1924, and it was not altogether a success. As was marked at the time, by the third day "the ponies had no wind and the punters had no money left.” It must be remembered too that there were fewer ponies in training and of a poorer class than the ponies racing to-day. The meeting just concluded, on the other hand, can be written down as a decided success. Fields were satisfactory, racing was of good quality, and last but not least, there seemed to be plenty of money about. The Clerk of the Weather was in holiday mood, and although he gave us a warning with a light shower on the first and second days, conditions were excellent both above and underfoot. Four records were lowered. Bintang putting up a new record for the 6 furlongs, Sintak Bulan for 3 furlongs, Happy Bay II for the 4 1/2 furlongs and Jubilee, for the Round the Course. No more remarks need be made about the going, the course was in excellent condition. His Highness the Rajah and Astana party were present at all three days and at the conclusion of the meeting His Highness very kindly distributed the prizes. The destination of the Champion Cup for the best performance at the meeting was in doubt to the end, but went to Abang Suhai’a Manis by a very small margin with the Datu Patinggi's Jubilee, runner-up. The Jockeys’ prize was deci ded by the very short head which divided Medin and Asing in the last race. A full description of the racing and results will be found below. In conclusion this opportunity is taken to thank all those (and their number is far greater than the average race-goer realises), whose efforts went to make the meeting the success it was in whatever capacity they were kind enough to offer their services.—(Contributed.) RESULTS. FIRST DAY. Saturday, April 24th, 1937. RACE 1. 2.30 p.m. THE TUAN MUDA'S CUP. 6 furlongs. Also ran:—Kijang 10.0, King Kong 8.3 and While Label 7.11 (left). King Kong went to the post a pronounced favourite, White Label gave trouble at the start, and when the flag fell his jockey failed to get him away. At the five furlongs the order was Happy Boy II, Bintang, Silver Blaze and King Kong with Kijang tailed off. King Kong moved up at three furlongs but was beaten coming into the straight. Happy Boy If maintained his lead but the weight began to tell just inside the distance and he was unable to answer a strong challenge from Bintang, who incidentally was not particularly fancied by his connections. 1 length, 1/2 length. Time—1 minute 31 4/5th seconds. (Record). Tote:-$10.80. Cash Sweep :—1st prize $800 Ticket No. 1488, 2nd prize $400 Ticket No. 399, 3rd prize $200 Ticket No. 903, Starters each $66.60 Tickets Nos. 1521. 590 and 296. RACE 2.—3.0 p.m. THE SEKAMA STAKES. 5 furlongs. Also ran :—Moonshine Jr. 8.4, Nightingale 8.0 and Jackson 8.7. Manis was favourite and got away smartly from the flag and looked all over a winner until Jubilee and Chairman challenged at the distance. Chair- man headed Manis and was in turn headed by Jubilee strongly ridden by Medin. A very close finish. 1/2 length, 1/2 length. Time—I minute 16 2/5th seconds. (Unofficial). Tote $7.60. Cash Sweep 1st prize $705.20 Ticket No. 180, 2nd prize $352.60 Ticket No. 852, 3rd prize $176.30 Ticket No. 1106, Starters each $58.70 Tickets Nos. 1304, 570 and 830. RACE 3.—3.30 p.m. THE DATUS’ STAKES. 6 furlongs. Also ran :—Warpath 9.12, Lucky Star 8.9 and Hairan 8.9. Tarzan made the running from Warpath with the favourite Rex always lying handy. Once in the straight Lundu brought the favourite out and the issue was never in doubt. 1 length, 3 lengths. Time—1 minute 37 2/5th seconds. Tote $1.90. Cash Sweep :—1st prize $502.80 Ticket No. 158, 2nd prize $251.40 Ticket No. 574, 3rd prize $125.70 Ticket No. 112, Starters each $41.90 Tickets Nos. 1898, 2014 and 1531. RACE 4.—4.0 p.m. THE B.C.L. STAKES. 3 furlongs. Also ran :—White Label 7.8. Sintak Bulan, a hot favourite, jumped off in front and made bis way home in record’ time. White Label was slowly off but made up a lot of ground, although he finished last. 2 lengths, 1 length. Time—43 l/5th seconds. (Record). Tote $1.80. Cash Sweep:—1st prize $3-10.80 Ticket No. 1832. 2nd prize $170.40 Ticket No. 142, 3rd prize $85.20 Ticket No. 1585, Starter $85.20 Ticket No. 1159. RACE 5.—1.30 p.m. THE MATANG HANDICAP. 4 furlongs. Moonshine Jr. and Manis were both fan ied, but Moonshine Jr. was favourite by a narrow margin. These two were always showing the way. At the Ara tree, Asing asked Moonshine Jr. the question and came away to a well-ridden race. 1 length, 2 lengths. Time—60 3/5th seconds. Tote $2.40. Cash Sweep:—1st prize $328.00 Ticket No. 515, 2nd prize $164.00 Ticket No. 1087, 3rd prize $82.40 Ticket No. 644, Starters each $41.00 Tickets Nos. 781 and 339. RACE 6.—5.0 p.m. THE PENDING STAKES. 3 furlongs. Also ran ;—Tarzan 10.0, Rex 9.10, Giok 8.9, Mandok 8.5, Adil II 8.2., Hairan 8.11 and Mist 8.2 In spite of being badly drawn Diamond had raced to the front before the road. The field was the largest despatched during the afternoon. Bintang Tiga and Tarzan were soon racing after Diamond, the latter, however, stuck to his advan tage aud paid a good dividend. Bintang Tiga was unlucky being unable to come through at the road. Mist was badly off. dwelling at the start. Cash Sweep : 1st prize $323.20 Ticket No. 881, 2nd prize $161.60 Ticket No. 1100, 3rd prize $80.80 Ticket No. 530, Starters each $11.50 Tickets Nos. 198, 640, 1024, 144, 143, 838 and 870 RACE 7.-.5.30 p.m. THE RANEE’S CUP. 1 mile. Also ran -Silver Blaze 8.9, Flying Fox 7.8 and Kijang 11.0. White Label got away this time and upset the odds. Starting slowly he had raced to the front at the five furlongs. White Label was clear still at the road but at the Ara tree Jubilee and Chair man challenged on either side but never quite headed White Label, who stuck gamely to his lead to win an excellent race by a narrow margin. Short head, neck. Time—2 minutes 8 2/5th seconds. Tote $27.40. Cash Sweep :—1st prize $269.60 Ticket No. 430, 2nd prize $134.80 Ticket No. 456, 3rd prize $67.40 Ticket No. 803, Starters each $22.40 Tickets Nos. 1026, 871 and 443. SECOND DAY. Monday, April 26th, 1937. RACE 1—2.30 p.m. THE MAIDEN STAKES. 4 1/2 furlongs. Ponies which have run at one or more official meetings of the Sarawak Turf Club and have not won a race. Also ran :—Hairan 8.4 and Lucky Star 8.2. Plandok jumped off in front and had established a big lead at the road. Warpath, the favourite, gradually overhauled Plandok in the straight and nothing else looked dangerous. Plandok just stayed on to win. Short head, 3 lengths. Time—1 minute 11 l/5th seconds. Tote $6.40. Cash Sweep :—1st prize $800 Ticket No. 521, 2nd prize $400 Ticket No. 1462. 3rd prize $200 Ticket No. 428, Starters each $100 Tickets Nos. 258 and 1435. RACE 2.—3.0 p.m. THE CORONATION HANDICAP. 4 1/2 furlongs. Also ran:—Nightingale 8.2, Blue Bird 9.9 and Jackson 8.6. Moonshine Jr. made the running from Manis, the favourite, and Jubilee. In the straight Ek Pa took Manis into the lead and was never seriously challenged. 1 length, 1 length. Time—1 minute 8 2/5th seconds. Tote :—$2.90. Cash Sweep:—1st prize $800 Ticket No. 1434, 2nd prize $400 Ticket No. 546, 3rd prize $200 Ticket No. 870, Starters each $66.60 Tickets Nos. 725, 1941 and 1071. RACE 3.—3.30 p.m. THE LORNA DOONE STAKES. 3 furlongs. Also ran :—Bintang Tiga 8.5, Hairan 8.5, Suka 8.3 and Mist 8.1. Tarzan, Rhubarb and Diamond got well away from the rest of the field which started slowly. Mist failed off. Tarzan soon had the situation in hand and, when Rhubarb cracked at the Ara tree, ran on an easy winner. 1 1/2 lengths, 1 length. Time—45 seconds. . Tote $3.60. Cash Sweep :—1st prize $711.20 Ticket No. 938, 2nd prize $355.60 Ticket No. 748, 3rd prize $177.80 Ticket No. 208, Starters each $44.40 Tickets Nos. 125, 203, 314 and 270. RACE 4.—4.0 p.m. THE DIDO STAKES. 4 1/2 furlongs. Also ran :—Bintang 8.7, Silver Blaze 8.5 and King Kong 8.2. White Label as usual was slowly away losing valuable ground at the start. As expected the race soon developed into a duel between Happy Boy II and Sintak Bulan, and the rest of the field closing up on the ditch. Happy Boy II had Sintak Bulan's measure at the Ara tree when White Label appeared from nowhere and ran Sintak Bulan out of second money by a neck, but just could not catch the favourite although White Label was travelling faster than anything else at the winning post. 1/2 length, neck. Time—1 minute 7 4/5th seconds. (Record). Tote $2.90. Cash Sweep :—1st prize $578.80 Ticket No. 1650, 2nd prize $289.40 Ticket No. 1030, 3rd prize $144.70 Ticket No. 957, Starters each $48.20 Tickets Nos. 1815, 356 and 1653. RACE 5. 4.30 p.m. THE APRIL HANDICAP. Also ran :—Moonshine Jr. 8.4, Nightingale 8.0 and Jackson 8.0. Moonshine Jr. the favourite, Manis and Jackson showed the way with Jubilee lying back. Manis looked a certain winner in spite of his penalty, when Medin, riding an excellent race on Jubilee came through to divide the Stakes in the last stride with Manis. One of the best finishes of the Time—1 minute 17 2/5 th seconds. Tote $2.10 Manis. $2.40 Jubilee. Cash Sweep:—1st prizes $351.60 each Tickets Nos. 748 and 1624, 3rd prize $117.20 Ticket No. 1609, Starters each $39 Tickets Nos. 1822, 1643 and 1728. RACE 6.—5.0 p.m. THE SIOL STAKES. 4 1/2 furlongs. Also ran :—Mist 8.1, Adil II 8.0, Giok 8.7 and Lucky Star 8.0. Tarzan was quickly away from Warpath, Rex, Giok and Lucky Star in that order. Rex was moving up at the road and came very wide into the straight onto the ditch. Warpath and Tarzan were racing in the centre of the course. Tarzan found the weight too much at the distance and Rex tackled Warpath and ran on a winner by half a length. 1/2 length, 1 length. Time—1 minute 8 4/5th seconds. Tote $2.40. Cash Sweep :—1st prize $356.40 Ticket No. 939, 2nd prize $178.20 Ticket No. 1639, 3rd prize $89.10 Ticket No. 842. Starters each $22.10 Tickets Nos. 1811, 1557, 828 and 945. RACE 7.—5.30 p.m. THE TYRO STAKES. 4 furlongs. Also ran :—Flying Fox 10.7, Rhubarb 11.0 and Lumadin 11.2. Happy Boy II, a hot favourite, jumped off in front and was never headed. White Label made up a great deal of ground after a slow start. 6 lengths, 4 lengths. Time—59 4/5th seconds. Tote $1.60. Cash Sweep:—1st prize $314.40 Ticket No. 1925, 2nd prize $157.20 Ticket No. 518, 3rd prize $78.60 Ticket No. 510, Starters each $26.20 Tickets Nos. 1753, 1426 and 1415. THIRD DAY. Wednesday, April 28th, 1937. RACE 1.—2.0 p.m. THE SARAWAK STEAMSHIP CO. STAKES. 5 furlongs. Also ran :—Silver Blaze 8.0 and White Label 7.11. Happy Boy II made all the running with Sintak Bulan scratched, and ran home an easy winner. 2 lengths, 1 length. Time—1 minute 15 2/5th seconds. Tote $2.30. Cash Sweep :—1st prize $800 Ticket No. 809, 2nd prize $400 Ticket No. 1978, 3rd prize $200 Ticket No. 350, Starters each $100 Tickets Nos. 1156 and 1013. RACE 2.—2.30 p.m. THE SIME DARBY STAKES. 6 furlongs. Chairman, who had been knocking on the door in all his races, made no mistake this time. Jubilee wont to the post a pronounced favourite, but found the weight too much for him. Manis made the early running but Chairman took charge at the road. 2 lengths, 1 length. Time—1 minute 33 2/5th seconds. Tote $3. Cash Sweep :—1st prize $800 Ticket No. 685, 2nd prize $400 Ticket No. 1094, 3rd prize $200 Ticket No. 1250, Starters each $100 Tickets Nos. 1880 and 835. RACE 3.—3.0 p.m. THE ONG EWE HAI PURSE. 5 furlongs. Also ran:—Warpath 9.6, Plandok 8.4 and Mist 8.0. Diamond mode the running from Tarzan, War path and the favourite Rex. In the straight Diamond came wide onto the ditch with Rex and Tarzan racing well over on the stand-side. Damit rode a shocking race on Tarzan. Instead of keep ing Tarzan straight be swerved right over the course onto Diamond, interfering with him and finally crossing him badly on the post. Only these two were in it and there was no excuse for Damit's riding. An objection to the winner, Tarzan, for crossing was upheld and the Stewards placed Diamond first and Tarzan second. 2 lengths, 1 length. Time—1 minute 19 2/5th seconds. Tote $17.40. Cash Sweep:—1st prize $800 Ticket No. 1541, 2nd prize $400 Ticket No. 1405, 3rd prize $200 Ticket No. 19G9, Starters each $66.60 Tickets Nos. 144, 1,258 and 782. RACE 4. -3.30 p.m. THE PADUNGAN STAKES. 4 furlongs. This race developed into a match between Happy Boy II and Sintak Bulan when the three other entries for this race were withdrawn. Odds were laid on Sintak Bulan, and he jumped off and ran home a good winner from Happy Boy II, who felt both the weight and his first race. 2 lengths. Time—59 seconds. Tote $1.50. Cash Sweep :—1st prize $800 Ticket No. 1204, 2nd prize $400 Ticket No. 306. RACE 5.—4.0 p.m. THE COUNCIL NEGRI HANDICAP. 3 furlongs. Also ran :—Blue Bird 9.13 and Jackson 8.4. Manis again showed a clean pair of heels and gave Ek Pa an easy ride. Moonshine Jr. started favourite. 2 lengths, 1 length. Time—43 4/5th seconds. Tote $3.20. Cash Sweep 1st prize $800 Ticket No. 463, 2nd prize $400 Ticket No. 949, 3rd prize $200 Ticket No. 680, Starters each $100 Tickets Nos. 933 and 793. RACK 6.—4.30 p.m. THE TURF CLUB STAKES. 4 furlongs. Also ran :—Warpath 9.11, Rhubarb 9.8 and Giok 8.2. Bintang Tiga was smartly off and settled down in front of Rhubarb and Rex with the reef bunched behind. Once in the straight Rhubarb started to improve on Bintang Tiga, but just as he got on terms with him the girths broke and Ek Pa had a lucky escape just missing the rails. 1/2 length, .1/2 length. Time—62 1/5th seconds. Tote $6. Cash Sweep :—1st prize $750 Ticket No. 624, 2nd prize $375 Ticket No. 664, 3rd prize $187.50 Ticket No. 117, Starters each $62.50 Tickets Nos. 1832, 547 and 1472. RACE 7.—5.0 p.m. THE CONSOLATION STAKES. 3 furlongs. Also ran :—Suka 7.8 1/2. Rhubarb compensated for his bad luck in the previous race by turning out again a-leading all the way. i length, 3 lengths. Time—45 seconds. Tote $1.50. Cash Sweep :—1st prize $587.20 Ticket No. 1352, 2nd prize $293.60 Ticket No. 601, 3rd prize $146.80 Ticket No. 1905, Starter $146.80 Ticket No. 717. RACE 8.—5.30 p.m. THE RAJAH’S CUP. Round the Course (about 11/3 Miles). Also ran:—Manis 8.10, Tarzan 8.5, Bintang 8.10, Kijang 11.0, Silver Blaze 8.8 and Jackson 7.10. The extra money for fourth place produced a record field for this race. Jackson gave trouble at the start but the field got away well and disappeared with Tarzan and Manis leading from a bunched field. At the 5 furlongs Manis had a clear lead but soon after this dropped back beaten. Chairman then took up the running with White Label, Flying Fox and Jubilee in close attendance. Jubilee disposed of White Label and Flying Fox and joined conclusions with Chairman at the Ara Tree. Jubilee headed Chairman but the latter came again to lead by a slender margin. Jubilee, however, had just the balance in hand to come again and get the verdict in record time for the distance. Head, 1 length. Time—2 minutes 45 seconds. Tote $3.40. Cash Sweep:—1st prize $551.60 Ticket No. 1239, 2nd prize $275.80 Ticket No. 228, 3rd prize $137.90 Ticket No. 332, Starters each $19.70 Tickets Nos. 1389, 1503, 576, 1927, 1374, 959 and 1718. UNLIMITED CASH SWEEP SPRING MEETING, 1937. MINUTES OF THE ANNUAL GENERAL MEETING OF THE SARAWAK TURF CLUB HELD AT THE SARAWAK CLUB ON 25TH APRIL, 1937, AT 6.30 P.M. Present.—Mr. J. B. Archer (in the Chair), Datu Shahbandar, Abang Bisuni, Abang Kipaili, Messrs. B. J. C. Spurway, E. S. Holl. H. E. Cutfield, W. F. Dick. A. W. Gibson, W. J. Chater, W. Philp, D. H. Lascelles, F. H. Pollard and G. T. Bates. (1) The Minutes of the previous Annual General Meeting were read and confirmed. Accounts. -Proposed by Mr. Dick and seconded by Captain Gibson that the accounts as submitted by the Secretaries be approved. Passed unanimously. (3)Mr. Spurway proposed and Mr. Cutfield seconded that Mr. Ed. Parnell be elected Vice President in place of Mr. Crocker, who has retired on pension. Passed unanimously. (4)Auditor Proposed by Mr. Philp and by Mr. Spurway that the appointment of an auditor be deferred and the Committee empowered to appoint an Auditor when required. Passed unanimously. (5) Subscriptions.—Mr. Dick suggested that subscriptions be reduced. After some discussion it was decided that the Secretaries should circularise Members and the matter be brought up at a Special Meeting. (6) Course and Public Stand.—Mr. Spurway explained to Members his idea for improving the course and facilities to the general public and members. It was proposed by Mr. Spurway and seconded by Mr. Cutfield that the scheme be investigated by the Committee. Passed unani mously. (7) Mr. Cutfield proposed and Mr. Pollard seconded that a Gymkhana Meeting be held on at least one day, e.g., tent pegging, fences, etc., to be included. 8 Members voted in favour 8 against, other members abstained. After further discussion it was decided that the Committee should sound owners regarding the proposal to hold a proper Gymkhana Meeting. A vote of thanks to the chair term mated the meeting. MINUTES OF A COMMITTEE MEETING OF THE SARAWAK TURF CLUB HELD AT "B.M.K." ON 1ST DAY OF MAY, 1937 AT 5.30 P.M. Present.—Messrs. B. J. C. Spurway (in tho Chair), G. T. Bates. R. S. Holl, W. J. Chater, Wee Kheng Chiang, Chan Qui Chong, the Datu Patinggi, Messrs. Tan Sum Guan and J. C. H. Barcroft. Absent.—Messrs. J. B. Archer and H. E. Cut field. (1) Minutes of last Committee Meeting were read and approved. (2) Classification— Flying Fox and Silver Blaze Div. I to Div. II. Tarzan, Rex & Diamond ,, III II. Jubilee, Manis & Chairman II ,, ,, I. Nightingale & Jackson ,, II ,, ,, III. (3) The Secretaries were instructed to write to the Authorities in B.N.B. for foundation of rumour that export of best ponies is being refused in future. (4) A letter from Mr. Phillip Soh Fu asking that all owners be supplied with copies of the Straits Racing Association Rules was read. The Secretaries were instructed to write for a copy first. (5) Proposed by Mr. Bates, seconded by Mr. Wee Kheng Chiang, that Mrs. Chater be recom pensed for her long connection with the Tea Rooms. It was suggested that Mrs. Chater be asked to choose a present up to $100. (6) Mr. W. J. Chater said that there was a good deal of grumbling about starting. It was proposed that in future there should be a Hon. Official Starter and a Hon. Deputy Starter and some simple rules and suggestions be drawn up for approval of the Committee. (7) Mr. Wee Kheng Chiang proposed and Mr. Bates seconded that the Rule relating to Cash Sweep Prizes be amended as follows :— (8) Mr. Wee Kheng Chiang suggested that Officials recommended by the Committee be entitled to use Padungan Road to and from the Race Course and fly a Red Flag. (9) Mr. Tan Sum Guan suggested that Unlimited Sweep tickets for Autumn Meeting be issued forth with. (10) Jockeys' Compensation.—Mr. Tan Sum Guan raised the question of insurance and owners' responsibility for jockeys injuries or incapacity. It was decided that legal opinion be obtained and circulated to owners by the Secretaries. (11) Mr. Wee Kheng Chiang proposes Mr. Bates seconds that in future Unlimited Sweep will be drawn in Units of $10,000 (i.e., 1st, 2nd, 3rd and Starter for each $10,000). Carried 6 to 2. Amendment by Mr. Chater seconded by Mr. Barcroft that the Unit be $15,000. Out-voted 5 to 3. (12) Mr. Barcroft proposes that transport charges up to a maximum of $20 be paid on all ponies from any outstation in Sarawak, Saises' passages excluded. Seconded by Mr. Chater. All in favour. (13) Mr. Spurway proposes that Entrance fees are as follows:— Second Division News. MARCH. The Resident, Second Division, states that there have recently been a considerable number of cases in which Dayaks have been wounded or killed by pig traps, and it is considered necessary to inflict severe punishment on those infringing Order No. LXXI of 1924. Such cases have as a rule occurred in the Ulus where ammunition is not yet allowed to be sold, but unfortunately this is no longer the case, one death having been caused at Sebuyow. Fanners of all countries are known to grumble, and their crops are never quite to their satisfaction, but this year seems to be the exception as far as the Second Division is concerned, and Dayaks from all over the Division report excellent and abundant c rops and a noticeable lack of pests. Pigs, however, have been very plentiful in many districts. His Highness the Rajah, accompanied by the Government Secretary, Mr. E Parnell, arrived at Simanggang by m.l. Betty on the morning of March 17th. All Penghulus and many Tuai were present to meet His Highness, who sat in open Court to deal with requests on the morning of the 18th. The crowd present was not so great as usual as everyone was busy on their farms, but the Tuai included over 30 prominent Dayaks from the Ulu Ai including ex Penghulu Ramba and his brothers. It was reported that owing to the high price of rubber Dayaks in the Paku, Saribas. were leaving their ripe padi to rot on the ground in order to have time for more extensive tapping, but it is not considered that any serious loss will he experienced or Malays, who are short of land, would reap the harvest on condition that they retained a share of the crop reaped by them. The forthcoming tapping holiday will he a blessing, and should keep natives from the temptation of leaving their crops for more lucrative labour. The inhabitants of the Batang Lupar, however, think of their harvests first and it is surprising the number of gardens that are left untapped. Owing to the padi harvest and the rising price of rubber very few natives visited Betong during the month. At Saratok a Malay named Romli bin Dadi was found guilty under section 403 of the Penal Code and sentenced to three months R.l. for misappro priating a prahu belonging to a Dayak, and altering its appearance. Accused is an old offender. Reports of boats being stolen are constantly made; the loss of a prahu causes great inconvenience to Dayaks coming from a distance, and offenders must be severely punished. The Officer-in-Charge, Kalaka, records with regret the death on March 29th of Seman, Tuan Belal of Kabong. On March 21st it was reported that the Ban Wah Seng had fouled a Chinese wangkung anchored above. Kaba when sailing to Kabong on the previous night, and the Police made an inspection of the damage. The owners of the two boats came to an amicable settlement, the Ban Wah Seng paying $200 compensation. The Jurugan of Ban Wah Seng has been charged with negligence. A roaring trade is being done in bicycles at Saratok, and it is not uncommon to meet elderly towkays learning to ride on small boys’ bicycles on an evening. Very good pengireh fishing has been experienced at Kabong, especially at the beginning of the month, when the tides were low. Abang Bujang, Native Officer stales the catches are equal to those made in 1917, which was a record year. Unfortunately tower boats are engaged in this trade as many of the Malays are working sago or tapping rubber. All Penghulus and several Tuai-Tuai were present at an aum held in Lubok Antu Fort on March 12th, previous to their departure to meet His Highness the Rajah at Simanggang. The question of suggestions to be submitted to His Highness was brought forward, and routine Government orders were explained and discussed. Among those present were ex Penghulu Ramba, T.R. Rantai, and Ngindang, the three chief offenders concerned in the recent breach of the Tuba Fishing Regulations. A second aum was held in the" Fort on 31st for the purpose of explaining the replies given by His Highness the Rajah to the requests submitted to him. Only those Tuai-Tuai were culled whose houses the Officer-in-Charge had been unable to it during his recent trip to the Lemanak and Engkari. or who for some reason bad failed to be present at any of the houses in which he had spent the night. Dayaks throughout the Ulu Ai district are still busy harvesting. Crops are reported everywhere to be good, with the exception of three or four bouses in the Batang Engkari whose inmates are themselves at fault owing to lateness in planting. A report was received stating that some Towkays at Lubok Antu are selling Dutch tobacco to Chinese gardeners. An investigation is being made for clearer evidence and an arrest will be made as soon as possible. A case of pungka peti occurred at Sungei Gugu, Pati Kesit, Lemanak, on March 16th, in which one Gayau Anak Bujau of rumah Kiang suffered fatal injuries. An investigation has been made and the case will be heard on the occasion of the Resident's next visit. Third Division News. MARCH. The Resident, Third Division, reports that the high price of rubber has had the effect of increasing the cost of labour, especially in the Rejang River, to an enormous extent. Ordinary coolie labour is now from $1 to $3 a day, whilst skilled labour is much more expensive. Tenders for Government contracts are so excessive that they appear ridiculous, and it is difficult to see how Government will get work done this year. Work on the new hospital at Sibu progresses at a very slow rate. The contractor is now three months overdue, and there is much yet to be done. The roads and approaches are being constructed and are a big job as all the earth has be brought in by lighters. Two coroner’s inquests were held at Sibu during March, both upon the Indies of Foochow Chinese, one of a woman drowned at Salim and the other a man drowned at Ensurai. Findings of death by misadventure were recorded in each case. Exports of smoked sheet from Sibu during March totalled 7,016.80 piculs. Weather was mainly fine during the month, with the result that tapping has been steady. This will no doubt affect April exports. Dayak tapping, however, has dwindled due to the padi harvest. His Highness the Rajah, accompanied by Mr. J. B. Archer, the Resident, and Mr. E. Parnell, the Government Secretary, made an official landing at Sibu on March 4th. His Highness was met by a Guard of Honour of the Sarawak Constabulary under the command of Mr. W. L. P. Sochon. Officer Superintending Constabulary Sector, and Represen- tatives of all sections of the community. His Highness gave audience to Malaya and Dayaks in the Court-house the following day, and accompanied by the Resident and Government Secretary left for Kanowit and Kapit in H.H.M.Y. Maimuna on March 7th, returning on the 10th. His Highness interviewed a number of natives on board and left for Kuching via Binatang and Rejang the following morning at 7 a.m. R.A.F.A. Aquarius, under the command of Captain Mart, paid a short visit to Sibu from March 12th to 14th, when the ship sailed for Singapore via Kuching. On March 16th Mr. W. S. B. Buck, accompanied by Mrs. Buck, arrived from Kuching to take up the appointment of District Officer, Sibu, vice Mr. R. E. Le Sueur. The District was officially taken over the following day and Mr. Le Sueur left for Kuching on transfer on 18th. A report having been received that a large ship had been chartered in China to bring immigrants to Sibu. officers of the Constabulary, Health and Immigration Departments proceeded to Kuala Rejang to meet the ship there to inspect landing permits in order to ensure that port and health regulations were enforced. Mr. T. S. Boyd, the Chief Justice, arrived on March 31st to bear appeal cases. Other visitors to the station included Mr. R. W. Hammond, O.B.E., Father Wrathall, C.R., Graf von Sierstorpff, Mr. A. F. Baughan of Messrs. Sime, Darby & Co., Ltd., Mr. and Mrs. Kidd of Kanowit. and Miss K. M. Harvey. Mr. Hammond is making a tour of inspection of all schools in the district. The Acting Secretary for Chinese Affairs, Mr. E. M. Selous, arrived on March 2nd on a tour of inspection of the Division and left again for Sarikei on 22nd, after having visited the schools and large estates in the districts. An inquiry was held into the burning down of Kampong Nangka long-house on the 12th of Inst month. The fire appears to have originated in the kitchen of a woman named Nalu, who lit and left unattended a fire and then went to sleep in an adjoining room. After due consideration the Court came to the conclusion that no criminal negligence could bo proved against Nalu who herself lost property to the value of over $2,000. The inhabi tants have been temporarily accommodated in nearby houses. The usual large number of cases dealing with offences against Rubber Restriction Orders were again a feature of the month's work in the Lower Rejang Courts. There was a good deal of influenza prevalent in some of the Dayak houses near Binatang during the month, and both Dressers paid visits to the Dayak houses concerned. Reports regarding the padi harvest in the Lower Rejang District vary greatly, and it is difficult to arrive at any estimate of the quality and quantity of the crop as yet. His Highness the Rajah, accompanied by the Government Secretary, Mr. E. Parnell, visited Lower Rejang stations during March. His Highness arrived at Sarikei in H.H.M.Y. Maimuna on the morning of the 3rd and was met by Mr. J. B. Archer, Resident, Third Division, and the District Officer Lower Rejang. After shaking hands with all those present on the wharf and inspecting the guard of honour, His Highness walked to the Government offices, where he sat in Court. Later, visits were paid to the Kong Chien, Sze Hua, Su Kwong and St. Anthony’s schools. The Government Malay school and Native Officer’s house were visited in the late afternoon. The members of all communities had taken great pains to ensure that His Highness received an enthusiastic welcome to Sarikei, and the town was prettily decorated. Some four hundred school chil dren greeted His Highness on his arrival and sang their welcome song. Binatang was visited on the 11th, His Highness being met on arrival at 9 a.m. by the District Officer, Lower Rejang, Native Officer, Binatang, and the leading members of the Malay and Chinese communities. His Highness sat in Court, and also visited the Kai Wen, R.C. Mission, Wock Lam and Govern ment Malay schools. The kampong at Binatang was tastefully decorated for the occasion. At noon the Maimuna left for Rejang and on arrival there His Highness and those who accom panied him were carried up from the water’s edge to the grass road in front of the bungalow in a prettily decorated seliri. On descending from the seliri His Highness was greeted with tremendous enthusiasm by the local Melanaus and also by the pupils of the Belawai Malay School, who had come over to Rejang especially for the occasion. His Highness walked through the kampong to the bazaar and back to the football field whence a return was made to the Maimuna. The walk through the kampong was made to the accompaniment of the discharge of cannons and crackers in large numbers. Here again the village was nicely decorated. In the Puro (Kapit District), Rumah Nyanggon and Rumah Manggom have been deserted as being angat owing to six deaths, including that of Tuai Rumah Manggom himself. All the Song and Kapit Penghulus came to Kapit to meet His Highness the Rajah. It was impossible to call down Penghulu Taman Usun Hang and Puso owing to lack of time. It has been reported that a serious quarrel took place between certain Chinese in Belaga bazaar and Kayans over gambling debts. Owing to prompt action by Village Constable Kelunting trouble was averted. In the Kapit district most of the Dayaks are about half way through their harvests and good crops are the rule, subject to ravages by pigs. It is typical of Dayak character that Rumah Rumpang of Sungei Sebunut should hold a begawai in the middle of the harvest despite strong advice from the District Officer to the contrary, with the result that for several days and nights their farms were unguarded and of what were excellent, crops there remains about one-tenth, the rest having been destroyed by pigs and deer. Both Kapit and Song bazaars appear prosperous, due no doubt to the steady rise in the price of rubber combined with the rise in the price of jungle pro duce. It is reported, however, that the cost of living has also gone up, vegetables, etc., being more expensive. The ruling of His Highness the Rajah that only local hawkers are to be allowed to trade in the Song and Kapit districts has caused great satisfaction to the traders. On March 8th His Highness the Rajah arrived at Kapit in H.H.M.Y. Maimuna, accompanied by Mr. E. Parnell, Government Secretary, and Mr. J. B. Archer, Resident, Third Division. On the 9th His Highness granted interviews to Dayaks, Malays and Chinese in the Fort and then visited the bazaar and Chinese school. In the evening His Highness visited the new bazaar and the R. C. Mission. His Highness left on the 10th at 7 a.m. On March 30th Jantan bin Omar, a collector working on behalf of the Museum, proceeded up the Ga'at to collect Bulwer’s pheasants. His ori ginal intention was to go up the Mujong, but high water and absence of suitable coolies prevented this. Harvest in the Meluan District was everywhere in full swing daring March, and depredations by wild pigs increased. One thousand rounds of No. 4 shot were sold out in a few days in Kanowit. and no further supplies had been received at the time of writing. Optimism as to the crop prevails. On March 18th Mr. J. C. H. Barcroft arrived in Kanowit, and on the 27th took over the affairs of the Meluan district from Mr. A. Macpherson, who left for Sibu the following day. His Highness the Rajah, accompanied by the Government Secretary and the Resident, Third Division, made an official landing at Kanowit on March 7th at 4 p.m.; His Highness then proceeded to Fort Emma where he sat in open Court to hear complaints and requests. Various requests were made, the most important being to allow the batak’d Dayaks to return up river. This His Highness permitted, provided that the Penghulus concerned would receive them. After a visit to the Kanowit Catholic Mission His Highness returned to H.H.M.Y. Maimuna, spend ing the night on board. Early the next morning His Highness gave the Penghulus an audience, and left for Kapit at 8 a.m. amid scenes of much enthusiasm. In the Oya district the price of raw sago dropped from the figure for last month, the price being $5 cents per passu at Dalat and 90 cents at the Kut. The exports of raw sago were :— One motor schooner, eight sailing schooners and twenty-five bandongs cleared the port of Oya during March, the total tonnage being 950 tons. Fourth Division News. MARCH. The District Officer, Miri, left Miri for a visit to the Ulu Niah, Ulu Suai and Ulu Sibuti on March 13th. The Dayaks have only beer in these rivers a few years and they are still perfectly contented and there are, as yet, no land disputes. The padi harvest is a good one and, in spite of a certain amount of damage by pigs, there will be plenty. On March 27th H.H.M.Y. Maimuna arrived off Miri with the Kuching Cricket Team. Their visit was only a short one this year, and they left again on the evening of 28th. The District Officer, Baram, reports that on the evening of March 31st, just before dnsk, an old Maloh named Santok was murdered on his way home from Lubok Nibong bazaar. As natives go he was wealthy, and was in the habit of carrying large sums of money in a belt round his waist. On this occasion he is said to have had over a thousand dollars on his person. The belt was missing from the body, and nearby, as though dropped in the hurry of departure after the crime, were found a hundred dollars in notes. The place where the murder was committed was by a lonely path, not far from the main road, but surrounded on all sides by undergrowth and in a depression between two small hills. He was killed instantaneously by one blow from an ordinary working parang—since dis covered—inflicted from behind on the base of the skull, and severing the spinal cord. Two arrests have been made. Reports have been received of an epidemic in the Tinjar and several deaths are said to have occurred. Medical assistance will be sent as soon as possible. The death was reported on March 17th of Tama Unyang Balan Ubat, the headman of the Long Belukun tribe living at Long Selahan, between Long Akab and Lio Matu. Rumah banyan, an Iban house of thirteen doors in the Bakong river, was completely destroyed by fire during the absence of all the inhabitants on their farms harvesting. Not a single person was in the house at the time so that no one can say how the fire originated. Apparently the property lost was not considerable since the house was old and many of the belongings had been moved to farming huts preparatory to building a new house. Up-river Agent Sulimin handed over his duties in the Tinjar at the beginning of the month and proceeded to Lio Matu on transfer on the 10th. Ikit, the Agent at Lio Matu is to do duty at Beluru. The up-river natives in the Baram district have almost finished harvesting, but the Dayaks are only in the middle of it. The latter would appear to have good harvests whilst the former at least have sufficient for their needs. Reports are good from the top villages in the Tinjar where harvesting is still in progress and cannot be finished without help from other villages. The vegetable garden in Marudi has been taken over by the Agricultural Department. The output remains satisfactory, and seeds arc continually dis tributed amongst the natives. On March 13th Lee Ah Bee. Court Writer, Baram, was transferred fur duty in Miri. He has been in the Baram district for nearly seventeen years, and his knowledge of the natives themselves and of their customs is for a member of the clerical service unique, and has proved of great value in his work. His departure is a great loss to the station, but be leaves many friends behind him. and an able successor in Mohamad Yussoff. The latter has become Court Writer and bis former work has been taken over by Abdul Manan, who arrived on transfer from Miri on March 15th. During the month one case of house-breaking with intent to commit theft was reported at Limbang. Owing to the fact that there was insufficient evidence, and that what evidence there was was completely contradictory, no conviction was obtained. Owing to all natives in the Limbang District being busy on their farms, few have been down during the month. With the exception of the far up-river people all taxes, gun and exemption, are now in and it is hoped to finish the collection by next month. During March the District Officer, Limbang, paid a short visit up the Sungei Lubai from 20th to 22nd to Rumah Ubong. where he met Penghulu Wee. There was nothing of importance brought up. The inhabitants appeared happy and con tented, and get amazingly good harvests considering the ravages by pigs, etc. The three Kadayans who absconded after theft from Lawas Estate were duly extradited from Labuan under the provisions of the Fugitive Offenders Act. They were then tried, convicted and sentenced to imprisonment in Lawas. Below are extracts from a report by Mr. A. R. Snelus, Officer-in-Charge, Lawas “I visited Ulu Tongoa, Ulu Trusan and the Bah during the month and was away almost three weeks. This trip entailed 17 days con tinuous walking and consisted chiefly of climbing innumerable hills in virgin jungle. "This will bo the subject of a separate report, and so it will suffice here to say that I found all well and quiet amongst the Muruts, who are busily engaged in harvesting, and received no complaints of any importance. Crops are nearly all good—some excellent—only a very few which were planted late being spoilt by the long drought during February, and all up-river Muruts expect to have ample for their year’s needs. Pigs and deer have caused a certain amount of damage, but in most cases the wisdom of foresight was exercised and more was planted than was absolutely neces sary for the year's supply. This is only too easy for these Muruts with large tracts of virgin jungle at their disposal. “The new regulations whereby adult bachelors are also now required to pay tax seemed to have scarcely sunk in, and I collected the names of some 60-70 new tax-payers while up country. “Down-river Muruts, Kadayans and Bruneis were also busy harvesting during the month and few were seen in the office. However, their headmen have been bringing in tax very satis factorily. “While up-river I enquired why the Muruts had entirely ceased collecting jungle produce and was everywhere met with the reply that prices are now too poor to make it worth their while bringing down heavy loads over the long distances involved. Apparently there is nothing to be done but to wait for prices to go up." Lawas (Sarawak) Rubber Estates, Ltd., exported 20,930 lbs. of dry rubber during the month. The pupils from Trusan have still not returned to school since Chinese New Year, and consequently attendances at the Chung Hua School remain decidedly poor. The Committee has been urged to make an effort to improve these low figures. The majority of natives in the Bintulu District are reported to have now finished the harvest; in most cases the harvest is satisfactory while not being a bumper crop, and there should be very few who have taken any trouble with their farms who have not got sufficient padi to last them for the year. About eight more kampong lots across river at Kampong Kallang, Bintulu, were demarcated during the month ; this is good land and natives are making quite a good show cultivating pineapples and the like. On Monday, March 29th, at about 5 p.m., a case of murder was reported in Kampong Sanai Lair, Bintulu, one Allih bin Sutir having killed his father with a parang in Sutir’s house; he resisted arrest for about half an hour, but later gave himself up to Awang Abil, Native Officer. The enquiry was duly held and Allih was charged with murder under section 302 of the Penal Code and th minutes of enquiry sent to Kuching. The fishing industry at Bintulu has been slack during the month. Apparently this is due to the drought; the water near shore is too warm, and all the fish are said to have gone a long way out to sea. Below are extracts from a report by Mr. A. R. Snelus, Officer-in-Charge, Lawas, on a visit to Ulu Trusan and Bali, Limbang. “Leaving Trusan on March 8th accompanied by a Lance-Corporal and one constable, we boated for a day and a half as far as Kuala Tengoa and then took to our feet. We arrived at the Bah on the afternoon of the 17th, after climbing an interminable succession of hills and travelling chiefly through virgin jungle. Discounting the innumerable leeches—and counting them is an almost superhuman task—the going for those with no loads on their backs was very pleasant. We were favoured with fine weather; walking in old jungle is delightfully cool and the route crossed mountain streams fairly regularly, the first and last of these being great gains in our favour since we had to camp out on five of the nine nights. “Houses were few and far between, and most of those we passed and called at were only small sulaps, invariably disgustingly dirty and fre quently unnecessarily far from water. The occasional larger houses of 4-5 doors were in an equally decrepit state of repair, but somehow managed to give the appearance of being cleaner, possibly because they have a chance of being aired. We did, however, spend one night in a strong, substantial and comparatively clean loug- house; but it was a house of Tagals, not Muruts, as was only to be expected! Incidentally, it is strange to find these Tagals all alone away up in the Ulu Trusan. The next nearest house of their race is in the Ulu Lawas Besar, while their community is really established at Ulu Merapok; but with these they hold no communication nor intercourse. Apparently they arrived from Dutch Borneo about 40 years ago quite independent of the others, and settled down immediately in the Ulu Trusan. Their members have since dwindled and there remains but the one house now. They have farmed this year on the opposite bank of the Ulu Trusan and have erected a magnificient swaying suspension bridge of rotans as their means of passage over the river. "I spent two nights and a day at T.R. Paran Sakai’s house in the Bah and found all well. All manner of business was discussed, all adults visiting the headman's house in the course of the day, and amongst other things a census of the population was taken. This disclosed a total of 15 variously-sized existing houses, and a popu lation of 318 persons of whom 65 should be paying tax. The latter figure was to me at any rate a surprise! “Except for those normally occurring ns the result of old age, there have been almost no deaths in the past 2-3 years. This again was a surprise, as I had arrived expecting to hoar a talc of woe and to be met with endless requests for medicine. But it seems that the general health has been remarkably good since the lust great epidemic about three years ago. Kurap is negligible, and the general appearance of the people in the Bah is noticeably healthier than those living down river. Diseases exist, hut are not at the moment prevalent. They seem to break out as epidemics in cycles, or at least periodically, when great havoc is naturally caused owing to the people’s communal manner of living. “Marriages, however, remain nearly 50% barren. “The Bah valley is most attractive, and provides a most refreshing contrast to the interminable dense jungle which has to be traversed to reach it. Situated on a plateau some 3,500 feet above sea level, the valley is about 4 miles long and half mile wide, being enclosed on both sides by hills about 200 feet high. Any land which is not cultivated with swamp padi on a proper irrigation system consists of scrub, fern and moorland, strikingly reminiscent of some heath at home. “Apart from a few matters of debt, which will have to be decided in court, there were no cases to settle, nor were there any complaints. These people in the Ulu Trusan seemed very happy and sufficiently prosperous. They have mostly had an excellent harvest; some, such as the Penghulu himself, reckon they have almost enough padi to last two years, but it obviously won't! Its other uses, apart from being eaten as rice, are too attractive! Here, too, there had been few illnesses and almost no deaths since the great epidemic of 2-3 years ago, and everyone was looking very healthy. “I discussed the question of rhinoceros in the neighbourhood with the Penghulu, who is a famous hunter of these beasts, and ascertained their haunts. He told me he was on to the tracks of one now, but that there were probably only four or five left on this side of the border, and so he requested permission to go over to British North Borneo—only an hour away from his house —and have a shot at the plentiful stock over there. This was not granted. “On my way back from the Ulu Trusan, 1 made a wide detour to take in the Ulu Tengoa. There are some dozen houses in this region, but all are very small, dirty and widely scattered. Padi crops here had not been so good, chiefly because they were planted late and so came in for the long drought in February and March, but the usual variety of vegetables had been planted and so there is not likely to be any actual scarcity of food. The Muruts are generally very wise in supplemen ting their padi crops with several kinds of vegetables. “We came in for a good deal of rain in the last three days of the trip, which made the going not so pleasant, aud the coolies—three of them had previously dropped out at various points—were glad to drag their weary bodies into Lawas on March 26th. 1 had hoped to walk across country from Tengea to Kuala Maputeh and then come down river from Ulu Lawas Besar, but the Lance- Corporal and my cook both had legs poisoned from festering leech-bites, and the coolies were worn out. so I decided to take the shortest way back to Lawas." “The above comments provide one instance of the difficulty of administering the Muruts—in this District at any rate—if they are allowed to continue in their old ways. The smallness of the houses, thus implying the scarcity of adult males, and the normally long distances between houses make it impossible to obtain a relay of coolies to carry the barang on a long trip of this nature. Permanent coolies have to be engaged down river to make the round trip, and these are poor specimens no longer used to climbing a hill at all, so that it is no wonder they fail to stay the strenuous course. One thing is evident : it is impossible to carry out adequate administration of the Muruts in this District under existing conditions. Drastic changes—probably innova tions are required. The only alternative, as far as I can see, is a severer type of Dayak administration. Since they themselves are so apathetic, constant supervision is required, which under the present circumstance it is impossible to give on account of the scattered nature of their houses, which straggle over a large area of difficult country, and a lack of funds and staff. If the general standard of health is to be improved I agree that administration on Dutch lines is probably the most effective method. And this embodies regulations and practices with which many of the Ulu Muruts are already vaguely familiar, for they are frequently being visited by Muruts from over the border, when such matters are discussed ; further. I consider it would be less antagonistic to their present customs than administration on Dayak lines, for under the Dutch system they need not be dragged down river and forced to build long houses. But it must be understood that Dutch administration would entail considerably heavier expenditure than is at present permitted, and that the Native Officer staff would have to be increased.’’ CRICKET. MIRI v. KUCHING. The annual match was played at Miri over the Easter week-end and resulted in a win for Kuching by the narrow margin of 32 runs. The Kuching team arrived in Miri by the Maimuna. kindly lent by His Highness the Rajah, in the early hours of Saturday morning and play Commenced shortly after nine o’clock. Kuching lost the toss and were sent in to bat, Crossley and Digby opening to the bowling of Tyrell and J. C. Clarke. Tyrell's first four balls worried Crossley considerably and the fifth took his wicket. Digby opened with confidence, driving the first ball of J. C. Clarke to the boundary, and continued to knock up a very useful 47 in an innings which was undoubtedly the outstanding one of the match. With clean, easy strokes he scored freely all round the wicket and but for very good fielding on the part of the Miri team his score would have been much higher. There was little of note in the batting of the remainder of the side. Reid, after scoring a boundary, tapped the next ball gently back into the bowler's hands; Hammond, after scoring 1, was out to a fine catch by Eagle at cover point off Lee; Selous was caught in the slips without opening his score ; Benson in his 13 drove 3 balls round to leg to the boundary and was caught trying to drive another in the same direction; Mitchell's 13 consisted of 3 fours and a single; Trechman worked hard for his 5; Gas coigne ran one and was saved by a faulty throw-in from being run out in the effort, only to step across his wicket to a hall from Lee shortly afterwards and retire l.b.w; Murray, after storing 3, skied one for Pemberton to catch, leaving Elam without a partner after he had scored 7 and seemed quite well set for a good innings. The Miri fielding and bowling were of a high standard, Lee being the outstanding bowler with 5 wickets for 80. F. Clarke, the Miri Captain, had the misfortune to injure his leg and had to leave the field half way through the innings, Pitt-Hardacre going on as substitute. Talbot and Ager opened the Miri innings, Talbot facing the bowling of Gascoigne whose first over was a maiden. Ager was bowled by Trechman in his first over which was also a maiden. The next 3 wickets fell in rapid succession and at the luncheon interval, after 25 minutes' play Miri were 4 wickets down with only 9 runs on the board. Tyrell joined Talbot at the wicket after lunch and with only 3 added to the score was caught by Reid off Hammond. For the next wicket Price and Talbot put on 20 runs, the best stand of the innings. Price batting with confidence. The remaining 4 wickets came quickly and cheaply, only 12 runs being added and in a brief innings of less than 2 hours Miri were all out for 44 of which Talbot contributed 18 carrying his bat right through, his batting including some exceptionally good strokes. Hammond handled his field extre mely well and his numerous bowling changes were well rewarded. Gascoigne and Selous were the outstanding bowlers. 0, 0, 4, 0, were the respective scores of Kuching’s first 4 batsmen out in the second innings, the score standing at 10 when the fourth one came out. Ager and Roberts were the bowlers responsible for this slaughter and it looked as if Kuching would be all out for a mere song. Fortunately Crossley decided to avenge his 'duck' of the first innings and settled down to bat in fine style. At close of play on Saturday Kindling had 7 wickets down for 42 runs. Play was resumed on Sunday morning at 9.25 a.m. and the remaining 3 wickets were disposed of by 10 o'clock for an additional 20 runs. Crossley came out 10th wicket down to a ball from Roberts who in his previous over had taken 2 wickets and whose average for Sunday morning was 3 wickets for 5 runs. Miri started their second innings requiring 115 runs to win. Talbot and J. C. Clarke were the opening bats men and Talbot faced Gascoigne for the first over which was a maiden. Trechman bowled to Clarke at the other end and 3 runs were scored in this over. In his second over Gascoigne claimed J. C. Clarke’s wicket with a catch by Elam behind the wicket. The score now stood at one wicket for 3 runs, remarkable as the best first wicket stand of the match. Talbot again batted well coming out fifth wicket down with 27 to his credit. Gascoigne bowled excellently, serving up fast, good lengthed balls with an effective break in from the off. With barely an hour to go and Miri with 9 wickets down and some 40 runs to get, it began to rain heavily and the teams had to seek the shelter of the Club House. It is another tribute to the long-established sporting spirit of the Miri side that when they examined the pitch some few minutes later they decided it was fit for play. The teams returned to the field and Gascoigne bowled to Lee. Three runs were added and then, with the score at 82, Batcheller succumbed to Gascoigne’s fourth ball. Thus ended another very enjoyable inter-station tussle. The standard of cricket generally was not very high, but from a spectator’s point of view it was last and full of interest from start to finish. The batting honours go to Talbot, Digby and Crossley, and the bowling to Roberts, Lee, Ager, and Gascoigne.—'Contributed.') Wickets fell.—1—3. 2—8. 3—28. 4—37. 5—56. 6—61. 7—62. 8—63. 9—65. 10—82. BOWLING—KUCHING. 1st Innings.—Gascoigne 8 for 12, Trechman 1 for 12, Hammond 1 for 2, Reid 1 for 4, Murray 1 for 2, Selous 8 for 7. 2nd Innings.—Gascoigne 6 for 26, Trechman 0 for 12. Benson 1 for 12, Hammond 1 for 11, Selous 0 for 5, Reid 1 for 11. A water polo match after cricket on Saturday resulted in a win for Miri by 7 goals to nil. On Sunday afternoon Kuching defeated Miri at Hockey by 2 goals to 1. 