The Sarawak Gazette WEDNESDAY. SEPT, 1st. 1937. Acknowledgements. Mr. Ong Sze Chan tenders his best thanks to all relatives and friends for their letters of condolence, wreaths and attend ance at the funeral of his beloved mother, the late Mrs. One Hap Hin. Mr. En Thiam and Madam Terejih beg to tender their thunks to all friends and relatives who sent wreaths and letters of condolence during their recent bereavement and also those who attended their beloved and loving daughters funeral on Social and personal AUGUST. We are informed that unforeseen circum stances have caused His Highness the Rajah to postpone the visit to Pontianak announced in our last issue. His Highness, who is due to reach Singapore by s.s. Comorin on October 8th. now intends to arrive in Ku ching by the Vyner Brooke on October 11th. We offer our congratulations to Mr. H. M. Calvert, Treasurer of Sarawak, on his pro motion to the post of Financial Secretary, Staff Class A Mr. E. Parnell, Government Secretary, becomes Chief Secretary, thereby reviving a title that has lain dormant since 1931. Dr. W. Hutchison, having resigned his appointment, as Chief Assistant Medical Officer, left Sarawak on August 7th, accom- panied by Mrs. Hutchison. We wish both Mr. and Mrs. Hutchison all success and good fortune in the future. We hear from London that the marriage of Mr. A. Macpherson, which was announced for July 28th, did not take place. Mr. Macpherson is due back from leave on November 22nd, and will be appointed Assis tant Secretary (Secretariat) vice Mr. N. E. Hughes, who relieves Mr. J. O. Gilbert as District Officer, Bintulu. Mr. Gilbert pro ceeds on furlough on October 19th. We deeply regret to record the death, which took place at the General Hospital on August 13th. of Mr. H. E. Davidson. Mr. Davidson, an old Harrovian, an ex-cavalry officer, and a nephew of the late Archbishop of Canter bury. came to the East shortly after the South African war and for a time served on Dahan Estate, Upper Sarawak. Later he held several planting appointments in Malaya, returning to Sarawak in 1924, when he set tled down at Sungei China, Matang. Mr. Davidson (universally known as “George Washington,’’) was a man of great erudition who possessed an encyclopaedic knowledge of many subjects. He was a well-known charac ter in Kuching, where he will he greatly missed. The funeral, which took place the same afternoon, was attended by a large number of Europeans and Natives. Two Service visitors to Kuching during the month were Major Vinden and Captain E. F. Benjamin. R.E., both of Fort Canning, Singapore, who passed through on their way back from the North. We congratulate the Rev. Father A Klerk. Rector of the R. C. Mission. Kanowit, on reaching the 40th anniversary of his arrival at the Mission. An account of the celebra- tions which marked this event will be found under Third Division News. We welcome to Sarawak Dr. M. L. Bynoe, of the Malayan Medical Service, and Airs. Bynoe. who arrived in Kuching on August 23rd. Doctors V. Thambipillai and Abdul Samat. of the same service, arrived on the same date, and have been posted to Kuching and Sibu respectively. Another new arrival to whom we extend a welcome is Mr. R. Davidson, of the Chartered Bank, who arrived from Singapore on August 20th to take over from Mr. W. Philp, who sailed on furlough a few davs later. We are glad to hear that H.M.S. Herald (“The Packetvaart”) will resume surveying Operations in Sarawak waters on Monday, September 13th. and will remain until October 28th. spending week-ends at Pen ding. Mr. J. C. B. Fisher returned from furlough on August 3rd. and left the same day to relieve Mr. S. G. Hansom as Assistant District Officer. Sibu. Mr. Hansom has been appointed to act as District Officer. Simang- gang, and Mr. Ditmas. who formerly filled that post, has gone to the Lower Rejang as Assistant District Officer. Mr. H P. K. Jacks, who was formerly doing duty at Sarikei, has been transferred to Simanggang. Mr. K. H. Digby, who for some months has been attached to the Secretariat for special duty, has now been appointed Officer-in- Charge, Serian and Samarahan. vice Mr E. H. Elam, who has relieved Mr. P. Scott as Acting District Officer, Miri. Mr. Scott sailed on home leave on August 27th. Outstation visitors to Kuching during the month included Mr. J. B. Archer, Resident, Third Division, and Mr. D R. Lascelles, District Officer, Kapit. The latter came down for medical treatment and was in the general hospital for some days, returning on the 23rd. Mr. and Mrs. E. O. Bruce, the first of the outstation Race week visitors, arrived from Miri on August 28th. Rajak bin Haji Udin, who passed away on August 27th, was a well-known character in Kuching He was a syce as well as a jockey of no mean ability, and rode for His Highness the late Rajah and present Rajah. His first winning mount was “Milksop” in 1892. and he was the most successful jockey in the Autumn Meeting of 1927 with three firsts and six seconds. Rajah was a brother of Jara-ee. who was Master of both H.H.S.Y. Zahora and H.H.M.Y. Maimuna, and Sudin. sometime Tua Kampong of Samarahan, and a parr owner with Mr. H. B. Crocker of Snipe, a famous racing boat which took prizes at many Sarawak Regattas. Sarawak Rubber Estates, Limited. Report of rhe Proceedings at the Twenty-fifth Annual Ordinary General Meeting held at the Office of the Company. 143-149, Fencburch Street, London, E.C.S. on 13th July. 1937, Mr. John Kenneth Henderson (the Chairman of the Com pany) presiding. Air. G. A. AVigney, F.C.L.S.. the Representative of the Secretaries (The Borneo Company, Limited), having read the notice convening the meeting and rhe Report of the Auditors, the Chairman said : The Directors’ Report and Accounts having been in your hands for the prescribed period, I will, with your permission, take these as read. Due mainly to much improved prices for our commodity, the accounts under review show con siderably improved results over those of recent years. The profit for the year after providing £1.500 for depreciation, amounted to £10,087. 8s. 8d. against £8,955. 18s. 9d. last year. Including the amount of £2.277. Os. 7d. brought forward, the credit at Profit and Loss Account was £12,364. 9s. 3d., from which it is proposed to pay a final dividend of 4 per cent, which with the 3 per cent, received last January, both less tax. will absorb £6,345. We also propose to place £2,999. 18s. 3d. to "Reserve for Taxation and £1,500 to a Reserve for Equalisation of Dividend—I shall have more to say about this latter sum in a moment. An amount of £2,219. 11s. is thus left to be carried forward. Turning to the Balance Sheet you will note that more detailed information regarding Estate Pro perty Account has been given, as your Directors considered this would be of interest to Share holders. It will be observed that additions to your property to 31st March last, which was valued in 1925 at £118,856 amount to £2,641, while amortization and depreciation to date total £30,356. The balance of this account at 191,142 gives a conservative valuation of £34 per planted acre, even allowing for the fact that the earliest of our plantings are now 30 years old. The financial position is strong, British Govern ment Investments and cash amounting in all to £45,934. 12s. 7d. In spite of a large increase in the number of tapping holidays, imposed by the Sarawak Govern ment, as advised in the report, and although prohibition on export of all grades of scrap rubber continued throughout the year, the crop harvested amounted to 638,266 lbs., an increase of 2.194 lbs. on last year. Abandonment of rotational tapping, mentioned in my last address, contributed to this satisfactory result. In regard to the vexed question of assessment, one of your Directors—Mr. Malcolm, visited Sarawak at the beginning of this year and went into the matter with Government officials, pressing our claim for a just and equitable allowance. We are also much indebted to him for the thoroughness with which he entered into the various details with the Manager on the spot. I am now able to inform you that the Committee set up by the Government is going ahead with a scheme of assessment and hopes to have this in operation early in 1938. But until assessments to individual estates have been granted, the Govern ment will continue to impose tapping holidays. During the first nine months of the current financial year four periods have so far been fixed totalling 106 days in all against 99 days for the same period last year. With the number of tapping holidays increasing and further advances in wages, some rise in costs in the current year appears inevitable. Invetigations by the Assessment Committee, we understand, have revealed that the total area under rubber in Sarawak is far greater than was estimated when the international restriction scheme was first considered, and the disappointing fact is that Sarawak's exportable allowance is decidedly lower than would have been the case had she been assessed on her true capacity. This state of affairs must almost certainly continue until the end of the present international regulation scheme at the end of 1938, and assessments made by the Sarawak Government to estates in its territory meantime will necessarily be on the low side. It is therefore anticipated that this Company may possibly have to pass through a somewhat lean period during 1938, and your Directors have deemed it prudent to create the reserve for equalisation of dividends already referred to. to cover that period. It is hoped that a renewal of the Rubber Regu lation Scheme will be agreed to in due course, and that Sarawak will then receive a much enhanced quota, commensurate with the country’s productive capacity. Our Visiting Agent recently reported favourably on the Estate, which is generally in good order throughout. You will have seen from the details of the planted acreage given in the report, that much of our rubber is upwards of 30 years old. and as intimated to you last year, the Board have in hand the question of manuring with chemical fertiliser certain areas where it is considered this would have a beneficial effect, and the replanting of other areas in which any alternative treatment would be uneconomic But this is a question which cannot be undertaken until the available supply of labour is considerably easier than at present. Our Manager has just, recently paid a visit to Sumatra and Malaya, during which he has made a study of the latest developments in connection with cultivation, manuring and replanting, which will be of great assistance in dealing with these matters on our own estate, on up to date lines. As regards labour, I am glad to say that our Manager has been able, in face of considerable difficulties, to retain a force which is just sufficient for present requirements, and we may consider ourselves fortunate in the circumstances. With regard to the general outlook the statistical position of the industry is much improved and if consumption is maintained at the present level a rise in the price of Rubber appears more likely than a fall, in which event the Company should be able to showed fair profit during the present financial period. In conclusion, I am sure you will agree that our best thanks are due to the staff on the Estate for the efficient service rendered by them during the year, and to our Agents at home and abroad for their constant care and attention at all times. I will now propose :—“That the Report and Accounts as submitted be approved and adopted,’’ and I will ask Mr. Malcolm to second the resolution. After that I shall be pleased to deal with any questions you may care to ask. There being no questions, the Chairman put the motion to the meeting, and it was carried unanimously. The Chairman moved :—“That a final dividend be declared for the year ended 31st March, 1937, of 4 per cent., less tax at 5s. in the £, payable on the 31st July. 1937, to Shareholders on the Register on 7th July. 1937, making with the interim dividend of 3 per cent, paid on 30th January’. 1937, 7 per cent., less tax, for the year.” This was seconded by Lieut.-Colonel Harvey and carried unanimously. The Chairman then proposed, and Mr. Malcolm seconded the re-election of Lieut.-Colonel J. Harvey, D.S.O., as a Director, and this was carried unanimously. On the proposal of Mr. E. Isitt, seconded by Captain E. R. Clutterbuck, Messrs. Turquand, Youngs & Company were re-appointed Auditors at a remuneration of 40 guineas. At the invitation of the Chairman. Mr. Malcolm gave a short account of his visit to the Estate, which, thanks to the excellent work of the Estate Manager, appeared to be in first-class condition. He also referred to the scheme of assessment now being worked out in Sarawak. It was to be regretted that until the present Restriction period ended, the Company's production was likely to be seriously curtailed. The proceedings then terminated. British North Borneo (Chartered) Company. THE PRESIDENT’S SPEECH. We print below extracts from the speeches of Major-General Sir Neill Malcolm, K.C.B., D.S.O., and Sir Andrew MaCFadyean, at the one-hundredth General Meeting of the shareholders of the British North Borneo (Chartered) Company held at River Plate House, Finsbury Circus, London. E.C-.2, on Tuesday, June 15th, 1937 :— THE CHAIRMAN : Ladies and Gentlemen, I now rise to move the adoption of the Report and Accounts for the year 1936. The outstanding feature, as I suppose I need hardly say, is our return to the list of dividend pay ing Companies with a modest distribution of 2 per cent. The last occasion upon which we paid a dividend was for the year 1928, when the distribu tion of 3d. a share, or 1 per cent. only, was made. It is perhaps appropriate that we should resume the payment of a dividend to-day. because this is the hundredth Meeting of the Company. 1 have been looking up our records and find that the first pro forma Meeting of the Company was held on the 3rd October, 1882. Of the authorised Capital of two million pounds, just over £425,000 had at that date been taken up, of which £300,000 had been paid to the Provisional Association on account of Lands and Properties taken over from them. The Borneo Revenue for the first 18 months of our existence, that is to say, to the 31st December, 1888, was just over £13,000. For the year under review the Borneo Revenue was £311,585, and our total capital, including loan capital, is £3,040,185—so there has at least been some expansion. Looked at purely from the dividend paying point of view, I am afraid the record of this Company is not exactly of the best, but the shareholders have at least the satisfaction of knowing that their money has con verted one of the most backward countries of the world into an important producer of some of those raw materials which the world needs. At the Meeting in respect of the year 1928 I in dicated that the Court would not have recommended even that small dividend of 1 1/2 per cent, had they not had reason to feel confident that they would be able to maintain, or even increase, the return in the com ing years. All those hopes and ambitions were, as I need hardly remind you, rudely shattered by the world slump, and it is only now, after the lapse of 8 years, that we are in a position to offer you this small return for al! your patience. Even to do this much we have had to take nearly £5,000 from the carry forward, but this we have felt justified in doing owing to the encouraging revenue returns for the first four months of the current year. Apart from rubber, and I need not emphasise what an important item that is in our activities, practically all our other exports have improved, as the result of better world conditions. In explana tion of the tables on the last page of the Report, I may mention, drawing your attention to particular items, that timber exported has gone up by over a million cubic feet and 17 per cent, in value; Copra is very well up; Dried fish has increased by nearly 40,000 dollars, whilst the figures for Cutch are the best we have bad since 1929. All this is encouraging, but we have a long way to go yet before we are anywhere near the figures of our best years. Indeed, the total exports for the last year are considerably less in value than that of rubber alone in our best year, 1925. But at that time rubber averaged just under 3/- a pound—a price which under the present system of control is hardly likely to be realised. However, the points I really want to make clear now are, first, that improvement only began io make itself felt during the second half of the year under review, that there is plenty of scope for further improvement in this, and coming years, and that even with our revenue much lower than it was in our peak years, we have a substantial surplus owing to economies which we have been able to make with the result that our expenditure has decreased from £336,765 in 1928, the last year for which we paid a dividend, to no more than £250.327 last year. During these eight years the cost of our comparable fixed charges has gone down by £20,000 a year, notwithstanding an increase of £8,000 in the Pension Fund. With reduced debts, increased investments, and more cash at the Bank, the financial position of this Company is now thoroughly sound and, with more money in circulation, the population is more pros perous. For these reasons your Directors feel justified in making the recommendation as to the payment of a dividend which is now before you. Nevertheless, while there are several—I may say- many—hopeful features in our business to-day, there is one disappointing item which I ought not to con- ceal front you. 1 have nothing encouraging to tell you about oil. Much money has been spent upon exploration, both on land and by photography from the air. Work in that direction is still going on, and will go on for some time longer. The quest will not be abandoned while any corner of the country remains to be tested, but so far it must be admitted that results have not come up to our hopes. I will not say more than that, for at the eleventh hour luck might turn. By this time next year we shall know perhaps the best aud perhaps the worst. .Any how, for the moment it certainly looks as though once more we had been thrown back upon our agricultural resources, and that being so, it is more than ever important that we should try to find some crops other than timber, rubber and copra. It is only necessary to glance down the list of exports on the last page of the Report and Accounts to realise what a very large part of our export trade is provided by those three items. Locally grown coffee is certainly replacing the imported article to some extent—it is a very good quality of coffee—but it is a long way from becoming an article of export. Tobacco is coming up again a little, and if the cost of production can be kept down, it should improve still further, hut it seems safe to say that it will never recover the place it once held as our most valuable article of export. There is. however, one crop which seems to hold out considerable promise for us in future, and that is hemp. Manila hemp is a most valuable fibre, principally owing to its property of resisting the deteriorating effect of salt water in which it is superior to sisal and all the other fibres. For all forms of marine cordage Manila hemp is supreme and North Borneo is the only part of the British Empire where it is produced in commercial quantities. Turning now to the administrative, as apart from, the financial, side of our affairs, the year under review has been one of exceptional activity largely- owing to the inspiration and energy of our Governor, Mr. Jardine. I told you last year about the investigation which had then already been started into the causes of the decrease in the population among certain of our tribes. I pointed out that the 1931 census showed that, while the native population had increased in the ten years by only one per eent., among the Muruts there was a definite decrease of nearly 20 per cent. No Govern ment having a proper sense of responsibility could disregard such a state of affairs as that, or such figures. It was, therefore, on Mr. Jardine's recom mendation that we invited Dr. Shircore to come from East Africa, where he had great experience of very similar problems, to investigate and report upon the health of the tribes in North Borneo, particularly the Muruts and some of the hill Dusuns. Dr. Shircore arrived in Jesselton on the 1st January, 1936. and after visiting Sandakan, where he had many interviews with Mr. Jardine .and Dr. Dingle, he proceeded to the Interior, accompanied by Mr. Woolley. Eighty-seven days were spent in actual travelling on foot and on horse back; many days and nights were spent in the Kampongs and hundreds of patients were thoroughly examined. It is very satisfactory to know that oven the most primitive of our natives showed no reluctance to undergo medical examination, a state of affairs which bears eloquent tribute to the con fidence which Dr. Dingle and his staff have gained through patient and devoted work for many years. As the result of his labour Dr. Shircore has pro vided us with a most exhaustive report which covers 120 pages of typed matter, and made his recommen dations under their appropriate headings. Now it was not to be expected that Dr. Shircore would be able to put his finger upon any one definite and hitherto undiscovered cause of depopulation, for we have had our own medical officers working in these districts for many years. What he has been able to do is to devote his whole time to research in a way that no executive medical officer could do, and also to give us the benefit of his African experience. His recommendations which may be briefly des cribed as a combination of improved research, better medical find maternity instruction, medical and agricultural training, are being very carefully considered by the Court and by the Governor-elect, Mr. Smith, who I am glad to see here with us to-day. It is interesting, by the way, to see how much stress Dr. Shircore, a medical man, lays upon agriculture. His recommendations involve wine, but not a great deal, increased expenditure, and we must I hope that in time they will give us the results we all desire and achieve the object for which this investigation was undertaken, namely, improving the living conditions for generations yet unborn. Another very interesting development during the year has been the establishment of a native administration centre at Bingkor, which is in the interior and is close to Keningau. I should like to quote a few lines from the Governor’s first report upon his new experiment: “This centre, ’ he says, with its court house, school, chief’s rest house, market sheds and sub-dispensary will serve two chiefs and 2.700 natives. The buildings have been erected by the chiefs and people themselves without any cost to Government .... I am informed that the progress made since last May is remark- able. The native court is popular and the people are looking to their chiefs for the settlement of their disputes increasingly. ” I think you will agree that this experiment is on the right lines, is of great importance, and may have a very marked effect upon the future of our administration. It is, as you see, a further effort to place responsibility upon the shoulders of the native chiefs and follows quite logically upon the maguration of the Native Chiefs’ Advisory Council, which continues to grow in value and efficiency. Sir Andrew McFadyean : Mr. Chairman and Gentlemen : In seconding the Motion for the adop tion of the Report and Accounts 1 welcome the opportunity that is thus given to me to give you a brief account of the most enjoyable trip which I made to the Territory just 12 months ago. I say it was a most enjoyable trip, and it was a very encouraging trip—and anything but an encourag ing trip would have been essentially depressing. May I start off what I have to say to you by telling you some of the general impressions which must strike anyone making his first visit to our Territory. First of all, may I say that I have unbounded faith in the future of our Territory, provided—and I hope this is not a serious qualification—that the world in due course reverses its present policy of restric- tion and goes in for a freer interchange of goods and services. In that case I am confident there must be in the long run a larger demand aud an increasing standard of living, and more wealth—a growing demand for tropical products which we shall help to satisfy. When I say I am confident in the long run in regard to the matter, I do not mean I expect any development which would deserve the epithet of spectacular—and I think any development of that kind is to be deprecated, because a rapid expansion of that nature could only take place with the importation of a large amount of labour from elsewhere, which might radically alter the whole character of the country. And moreover, we labour under certain disadvantages out there. In the first place, we are further from markets than the great producing Territory of Malaya, and, in the second place, very likely as a result of that initial disadvantage, capital has been going over many years in much larger quantities to Malaya than to our Territory, and channels which have thus been carved out will continue to attract capital in perhaps disproportionate amounts until in the course of time the margin of advantage in diverting money to less developed territory becomes more obvious. On the other band, we have certain very considerable and real advantages. We have a very fertile soil and we have virgin resources. The surface of the country as yet has only been scratched, and we have no waste to repent. There fore, we have much more of a future than of a past. Our timber resources, for example, to take one instance, are already of great value, and with careful administration that means that the original jungle forest with 70 per cent, of what I may call “weed trees” is cut and replaced in the next forest generation by 70 per cent, of fine timber, leaving only 30 per cent, of weed timber. Those resources. I believe, will become very much mure valuable in the future. Then we have a native population which, when properly handled, shows great skill in tropical agriculture. Now may I come to the subject which I have no doubt is uppermost in your minds, namely, that of rubber restriction. As the President informed you last year, the restriction policy hit North Borneo and its Estates most severely. One of my objects was to examine this problem on the spot with such experience of the problem as I had acquired as the Company's representative on the Rubber Regulation Committee. By the time I reached the Territory about 11 months ago the signs of grievance, which had been very strong, had already somewhat diminished. It was not without, significance, that when I met a representative body of planters on the West Coast the first and most important subject which they wanted to discuss with me was the supply of labour, and only secondly came the question of restriction itself. Even though the signs of grievance had diminished, I think it is desirable that I should say a few words to you about its nature. After Regulation had been adopted, it was dis covered that the areas planted in 1925 to 1933, which was one of the factors determining the distribution of quotas amongst the Territories, had been under estimated. Now if we make the assumption, which I am sure is not 100 per cent, justified, that no similar error had occurred in the case of any other Territory, we should have been entitled on the correct figures to somewhat between 1,500 and 2,000 tons per annum more. I am not aware that anyone was to be blamed for that error. The Court used the best information which it could obtain from the Government. The Government would probably have had rather fuller and more reliable figures if, in past years, we had had more money to spend on that kind of object. To this extent, therefore, it must be admitted that the feeling of grievance was justified; but speaking quite frankly, as I did when I was in the Territory, I think a large part of the grievance was due to misapprehension, and another large part was due to other circumstances which were of a purely temporary nature. It was felt in the Territory that the territorial distribution, that is to say, the distribution between territories, should be settled by so-called productive capacity and without regard to past performances during the periods of depression. Now leaving out of account altogether for a minute the difficulty of deciding what is pro ductive capacity, without any qualification by price, it is seriously open to question whether going upon any such criterion would have made us any better off: in fact, it might have meant that our quota would have been a great deal smaller and that of the Netherlands East Indies a great deal larger. But quite apart from that, very little reflection is needed to see that, when territories which produce 80 per ceut. of the world’s supply are agreed upon a formula territory which produces 1 per cent, of that supply can hardly expect to induce those other territories to alter that formula in its interest—and all they could have decided to say was that Regulation on that basis was of less advantage to rhe Territory than no Regulation at all. One thing quite clear to me from my talk to the planters was that they thought quite emphatically that the maintenance of the Regulation was to their primary interest. The second element of grievance to which I refer was this. At the beginning of restriction the Regulation Authorities in Borneo thought it desirable to be a little more generous to the small planter than to the Estate. Now that necessarily meant that in the internal distribution of the quota allotted to the Territory the Estate came off second best in comparison with the small owner. Unfortunately this privilege to the small owner was given at a time when the Regulation Committee felt it necessary to make a drastic cut in the exportable amount, with the result that the cut on the Estates was savage. Now with the very much larger proportion which has been released by the Regulation Committee, with the very distinct rise in the price of the commodity, and with the disappearance of the special favour which was granted to the small planter, I think that the sense of grievance has practically disappeared. If the Regulation Scheme is extended, there is a hope—and. without a knowledge of all the facts which arc at present being collected from the rubber producing territories, I should not like to put it higher than that—that it may be possible to get a somewhat larger proportional quota for British North Borneo in future years. I would just like to add this, that with the amount which we are at present allowed to produce I should personally regard the value of a larger proportional quota as mainly furnishing a cushion in the event of its being necessary for the Rubber Regulation Committee to again make a drastic cut in exportable quantities. Before I leave the subject of rubber, may I say that while I saw some Estates which bad obviously suffered very badly during the depression, I saw others which to my unpractised eye compared very favourably with first-class Estates in Malaya. Thanks very largely to the zeal of Mr. Bateson, things are improving there. Our plantations are to a much greater extent well carpeted with cover, and manuring has been in progress for a very considerable period. May I in conclusion refer once more to my general impressions and give you perhaps what is my pleasantest and most abiding thought, which is that of a population well administered and essentially happy, and of a beautiful country which is one of the few remaining in the world as yet unmarred by sophistication. (Applause.) An Inaudible Message. STORY OF A MOSLEM CONVERT. "Triumphant Pilgrimage.” By Owen Rutter. (Harrap. 10a. 6d. net.) By CHRISTOPHER SYKES. In his introduction to "Arabia Deserta T. E. Lawrence pointed out very truthfully that English men whose lives are fated to the East resolve into two types: those who emphasise that they are English and unable and unwilling to be anything else; and those who go to the limit of another tendency—to become, as far as possible, of another race. The two types face their two dangers : the first can become a white bully, the second a romantic idiot. "David Chale" was a young district officer of the Sarawak administration. One day he was put in charge of a captured murderer whose solitary con finement was cruel enough to deserve the name of torture. But the malefactor made no complaint, and the only words which passed his lips were: "Allahu Akbar—God is great." The impression which this made upon Chale opened the way in his heart for a profound conviction. Eventually he became converted to Islam and determined to make the Pilgrimage. To help him in this he contracted a loveless marriage with a Moslem. (This is not so shocking to Islam as it is, perhaps, to us.) With her he overcame unbelievably great difficulties. He triumphed largely because he was so finely incapable of disillusion. He made the whole pilgrimage, and at the end of it he was deeply in love with his wife. He went back to Sarawak with her, and then they both returned to England. Chale asked Owen Rutter to make a record of the journey. as he himself "can't write." That is the story. The point of it is this : Chale is not a romantic idiot, neither is he a globe-trotter or an explorer. His conversion was passionately sincere. He believes that Islam in its purity is miles in advance of Western civilisation, more effective than Christianity. Only in Islam can he see salvation for Asia and for his beloved Malays in particular. The example of Asia revived by the Koran must purify the whole world and make the base preoccupations of Europe appear as ridiculously gross as they indeed are. He has set himself a stupendous task, and this book is intended as his statement of good faith. It lamentably fails in all but that first purpose. It is impossible, when reading this book, to laugh at its singular hero; but in its trashy, journalistic manner it falls so far below the hero's high purpose as to become quite laughable in itself. The reasons which moved Chale to Islam must have been very great and profound, but no reason is set down in this book which the silliest novelist could not have invented. The story slithers along on the dreariest cliches. "Spiritual suffocation is worse than physi cal, and is a species of mental torture insupportable An author's life, unless he happens to be in the first or second rank, is a hard one. If his books command a moderate sale, he is usually under con tract wih a firm of publishers to produce one, or more often two, books a year, and as a result he is often hard driven for inspiration. This accounts for the output nowadays of so much stuff that is frankly third rate; it accounts, also, for collabo rations of the type responsible for Triumphant Pilgrimage:- '’I've got the material,—you write it up ' says someone to an author, who is wondering which way io turn for a theme for that second annual volume so necessary to bring home the bacon. When he has heard the outlines of the story over a leisurely luncheon, he decides that there may be something in it, and that provided he is not over scrupulous regarding veracity, the yam (brightened up here and there with those little extra touches the Great. Reading Public demands) will go over. And in a few weeks the G.R.P. is given a book such as Triumphant Pilgrimage, and the author's royalties—less the split due to his collaborator—are safe for another six months. Triumphant Pilgrimage is the story of "David Chale's'' pilgrimage to Mecca, written and touched up by Mr. Owen Rutter. Why "David Chale," a former member of the Sarawak Civil Service, should use a pseudonym when his portrait figures as the book's frontispiece is a mystery, but since he has chosen to adopt this slender disguise to his identity, let us respect it. Let us also make it clear at once that there is not the slightest doubt regarding the authenticity of David Chale’s pilgrimage to Mecca. The first part of the book, however, deals with his life in Strange Collaboration. The fault is not entirely Mr. Rutter’s. Few men, not sharing Chale's conviction, would have done better. But the failure of the book, involving the failure of the hero, is really tragic, and I appeal to Chale to take the only way out. Write the book yourself. You say you "can’t write"—well, then, your mission will be forgotten in a fortnight. And, besides, a man with your determination simply can write, Your book may take you several years— what matter? And drop this "Chale" nonsense. There may be important reasons for your disguise— there are more important reasons for discarding it. You see. people don’t really care whether a half- fictional character becomes a Moslem or a devil worshipper. You would agree, with Joseph Conrad when he said that nothing is so "rotten" as adventure only for adventure’s sake. Well, until you write your own tale we know too little of your "point of honour.” —(Daily Telegraph.) to a certain type of man.” We are told that the tombs of Moslem saints "came to be worshipped just as effigies of the saints are worshipped in the Catholic Church.” In a book with a serious, religious purpose that kind of ignorant and sloppy statement simply won’t do. And Mr. Rutter is perpetually trying to heighten interest in Islam at the expense of Christianity by the use of cheap devices. Here is one : "Muslims believe that . . . little credit can be given to the copies" [of the Pentateuch Psalms and Gospels] "in the hands of the Jews and the Christians . . . There was known to be an ancient Arabic version of the Psalms . . . It was a facinating speculation. ... It might be the most important . . . document in the world." Or it might not. Sarawak, and contains so many misstatements and inaccuracies that although Mr. Rutter's account of his actual pilgrimage is no doubt substantially correct, his acceptance of these other inaccuracies, when the true facts could have been so easily verified, cannot hut cast a shadow of doubt on some of the more dramatic incidents that occur later. There is, for instance, an account of brutal cruelty to a condemned prisoner followed by a revolting description of his execution in public; this should be contradicted here and now, since it is utterly impossible that such a thing could have happened in Sarawak where the whole prison system is notably lenient, and where executions are carried out with the utmost privacy and despatch. Inciden tally. it is this incident that is stated to have led to David Chale's conversion to Islam fifteen years later. And now to the story. These, briefly, are the facts. David Chale joined the Sarawak Civil Service in 1920 and proved an exceptionally capable officer, with an unusual grasp of native customs and languages and the native point of view. He resigned on the completion of his first tour of service and joined the British American Tobacco Company, with which firm he worked for about two years. In 1927 he was permitted to rejoin the Sarawak Service, and filled various secretarial appointments in Kuching until the end of 1930. when he resigned again on being told that he would have to return to an outstation in the normal course of duty. He left Sarawak and went to Australia, where, after considerable vicissitudes, he married an Australian lady possessed of considerable means. He returned with her to London almost immediately. And now let us turn for a moment to Munirah, his Malay “wife," who shared his journey with him. In the first place, she is not a Malay st all, being the child of a Dayak father and a Melanau mother; in the second, tar true history varies considerably from that of the high-minded young lady sketched by Mr. Rutter. In about 1928 Munirah married a Maley gardener by whom she had two children. The whole pathetic account of her forced marriage with a man she loathed, and her wretchedness thereafter, is so much moonshine. She was divorced by her husband for a very good reason, and subsequently associated with a number of other men. In October, 1935, David Chale, who was on his way out to Australia to join his wife, decided to break his journey in order to pay a start visit to Kuching. He met Munirah, and suggested that she should accompany him to Singapore. His offer was accepted, and three days later he disposed of his air-mail ticket to Australia and announced as a huge joke that he intended to take Munirah not only to Singapore, but to Mecca. There followed the tiffin at the Rest House rather inaccurately described by Mr. Rutter (every one present was already well aware of David Chale’s intentions, of which he had made no secret, —indeed, as has been said, he treated the whole thing as a highly amusing stunt,) and the next day he left with Munirah for Singapore, where his con version to Islam followed. We have no desire whatever to belittle the magni tude of David Chale’s achievement in reaching Mecca, nor do we wish to cast doubts on the sincerity, now that he has made the pilgrimage, of his religious beliefs. We give the foregoing facts simply as an antidote to a vein of unpleasant smug ness-let. us not call it hypocrisy—that runs through Mr. Rutter's account of the events leading to his conversion. There is an assumption of superiority on David Chale's part that is apt to be irritating to those who know the facts,—for instance, Mr. Rutter makes Chale say that he “chucked the service” in order to enter Islam, since, had he become a Muslim publicly while in Sarawak, “they (the Government authorities) would have booted him out." This statement, which is tantamount to a declaration that the Sarawak Government docs not permit freedom of religious belief in its officers, is nonsense. It is also difficult to Ree how his con version could have resulted in his dismissal when he had already left the Service five years before. The truth is, of course, that David Chain's con version was not due to any long premeditation, but was the result of a sudden impulse that had as its object the pilgrimage to Mecca and the sensation that this would create. If he had been at heart a Muslim, as he alleges, for several years, then this fact was not known to his most intimate Muslim friends, nor was it in any degree evident in his speech or conduct. And if his contention is indeed true, then it is difficult to see how he squares this with his marriage with a Christian woman after he left Sarawak. David Chale's pilgrimage to Mecca is an undoubted achievement giving proof of character and determination, bill both he and his collaborator would have been well advised not to fog what was purely an adventure for adventure's sake’ with a mist of sanctimonious hypocrisy, for to pervert what should be an uplifting spiritual experience to the ends of profit cannot but fill even the most irreligious reader with disgust. At David Chale’s meeting with Mr. Rutter at Quaglino’s he empha sised the fact that he did not wish him to regard his pilgrimage as a "journalistic stunt." If as he said these words, a slight bulge was noticeable in the lower part of his jaw, it would not have been a piece of Quaglino’s excellent lobster, but merely David Chale’s tongue firmly fixed in David Chale’s cheek. First Division News. JULY. The Tua Kampong of Bako, Haji Mohamat, has complained of the amount of work he has to do in connection with serving of Government calls on Chinese and others in his district; he has been advised not to resign pending enquiries into his complaint. Work ou filling the shop sites at the 10th mile, Penrissen Rond, was delayed owing to shortage of dog spikes for the rails laid down, and the Resident made several visits there to try and dear up the delays. The work was well advanced, by the end of the month. A complaint was made in Kuching that an Arab immigrant was trying to get local Malays who intended going to Mecca to put. themselves in his hands, on the grounds that he could arrange for them to do the journey cheaply; he was informed that Malays proceeding to Mecca had managed very well without bis help in the past, and his appli cation to extend his stay in Sarawak was not allowed. On July 16th the Resident proceeded io Serian accompanied by the Chief Health Officer, Dr. E. M. Marjoribanks, and the Assistant Executive Engineer, Mr. T. A. Reid, stopping at 24 1/2 and 32nd mile bazaars on the way to examine drainage and sanitary arrangements. The work of filling in the back of the Serian bazaar is proceeding very satisfactorily, and as a result of the regrading of the road at Serian and the removal of the hill at the end of the bazaar, it is anticipated that there will be room for another 4 or 5 shops. On July 11th a case of attempted murder was reported in Kuching. The culprit was arrested on the 15th, but the case had not been heard by the end of the month. Accompanied by Native Officer Abang Zamhari, the District Officer, Kuching, left for Santubong by outboard motor at 4 p.m. on July 22nd, arriving at 8 p.m. after constant trouble with dirty benzine. The following morning he inspected the new boundaries of the Trengganu Malay gardens, the survey of which has been completed. There is some demand for land for vegetable growing and it is hoped to lay out lots near Sungei Sabun for this purpose. Hr also inspected sites for more kampong lots along the Sungei Maras. The question of a proper bazaar was discussed with the local Chinese, all of whom welcome the idea and are prepared to build ’type B' shophouses. The great attraction is, of course, the security of tenure offered by a IM) year lease. The proposition has been submitted to the Resident for approval. The erosionat Buntal is very bad and there seems to be little possibility of finding a suitable bazaar site. The Kampong itself is cramped for room, being surrounded by Chinese coconut gardens. At Bau an inquest on the body of Tabum anak Kinggin. a Land Dayak of Kampong Seropak, found hanging from a rubber tree, resulted in a verdict of suicide. No serious crime was recorded in the Bau district during July. The Dahan Rubber Estates harvested 6,850 lbs. of dry rubber during the month. Rainfall at Bau was 5.59 inches, and at Dahan 7.82 inches. A number of Giant African Snails were observed in Bau and Buso during the month. It is under stood that very few, if any, of these pests have been seen in Upper Sarawak up to now. The Bukit Young Company at Bau desire to extend their lease. As, however, the area con- cerned is rhe private property of Hie Highness the Rajah, this application cannot he considered. The activities of this mine cause considerable discomfort to the District Officer personally, as billing and excavating is taking place some two hundred yards from the bungalow, and further extensions would make the bungalow impossible to live in. At Serian there were four cases of illegal replanting of rubber during July, in all of which .convictions were recorded On July 21st a fight between a Chinese pepper gardener and the conductor of the bus "Joon Jee Long" ended with the conductor hitting the gardener on the head with a piece of iron. They were separated, and the gardener came to Serian for treatment. He was not seriously hurt. The Native Officer and Corporal went to investigate that night, and later the conductor was fined $50 and costs in the District Court. On 16th m.v. Peng Ann arrived at 9 p.m. at night without the Chinchn, a Chinese named Wee Chui Khin. Prom a letter received a Simunjan towkay became suspicious, and at 11 p.m. m.v. Peng Ann sailed for Kuching. After investigations in Kuching the Simunjan towkay made a report to the Police, who searched s.s. Circe and found Wee Chui Khin about to abscond to Singapore. He was arrested and on the 22nd Inspector Gregory Solosa arrived in Simunjan to collect evidence. It is understood that some of the towkays* money handed to the Chinchu has not been recovered, hut little sympathy can be felt for them since they prefer to trust large sums of monev to the Chinchu rather than remit it through the Post Office. It is hoped that this will he a lesson to the traders. Many applications for land on the Simanggang Road, Samarahan and Sadong Coast were approved. Four applications for coconut gardens from Kuala Sadong, however. had to be rejected as the land applied for was found to be padi land which the Malays of Jemukan wish to use this year. Acknowledgment. SARAWAK MISSION OF SEVENTH-DAY ADVENT1STS. The Editor, Sarawak Gazette, Kuching. SIR, The Sarawak Mission of Seventh-day Adventists desires to express appreciation to the following individuals and firms who have so generously assisted the mission this year in its public welfare work : At this time, educational work is being carried on for the Dayaks and Chinese. New buildings are being erected at the school for Dayaks located at the thirty-seventh mile Simanggang Road. This school provides education for the head, the hand, and the heart, in its programme of field work as well as its usual book work. A portion of each school day is given to the use of the changkol and parang to assist in providing food for the students. In addition to these educational efforts, medical work is being carried on in North Sarawak. At Tatau, Dr. Morrow is making more than a thousand contacts annually to treat the sick and suffering. Recently, the hospital and mission launch have been valuable aids to the Doctor in providing help during the recent influenza and cholera epidemics. Again we offer our gratitude to those who have helped in this good work and to our many friends. Thanking you for your valuable space, we remain, Yours faithfully, The Sarawak Mission of Seventh-day Adventists. J. M. NERNESS, Director. Football. The names of football clubs wishing to enter for the Chinese Cup and the James Buchanan Cup must reach the Honorary Secretary on or before September 11th. Tennis. KUCHING OPEN TOURNAMENT 1937. The results are as follows :— MEN’S DOUBLES. First Round.—Ah Hian and Kitto heat Benson and Cargill 6—0, 6—1. Kui Choon and Peng Teck beat Mansel and Baughan 6—3, 6—4. Van Houten arid Klun Siong given walk over by Large and Ed- Imonds. Ah Bee and Kheng Hai beat All Nyaw and Hap Ann 7—5, 6—4. Note.—Ah Hian and Kitto and Ah Bee and Kheng Hai were “seeded.'’ Semi-Finals.—Ah Hian and Kitto beat Kui Choon and Peng Teck 6—3, 6—1. Ah Bee and Kheng Hai beat Van Houten and Khin Siong 6—3, 7—5. Filial.—Ah Hian and Kitto beat Ah Bee and Kheng Hai 6—4. 4—6, 6—0. MEN'S SINGLES. First Round.—Kitto beat Cargill 6—3, 1—6, 6—3. Ah Nyaw beat Rothera 6—0, 6—2. Kheng Hai beat Edmund Ho 6—4, 6—3. Van Houten beat Benson 6—2, 7—5. Teck Hee beat Hap Ann 6—1, 6—4. Hassan beat Baughan 6—3, 6—4. Ah Hian beat Khin Siong 6—0, 6—1. Mansel a bye. Note.—Teck Hee, Ah Hian, Kheng Hai and Kitto were “seeded." Second Round.—Kitto beat Ah Nyaw 6—4, 6—2. Kheng Hai beat Van Houten 6—0, 7—5. Teck Hee beat Hassan 6—1, 6—1. Ah Hian beat Mansel 6—1, 6—1. Semi-Finals.—Kitto beat Kheng Hai 8—6, 0—2. Kheng Hai retired. Ah Hian gave walk over to Teck Hee. Kuching Badminton Association. The Kuching Badminton Association's Open Tournaments, 1937, were concluded on Friday, 2oth August, at the Maderasah Malay School which had been kindly placed at the disposal of the Association by the Secretary for Native Affairs. Several of the European community witnessed the finals of the "C” Doubles (Men) and Mixed Doubles, at the conclusion of which Mrs. Parnell kindly presented the prizes. Following a speech of thanks by Datn Amar, President of the Association, the party adjourned for refreshments. The tournaments may be regarded as a complete success this season since entries amounted to 137 compared with 90 for 1936, and a noticable improvement was observed in the standard of play all round. The introduction of grade “C” was necessary owing to the large number of entries from beginners. The Association wishes to thank Datu Amar, Mr. H. M. Calvert. Mr. F. L. Mansel and Messrs. Chiang Wah Onn, who kindly donated prizes. Thanks are also due to Mr. Chia Bok Gee and members of the committee whose untiring efforts contributed so much towards making the tourna ments a success. Second Division News. JULY. The Resident, Second Division, reports that a number of complications have arisen out of the prosecution, by the District Officer, Saribas, of the owners, crew and passengers of m.v. Kim Chin Lee, a vessel not licensed to carry passengers. A very serious view has to be taken of this matter, but it is not surprising that Chinese and other travellers go to any length of deception, such as hiring sampans to lake them down river to board the vessel, disembarking at Pending or the brick factory, etc., considering the appalling shortage of passenger- carrying vessels. Tn this instance passengers as well ns the owner, chinchew and crew were prosecuted and in one instance the persons concerned pleaded guilty of falsification of ship's articles. It later transpired that this was not the case, and those concerned are charged with perjury in addition to other offences. The cases have been referred to Kuching for further action. Representatives of sixty-eight doors of Entebar (Undup) Dayaks, who have started to prepare land for farming across the Netherlands Indies frontier without permission, were interviewed by the Resident. Farming by these people in Netherlands Indies territory has been strictly forbidden, and none will be allowed to farm there until, and unless, a proper arrangement has been made with the Dutch authorities. A pledge of 20 katties a door has been put in by each door concerned. For the last month or so many Dayak houses near Simanggang have been busy with begawai. It was decided that owing to the low position and liability to flooding of the old Simanggang football field a new one should be made. The site selected is to the inland side of the District Officer’s house. It was also decided that all teams wishing to enter for the annual competition should be let off entrance fees, provided those interested in these teams undertook to provide manual labour. The local Malays will also provide labour. The whole field has been cleared and practically all of it has been stumped, ditches have been made and a large proportion of earth filling from the adjacent hill has been done. It now looks ns if the new field will be a great success and it is certain to he a vast improvement on th old field, which becomes a quagmire in a very short time after heavy rain. Some Dayaks from Sebu, near Pulo Seduku, reported that seven members of their house bad collected what they thought were kulat ikan from a rotten log in the jungle, but the fungus turned out to be some poisonous variety and six of them became very ill but soon recovered; one. however, died. Towkay Kueh Kim Song (who signed himself on as part of the crew of the m.s. Kim Chin Lee) tried to commit suicide on the afternoon of July 27th on the kaki lima of the Betong bazaar. Had it not been for the prompt attendance of the Dresser, he might have died. He was sent down to Kuching Hospital in the rn.v. Yong Huat Heng in charge of the Dresser on the same night. On July 10th Tan Ah Jee (a Betong pepper gardener) attempted to commit suicide by drinking tuba. He was sentenced to three months' rigorous imprisonment by the District Court. St. Christopher Mission School, Debak. closed down officially at the beginning of the month owing to lack of attendance. All boys from that area will now attend as boarders at St. Augustine's School, Betong. On July 9th the Right Rev. the Bishop of Labuan and Sarawak left Betong for Kuching per m.v. Butan. On July 15th Father H. P. Howes arrived overland from Simanggang to replace Father F. H. Maycock who went on transfer to Kuching (via Simanggang) on the 17th. On July 3rd the body of Chindan anak Mut, 14. Minggan, near Kupang, was brought in to Saratok, death haring been caused by gunshot wound. An inquest was held and a verdict of death by misadventure returned. Deceased had been out shooting He was coming home in the evening and it is presumed be slipped up on the path which was slippery, causing his gun to explode. His death must have been almost instantaneous as the Dayaks in the house healing the gun go off went down at once to see what had been shot, and Chindan had died before they found him lying on the path. Four Dayaks from Batu Linking were convicted of stealing wet rubber from neighbouring gardens and marking it with a stencil belonging to Haji Senussi. T.K. They were sentenced to three months' rigorous imprisonment, each. Lanchang, a local celebrity in the Kalaka district reported that he had $28.00 stolen while sleeping in the bazaar. A Dayak, who was suspected, was searched and most of the money, consisting of $1 notes, was found wrapped up in a charm. The Dayak was convicted of theft and sentenced to three months’ rigorous imprisonment. A Balau Dayak living in the Roban was fined for practising surgery. He cut open a tumour on a friend’s knee, and a few days later the patient was brought to hospital with a septic leg. The Dayaks in the Kalaka district have started work clearing their farms. So far there have been no serious temuda disputes, hut the season is still early. The Rev. Father Sparrow, S.P.G., spent several days at the end of the month in Saratok visiting Boban. Funds providing, he hopes to erect a permanent school building at Roban as the school is well started and numbers are increasing. During July, Penghulu Undom and his party of Dayaks returned from their visit to Singapore. The party appeared to have done themselves proud, one of their number having been taken up for a flight in an aeroplane. The whole party went to Johore, where one of the party, because he persisted in wearing a sirat, was an object of much amusement. He became so self conscious that in order to hide his nakedness he had to conduct his sightseeing from a rickshaw. Apart from his usual visit, the District Officer arrived at Engkilili on July 19th in connection with a suicide case. Bong Sin Moi, a young woman of 23 years old, killed herself by taking tuba. It is curious to note that deceased was dressed in her best clothes. Third Division News. JULY. Below are extracts from a report by the Resident, Third Division :— “In the Resident's Court, sitting at Sibu, I dismissed a Sarikei appeal from the District Court and adjourned another Sarikei criminal case as the accused appeared to be feeble minded. Later on in the month I heard an appeal by three Henghuas against their convictions by the Sibu District Court but their appeals were dismissed. In Sarikei I held a divorce case which was adjourned. I left for Kanowit on July 9th and for Meluan on the 11th, returning to Sibu on 13th. The health of the Government servants and garrison at Meluan appears to be bad, and I have reported this matter under separate cover. Nothing of importance was brought up. except the building problems in Kanowit. The future of Meluan is difficult to foretell and until it is decided whether it is to remain as headquarters of the District it is impossible Io draw up any scheme. The absence of any shop at Meluan and its loneliness has a bad effect on the garrison, and I think that eventually it may be desirable to make Ka nowit headquarters. “On the 23rd 1 left for a tour of the Lower Rejang District risiting Sarikei, Selalang, Rejang, Belawai, Paloh, Daro and Matu. At Selalang the Island Trading Company, Ltd., complained of shortage of labour in spite of the fact that they had raised the price of bark from 20 to 24 cents a pikul. “'Rejang has lost, much of its former glory and the bazaar is in a neglected state. The rise of Sarikei has quite eclipsed Rejang and few ships stop there nowadays. “At Belawai and Paloh 1 visited the village schools. At the latter there were ten little girls, rather a surprise in a Melanau country. Daro bazaar is in a dreadful state and it ia only a matter of time before it must be rebuilt. “At Matu I visited the Bawang School; a very creditable institution. More shops in the bazaar are needed and in time I think Matu will become a model station. “I was much struck with the politeness and gentleness of Chinese in the Rejang/Matu Districts after the rather raucous habits of those in Sibu, Sarikei and Binatang. The Melanau, too, is generally a pleasant person with whom to converse and work. I returned to Sibu on 29th.” At Sibu, an inquest was held into the death of a Dayak woman named Jot anak Pedawa who com mitted suicide by cutting her throat in the Hospital, Sibu, on 22nd July. She was originally sent to hospital for observation as it was alleged she had previously attempted suicide by drinking tuba. The inquest was adjourned in order that more witnesses might, be called. The tapping holiday was observed throughout, the Third Division up to July 24th. There were five prosecutions for illegal tapping during the month and in all these cases convictions were obtained. Export of smoked rubber sheet from Sibu during July totalled 9,725.10 pikuls. The dry hot spell during July resulted in water shortage at Sibu. The quality of the water was good, however, due to the lack of any "fresh” in the river. All plant has been overhauled and cleaned. Sixteen new metres were installed and twenty-one examined and repaired. M.L. Wee Wullie was stationed at Sarikei during the month dealing with the water shortage there. H.H.M.Y. Maimuna arrived at Sibu on July 16th with a party of assessors and their staff, including Messrs. MacDonald. Ward and Corrie, and proceeded to Leba’an on the 18th. The Maimuna is acting as temporary headquarters for assessors in the Batang Rajang, moving from place to place as required. A wire from the District Officer, Oya, suggesting an outbreak of cholera in his district was received on 26th, and the House Surgeon, Mr. T. Atten borough. and Sanitary Inspector Lee Sv.ee Hock, proceeded to Oya to confirm the report. Happily the report proved to be unfounded, and gastric influenza was diagnosed. The epidemic is well in hand. The Travelling Dresser. Sarikei, Mr. Sim Swee Phoi. was away most of the month. From l‘2th to 17th inclusive he was employed in carrying out a medical survey of the health of the Dayaks under the control of Penghulu Nyipa. The result of this survey showed that the Dayaks were, on the whole, in good health, but that the birth rate was extremely low and the proportion of children to adults was under two per head. The health of the Lower Rejang district was not very satisfactory during the month, and the up river areas, according to reports received, seem to be riddled with influenza. From the 13th until the end of the month no rain fell at Sarikei, and the lack of water must have had an adverse effect upon the health of the community. Mr. H. P. K. Jacks, Cadet, accompanied by Native Officer Abang Otton, toured Penghulu Nyipa's district from 12th to 17th inclusive. Every house in rhe district was visited, thirty-one in all, hut there were no matters of any particular importance brought up. Most of the houses on the Batang Rajang are well and sturdily built, and the inmates very well to do. The issue of stencils and identity plates for tho greater part of the Lower Rejang district was com pleted during the month. Two parties were sent out on the 5th, one to tho Middle Julau and the other to the Upper Julau. The former party returned on the 29th but the latter were still away at the end of the month. By the end of the month stencil register sheets covering 11.969 holdings had been sent to Kuching. A preliminary enquiry was held in the Kapit District Court in connection with the suspected harbouring of Bong Ah Shin, an escaped prisoner; then was insufficient evidence, however, to convict the accused for trial to the Resident’s Court. On July 28th the Native Officer, Song, reported inure deaths at Rumah Tadoh and in the Berguang; the Kapit dresser has been sent to visit all houses in that locality. On July 25th twelve Ukits arrived from Dutch territory to visit their relations in the Uln Baloi. Being typical Ukits they had no belanja, and cadged from most of the Dayak houses on their way down the Balleh. Penghulu Temunggong Koh has been charged by Bak of Rumah Mindah, Oyan, with breach of agreement in connection with the marriage of Koh's daughter. As many of the witnesses appear to be rather afraid of Koh and are lying accordingly, progress is difficult, and at the end of the month the matter stood adjourned for calling of further evidence. The case is arousing much interest among the local Dayaks in view of Koh’s position. Bak also is a Dayak of good position. Penghulu Sibat has purchased a small outboard engine, and after several days' training in Kapit, returned with it to the Melinau. He is the first local Dayak to purchase an outboard, and his venture has aroused some interest amongst the people. Rattan has retained a fair price and a large quantity was shipped from Kapit during the month. On July 12th the District Officer left for Song and visited gardens in the lower Katibas and tribu taries up to Nanga Tekalit, visiting all the Dayak houses also in this area. Rumah Gias in the Takan had been deserted on account of deaths, and the people were in langkaus about three hours walk up the Takan. On July 22nd Mr. Goodfellow arrived to collect for the London Zoo. T.R. Jantieng of the Ulu Tiaw, Mujong, was sent for and on the 29th Mr. Goodfellow left Kapit with Jantieng for the Tiaw. The river is exceptionally low. and he will probably take over three days to reach Rumah Jantieng. It is understood that bekin, Bulwer's pheasant, is the specimen most desired. This is the most difficult time of the year to collect birds such as bekia, and it is a pjty enquiries were not made beforehand as to the best time for collection. Tedoug anak Baring, the younger brother of Penghulu Jugah, returned on July 27th, having accompanied Mr. N. E. Hughes to Long Nawang in Netherlands Indies territory. On July 9th at Meluan Rubber Inspector Chui Hee was sentenced to nine months' imprisonment for an offence under section 161 of the Penal Code : prisoner gave notice of appeal. In the Meluan district a small number of down river Dayaks have already commenced preparing farms for next year’s crop, but the majority of Dayaks will not commence clearing until next month. Work is progressing well on the Government Experimental Padi Fann at Kanowit a nd it appears that quite a considerable area will be planted up this year. The Acting Senior Agricultural Officer, Mr. P. Banks, paid a visit to Kanowit in connection with this project. On the evening of the 8th Mr. Banks very kindly arranged a cinematographic performance in the Fort and presented to an audience of Malays, Dayaks and Chinese a most interesting programme of agricultural films. The performance was much appreciated. A number of Dayak houses in the Kanowit and Entabai rivers were visited this month in connec tion with the rubber assessment and at the end of July primary assessment had almost been completed in these rivers. A proposed trip to the Ngemah and Poi had to be postponed as the District Officer was loo busy on rubber affairs to spare time for routine travelling : it is hoped to undertake this trip in August. The majority of batak’d Dayaks have now returned, and a number of houses have sprung up in the vicinity of Meluan Station, rather to the annoyance of the Government servants, who com plain of a decrease of fish and game. Incidentally, these Dayaks themselves are not as pleased with the move as they had anticipated, for their arrival coincided with a serious outbreak of gastric influenza, many of the newly returned Dayaks succumbing to the epidemic. The illness, which has been unjustly ascribed to evil omens, has meant extra work for Government as many of these Dayaks have abandoned the build ing sites selected by Government and scattered over the country. The District Officer has agreed to arrange to select, in certain cases, new building sites, but has made it clear that scattered dwelling huts cannot be tolerated, and must be abandoned immediately. The epidemic of influenza, mentioned in the District Officer's June report, continues in the Meluan area and cases now have been reported in the Entabai and ulu Kanowit. The health of the Government servants at Meluan causes anxiety, and on July 22nd the House Surgeon. Sibu. and a Health Official from Kuching visited Meluan to review the situation. Owing to low water it was impossible to trans port timber to Meluan and consequently the build ing programme was delayed. Work has commenced on the addition of a verandah to the Police Barracks and timber has been ordered for the Native Officer’s and Junior Service quarters. It is unlikely that the entire programme will be completed this year. The bridle path from Julau to Melurun has been made and work has started on the path from Melurun to Meluan. It is hoped to make a path from Meluan to Poi and Ngemah next month. It should be realised that though these paths will be of administrative value, especially in the event of emergency, they will be little used by the Dayaks themselves and consequently in a very short space of time will become overgrown unless adequate provision is made for their maintenance. The block houses at Nanga Entabai and Apo are being dismantled as it is considered that they now serve no useful purpose. On July 20th the Rev. Father Klerk of the R.C. Mission, Kanowit, celebrated the 40th anniversary of his arrival at the Mission. The Resident, Third Division, accompanied by a party of Europeans from Sibu visited Kanowit to attend the celebra tions. The programme included land sports. Dayak dancing and an exhibition of conjuring, and was brought to a close by a dinner at which there were present fifteen Europeans and many hundred Natives and Chinese. A great deal of time was taken up in the Mukah District Court in attempting to unravel the com- plications of a local sawmill which had received leave to operate last November, using a single saw, at Bedanga. The original prosecution was for failing to register as a company, but during the hearing 22 persons came forward with share scrip valued at $1,180.50 which the promoters admitted fully paid up. and all spent except for 71 cents. An examination of the accounts and the assets of the company in situ resulted in conviction of the promoter, one Pek Kee Hoek, for breach of trust, and of his father for abetment. No revenue was forthcoming, and Pek Kee Hock admitted having converted a large amount of this money to his own use. Assessors who were called in estimated $742.40 as spent legitimately, but the magistrates con sidered not more than four or five hundred at the most is the value of the assets. Sister Lamberts, who is a fully qualified nursing sister, arrived at Mukah during July to join the St. Anthony’s Convent, and principally to take charge of the Convent female medical ward. The Resident, Third Division, granted per mission for a subscription to be raised among local people for this female ward, which fills a long-felt want. So far $134 has been promised, and $100 in cash has been paid to the Mother Superior, Mother Alphonsus, who started the ward and who is shortly leaving for Sibu on transfer after nine years’ work here among the Melanaus. On July 25th two Dayaks from the Oya border came down and reported that many of them were ill. and some had died from a disease which they described in detail from its inception until death, which occurred after five days or so. Every symptom which they described was that of cholera, although the Dayak word for this (from a diction ary), which is said to be pedis prut, belaka, they alleged they bad never heard of. The District Officre, Oya, was informed, and the disease is said to be gastric influenza. At the end of the month some Mukah Dayaks in the Sebakong, quite near the above infected region, again reported identical symptoms, exactly those of cholera. The Dresser left to investigate bearing medicines for treatment of those infected. The Rev. Father O’Brien of the Roman Catholic Mission. Mukah, was transferred to Binatang during the month, being relieved by the Rev. Father Delany. On the night of July 7th/8th two houses at Sungei Kut, Dalat, were broken into and property to the value of $350 was alleged to have been stolen. At 6 o’clock the following evening a youth named Miseng bin Jamin was arrested at Kampong Balan and charged with the theft. Fart of the property alleged to have been taken was found in his possession. At the subsequent preli minary enquiry sufficient evidence was forthcoming to warrant the committal of Miseng for trial before the Resident's Court on charges under sections 380 and 457 of the Penal Code. Large numbers of Dayaks appeared at Oya and Dalat from time to time during the month to pur chase ammunition. Rumours of the presence of the outlaws Kenda- wang, Kayan, and Ijau in the vicinity of Sungei Baoh and Sungei Tamin were current throughout the month. On the 24th July Tuai Rumah Rampai. who lives in Sungei Baoh, admitted that a man named Ijau had been living in his house for the past eight months but denied that the man was the rebel of that name. Others, however, who have been shewn a photograph of the rebel assert that it bears a close resemblance of the man mentioned by Tuai Rumah Rampai. The latter has been ordered to bring Ijau to Dalat without delay as, whether he is a rebel or not, he is guilty of entering the District without a Dayak Pass. Dayaks in the Oya river and its tributaries com pleted their harvesting during the month and information has been received that good crops were obtained in Sungei Baoh and Sungei Tamin. Else where crops have not been particularly successful. On July 2nd Mr. G. Schiotling, Assessor, arrived in the District to assess production of all rubber holdings outside the Interior Area. In this con nection, it is interesting to note that when the Census was taken during 1935 only 1309 holdings were reported for the whole district, whereas figures now available shew that, exclusive of the Interior Area, no fewer than 1063 holdings have been recorded by the Assessor. The Interior Area has not yet been completed but at the moment of writ ing particulars of 924 holdings have been taken. In spite of notices advertising a scheme whereby aliens may take up sago land, free of rent for eight years, in an area adjacent to Sungei Labassau, no applications have yet been received. Mr. D. L. Leach, Assistant Superintendent of Lands and Surveys, Sibu, arrived in Dalat on the 22nd July to take levels with a view to ascertaining the tonnage of filling required to raise future sites of Government buildings above high tide level, and to assist in drawing up a site-plan of the station should it be decided to transform Dalat into the headquarters of the District. It has been estimated that approximately 40,000 tons of earth will be required for the former purpose, while if any attempt is to be made to improve health conditions in the bazaar, a further amount of approximately 20,000 tons of earth will be required. Fourth Division News. JULY. A somewhat serious fracas commenced at Lubok Nibong, Baram. as a result of which six Chinese were admitted to hospital with bad wounds. The gambling farms were closed temporarily, and ten offenders were each fined $25 or one month’s imprisonment, and pledged for six months. Complaints from pepper planters at Niah. that their traders have been charging exorbitant retail prices and also excessive interest on cash advances, were investigated both by the District Officer, and Mr. A. W. D. Brooke. It would appear to be a dispute identical with the one at Engkilili some years ago. Attempts to arbitrate out of Court have been fruitless, and all available traders' account books and planters' pass-books have had to be forwarded to the Secretary for Chinese Affairs, Kuching, for trans lation and examination. Mr. A. W. D. Brooke returned from a tour of the Niah and Sibuti districts on July 2nd. He left Miri on the 16th after medical treatment, preparatory to making a lour, with the District Officer, Baram, of the Kelabit country. They left Baram on the 19th, but had to return owing to the sudden illness of Native Officer Galau on the way. They left again on the 22nd, taking Probationary Native Officer Wan Ali with them, and a Dresser. A number of applications were received from Foochows at. Baram to export to China the remains of their deceased relatives and friends, but negotiations to sell their gardens fell through before any exhumations had actually taken place An artesian fresh water well, struck during S.O.L. boring operations in Luak Boy. has unfor tunately not sufficient pressure to enable a flow to be carried to the top of neighbouring lull slopes on Tanjong Lobang, where it was hoped experiments in terrace padi planting could have bean undertaken Irrigation, on a large scale of adjacent level padi land, however, could probably be undertaken by the Agricultural department if an officer could be spared to visit Miri. There arc several square miles of inferior land which could no doubt be rendered quite fertile in a comparatively short time. On July 18th a Sibuti Dayak named Singgua was admitted to the S.O.L. General Hospital. Miri, suffering from gunshot wounds accidentally inflicted by another Dayak named Ganga. As usual in these cases, the victim had been mistaken for a pig. It is, of course, very easy to mistake one’s enemy for a pig, and Ganga is now in custody awaiting trial. Singgua is not seriously hurt, however, and there is at present no reason to believe the shooting was anything but accidental. During the month there was a considerable epidemic of influenza both in the ulu Bintulu and ulu Tatau districts. In the ulu Anap. the epidemic was very bad and there were many deaths reported. Dr. R. T. Morrow of the Seventh-Day Adventist Misson did excellent work in fighting this epidemic : his Mission hospital was full up with the worst cases; in many cases sickness turned into pneumonia due to the fact that as soon as the individual felt ill. he or she generally took a bath. The Dresser was despatched twice to Tatau in order to assist Dr. Morrow and to take over extra medicines. At one period the Dayaks reported that after death the corpses turned black.—immediately people jumped to the conclusion that it was cholera, and all Dayaks al this stage left their houses. The District Officer then ordered the segregation of the Anap river, and Dr. Morrow proceeded up river to investigate, but apparently the rumours were false. By the end of the month the epidemic had started to abate and now the matter is well in hand. The District Officer wishes to say that it was a great relief having Dr. Morrow on the spot, as the Bintulu Dresser could not have been spared from Bintulu for any length pf time, due to sickness there. The work done by Dr. Morrow was greatly appreciated. Dayaks in many houses in the Bintulu District are very late with their felling for their padi farms; they all say that it is due to having to attend to their rubber gardens, but actually, in most cases, it is cither due to laziness or sickness : it should be noted that they bad no difficulty in finding time for lengthy begawais. The work on the landing ground proceeded very satisfactorily during the month. This work con sisted of the removal of all stumps, etc., in the selected strip. There was very little difficulty as regards obtaining labour, after the tapping holidays had ceased, as anticipated. The Rev. G. V. Summers of the Methodist Mission. Sibu, visited Bintulu and Sebauh on 9th to 13th July, in connection with his Mission’s work amongst the Foochows at Sebauh. The price of belian, for which there suddenly seems a terrific demand, continues to soar. At the beginning of the month split attaps were obtainable at $90 per laksa, now they are unobtainable at $110; sawn attaps are remaining at a steadier price, but sawmills cannot keep pace with the demand and it is practically impossible to obtain any attaps of any sort at the moment. Mr. D. V. Murphy. Deputy Commissioner of Sarawak Constabulary, Miri. arrived at Limbang on a visit of inspection on July 28th, and left for Lawas in m.l. Sylvia on the 30th. On the 10th, a Mr. E. H. Mickelson of Melinau, N.E.I. arrived from Labuan, his attention being to return home overland via the Bah country and Long Nawang. Owing to various circumstances Mr. Mickelson eventually decided to return home hy the way be came. and left for Brunei on the 12th. Government servants at Lawas again enjoyed good health, but Kampong people are still suffering from attscks of influenza and malaria; while the Muruts are ravaged as usual by their normal diseases. T/ In the Lawas district all natives were busy clearing their farms, when they were not waiting for the Assessor to visit their rubber holdings. Clearing is nearly everywhere completed, while some of the Tagals in Ulu Merapok have not only felled but also burned off. Down-river Muruts have been celebrating the completion of clearing in their usual drunken manner. The Assessor had a tiresome time coping with Murut down-river gardens at Trusan as, despite repeated instructions and explanations given to them, the Muruts seemed rather indifferent to the whole proceedings. The fact that they have planted various small plots some distances apart, which plots they designated all as one garden, caused a certain confusion. Mr. Willis arrived at Lawas from B.N.B. to take over the management of Lawas Estate from Mr. Thomson. The latter, together with Mrs. Thomson, is leaving for Europe on the 1st August, and, it is understood, does not intend returning to the East. 