The Sarawak Gazette. THURSDAY, APRIL 1st, 1937. Births. WOOD.—On Monday. 8th March, 1937, at the General Hospital, Kuching, to Jeanette Mary (nee Jacques), wife of Wallace Wood, a daughter (Rita). GLASS HOOPER.-At Downe Hall, Bridport, Dorset, on 11th March. 1937, to Dorothea (n e Purnell), wife of George Erskine Glass Hooper, a daughter. In Memoriam. In memory of DANIEL T. W. JAMES who passed on his way 21st March, 1936. He served all. Acknowledgment. Mr Tan Sum Guan tenders his grateful thanks to all relatives and friends for their kind attendance at night visits and at the funeral of his late mother Madam Ong Geok Lian and also to those who sent telegrams, wreaths and letters of condolence in his sad bereavement. Local and Personal. MARCH. His Highness the Rajah was absent from Kuching for two periods during the month, visiting Rejang River stations from March 2nd to 12th. and Simanggang from the 16th to 19th. His Highness was accompanied on both tours by Mr. E. Parnell, Government Secretary. Dayang Valerie returned to Kuching from a visit to Singapore on March 19th, and expects to leave for home on April 3rd. Major W. F. N. Bridges, D.S.O., and Mrs. Bridges left for Singapore on March 27th. Both will be badly missed in Sarawak, where they have made many friends. During the past few months Major Bridges has been conducting an investigation into the rubber position in Sarawak, and his report is now in the hands of the Committee of Administration. During the course of his investigation Major Bridges visited all the more important outstations and rubber-grow ing areas, and in order to see for himself what conditions are like in the interior he travelled extensively in the Ulu. Mr. B. J. C. Spurway, Acting Senior Forest Officer, left Kuching by s.s. Darvel on March 13th in order to attend the Conference of Malayan Forest Officers at Kuala Lumpur. The paper prepared by Mr. Spurway for this meeting is printed in this issue of the Gazette. On March 14th Mr. B. C. Butler, Canadian Government Trade Commissioner, and Mrs. Butler arrived from Singapore by s.s. Circe, leaving for Miri and the North the following day. We hope that Mr. and Mrs. Butler will be able to return later for a longer stay. Mr. G. St. F. Dare, Senior Agricultural Officer, left for home on furlough by s.s. Vyner Brooke on March 11th after a week or so of farewell parties. We wish him a pleasant voyage and an enjoyable leave. We welcome to Sarawak Mr. M. J. Breen, late of the Hong Kong Civil Service, who arrived in Kuching on March 8th on a special mission, and Mrs. A. F. Baughan. who arrived complete with son and heir on March 25th. Mr. and Mrs. W. S. B. Buck and family returned from furlough on March 15th, anil sailed the same day for Sibu, where Mr. Buck has taken over the appointment of District Officer from Mr. R. E. Le Sueur. Mr. Le Sueur, who has relieved Mr. F. H. Pollard as Secretary for Native Affairs, arrived in Kuching on the 19th. A correspondent sends us the following little story which is worth placing ou record :— SCENE : The dining-saloon of one of the newest Nord-Deutscher Lloyd mailboats at lunch time. An American tourist joins a cosmo politan group of passengers at one of the tables, rubs his hands in hungry anticipa tion, picks up the menu and scans with the eye of a connoisseur the long list of courses. Suddenly two strangely familiar words strike him,—“Nasi Goering”. For a moment he can hardly believe his eyes, then, thumping the table in disgust, he rises, throws down the menu and his nap kin, and leaves the table, muttering curses under his breath against politics in general and those of Herr Hitler in particular and his merry men. As he reaches the door, the head steward approaches him court eously to ask if he is perhaps sick. "Yes, I am sick!” he thunders. “Sick of your ------propaganda. It's bad enough to have to put up with it in newspapers, over the wireless, and in conversation, but when it even invades the menu, then I’ve had enough! ’’ Mr. R. W. Hammond, who is at present investigating the educational position in Sarawak, returned from a tour of Dutch Borneo and Java on March 25th. Mr. Hammond, who was given every assistance by the Dutch authorities, and who speaks in high terms of the kindness and hospitality every where extended to him, states that he had a most interesting and enjoyable trip. Before returning to Kuching Mr. Hammond was able to spend a few days visiting educational establishments in Malaya. We welcome back the Rev. Father J. A. M. Vos, Procurator of the Roman Catholic Mission, who returned from leave on March 25th. According to Father Vos, it is some thing of a relief to return to the peace and quiet of Sarawak after living for some eight months in the strained atmosphere of Europe. During the Easter holidays a cricket team from Kuching and the Third Division paid a visit to Miri, travelling there and back by H.H.M.Y. Maimuna, which was kindly placed at their disposal by His Highness the Rajah. We hope to publish a full account of the cricket match and other sporting activities in our next issue. Obituary. MISS ADA CUBITT. On February 13th, 1937, there passed to her rest, after a Jong illness bravely borne, one whose name will long be remembered by the peoples of Sarawak for her devoted life amongst the poor and afflicted of the country. Ada Cubitt arrived in Sarawak in 1913 as a missionary sent out under the auspices of the S.P.G. end worked for several years in different parts of the diocese ; in 1921, however, although not Severing her connexion with the S.P.G., sho associated herself with the Medical Department of the Government and look up her residence in a small house just outside the Leper Camp which was then situate at the sixth mile off the Rock Road. Here she became Matron, and occupied herself entirely attending to the needs of the inmates. From that time onwards she devoted her life and energy to the lepers, and when the camp was removed to Satang Island she went with it, and lived alone on the island with them as her sole companions. Her health began to fail in 1925 and she had to leave the country and return to England. Her work amongst, and devotion to, the lepers was an inspiration and encouragement which will long be remembered by all who knew her. Although perforce separated from the people of her adoption she never failed to keep in touch with her friends, and many a life has been brightened by a note of encouragement received from her since she returned to England. Her death, which occurred at a comparatively early age, was undoubtedly hastened by the strain of her life out here and the devotion and sacrifice she made on behalf of others. For die first few years in England she seemed to enjoy moderate health but latterly she was a great sufferer. Her call to higher service was not unexpected, and now that she has been promoted one can but rejoice and give thanks to God for the years of her life so nobly offered in the service of suffering humanity. R.I.P. —(Contributed.) The Reverend Thomas Buda. Thomas Buda was a Sebuyoh Dayak from Merdang. In former days Merdang was a Nourish ing mission station, but since the epidemic of sickness some thirty years ago it has been but a shadow of a shade. About forty years ago Bada was sent to St. Thomas’ School and later became a carpenter at which trade he worked for some time. It was Bishop Hose who really discovered Buda, and after his having expressed a desire to do some definite work, sent him back to his own village of Merdang as teacher and Beader. Later on he became a Catechist and was in charge of the whole district. He used to travel up the neighbouring rivers looking for opportunities of work and showed an initiative very unusual amongst the Dayaks. One day he found a hopeful spot, the village of Tai at the foot of Munggu Babi, at the source of the River Samarahan. At tins place there is a large population of Land Dayaks and in 1918 at his own earnest request, he was sent there. For several years he lived in a tiny hut built for him on the verandah of the long house of the village teaching and instructing the people. His knowledge of carpentering came in useful and after a time he had a Mission House erected and a leaf-attap Chapel. It was in 1921 that the first fruits of his labour were gathered in and some thirty persons were baptised m the river. Buda's power of leadership and his quiet steady work made him a “persona grata" in the Tai District, and in 1924 he was admitted to the Dioconate in Kuching Cathedral. He was the first Sebuyoh Dayak to be ordained. From that, time onwards the work made astonishing progress by the Grace of God and from that tiny beginning has grown a large congregation of Christians Tn 1926 he was advanced to the Priesthood at Belong and then returned to his work at Tai where to-day there stands a substantial Church in the village with a congregation of some one hundred and fifty communicants. The language of the Tai people is quite different from that of Merdang but Buda studied it and soon became quite proficient in it and translated a number of prayers and hymns, but he never managed to produce an actual prayer book in the Tai language. For some time past now Father Thomas Buda's health has been failing but he persevered unto the end, and it was not until last Christmas that he was compelled to ask permission to pass the rest of his days in his old home at Merdang. He had only been there about three weeks when one night he became very faint and his soul quietly passed away to higher service. In his work he was quiet, unflagging, and faith ful in all he did. He carried on as long as he had strength and when he was obliged to give up work, begged a private communion set to take with him in his retirement, so that the few people of Merdang might receive the Sacrament at his hands. He was one of those unobtrusive people who exercise a good deal of influence and win affection and trust from those who knew him. His body was brought back to Kuching on Saturday the 14th March, 1937, and he was laid to rest in the Cemetery, the Bishop committing his body to the grave. We thank God for one who has finished his course in the faithful pursuance of his vocation. May he rest in peace.—(Contributed.) Funeral of Madam Ong Geok Lian. Madam Ong Geok Lian, sister of Mr. Ong Tiang Swee, c.s.s., and mother of Mr. Tan Sum Guan. Mrs. Ong Hap Leong and Mrs. Kho Soon Ewe, passed away peacefully on Wednesday, 24th March, 1937, at the age of 76. She leaves behind one son, two daughters, cloven grandchildren and four great-grandchildren to mourn her loss. Her remains were interred at the new Hokien Cemetery at 4th mile Rock Road on Friday 2Gth March. 1937. The funeral procession attended by the Sarawak Constabulary Band and the Bandarsah Modern Band shirted in the morning at 9 o'clock and took the following route :—Reservoir Road, Wayang Street. Main Bazaar, Gambier Road, India Street and Rock Road. The hearse, which was tastefully decorated, was followed by the chief mourners, relatives and a very large gathering of friends, besides 240 boys and girls of the Hokien School who carried the wreaths. The procession, which was a very impressive one, was accompanied at the rear by a long string of cars and buses. —(Contributed.) An Account of A Recent Visit to China. BY S. B. AH KOON.—(Continued.) On the morning of the 21st we got up very early and after tea boarded the train for Peiping, where we arrived at 11.30. The train was crowded with passengers, many of whom were Japanese soldiers. I shall refrain from making any remarks concerning these; they are too well known to be described, and this has determined me not to proceed any further. We intended to stay in the hotel of the Travel Service of China, but on our arrival there we were politely informed that there were no empty rooms, and to come again in three days’ time; we then drove over to the Astor House Hotel, known in Chinese as Chang Ann hotel. After lunch we drove out to the city, making Chung San park our objective. Then we went to see the Thien Thang (Temple of Heaven) and Huang Kiting Yu not far from it. The Temple of Heaven is at least a hundred feet high, and its posts consist of enormous trunks of trees which have stood there ever since the time of the Ming Dynasty. The circumference of each post is about 13 feet, and both of us were unable to join our hands round them. The temple is very beautifully decorated with carvings, the beauty of which I cannot find adequate terms to describe, indeed the whole temple stands as a monument to the skill of Chinese craftsmen during the Ming Dynasty. The surrounding pavements are all of marble, since at that time cement was not known. The only marble that we see here are those so-called marble slabs that decorate some of our tables. This temple is not surrounded by a wall. The Huang Kiung Yu temple is, however, surrounded by walls which are a wonder to many of us, being about 100 yards in diameter and about 4 feet thick at the bottom. The wonder lies not so much in the size as in the fact that it has a strange capacity of conducting sound. If you stand close to any part of the wall and speak close to it, what you have spoken can be heard distinctly by another person if he stands close to the wall although he may be a hundred yards away. Each word comes through as distinct as if you were talking face to face. We were informed of this by a motor-car driver who went with us as our guide; neither of us would believe it, so I suggested that we put the story to the test. We are in a position to confirm it as absolutely true, although neither he nor any one else we asked on the matter was able to give a satisfactory explanation of the phenomenon. Many just looked wise and muttered something about legend. The Altar of Heaven, Thien Tai, was built not far from the Thien Thang and the Huang Kiung Yu. These three were built in such a straight line that one cannot but admire the ability of the architects of that time when the present measuring instrument- were unknown. The Altar of Heaven, the altar where the Emperor offered bis sacrifice to Heaven, was built of pure marble all through, in three terraces. It was said that on each terrace kneeled the high officers and bodyguards of the Emperor. We then returned to the town and drove around. Shop-houses inside the first walled city are low. and many are only one storey high. Streets are wide, and in some parts very clean, with trams and cars running, not to mention numerous rickshaws. Motor-car hire is only $1.20 an hour. After drifting in parts of the town we went to the Museum and Moi San Hill. The Museum buildings were formerly the palace of the Empress (or harem, if 1 am not too offensive). Several houses formed the palace, which was surrounded by houses of eunuchs, which in turn were surrounded by the houses of bodyguards. The whole place was encircled by a canal, and then by the wall. Up till just before the Republic, so we were told, this place was a sacred place, so to speak, and if any one not. belonging to the Court dared to go there, he would return minus bis head. But now everyone who goes there will add something to his head on returning; such are the wonders brought about by civilisation. In the old days when an order was issued it usually began— “Listen, tremble and obey!" but now the notices that are issued (there are many to be seen in any part of the town) are worded in quite a different manner. After seeing other places of interest we returned to the hotel. A strong wind was blowing the whole day, and many people used cloth to cover up their noses and mouths and women went about with veils covering their faces to keep off dust and cold. On the 22nd we hired a car for the day at $14 and at 8 a.m. we went to see the zoo. After spend ing about forty minutes there we went direct to the Summer Palace, now known as I Ho Yuan. When we bought our tickets we were asked by the Police what nationality we were; later on we asked our guide why this question bad been put to us, and we were informed that great precautions must be taken, and protection must be afforded to those of non- Chinese nationality so as to avoid any complications. Visitors to Peiping should not miss the opportunity to see the Summer Palace. It was rebuilt from foreign loans, the purpose of which was quite different. Instead of vessels floating on the seas, marble boats, floating uselessly in the Khoon Nin lake, appeared. One of these marble vessels is now used as a tea shop. Again I have to disappoint my readers in that 1 am unable to describe any part of what I saw there. You will have some idea of what the building is like when I mention that we walked through a corridor some 270 feet long, with hundreds of paintings on it and not one alike. The Museum, which is housed there, will also make you spend hours without feeling the passage of time. The watches, clocks, and jazz band instruments, are worth looking at. The theatre hall, under which is a big pond where real boats were used during the performances, is one of the many things of interest. A group of Japanese children were paying a visit to the palace. There were thirty-one in all, and none of the children, boys and girls, was more than fifteen years old. Their grown-up leader, on reach ing any point of interest, lectured to them and they listened with a seriousness one would not expect from youngsters of their age. Talking of the theatre, we were informed by the guide, a Manchu man, who had lived all his life in. this area, that in pre-republic days the audience Consisted of the royal family only, and the ministers and officers had to kneel by the other side of the ball in a special stall. Just fancy kneeling through the whole show! This guide pointed out the place where he hid himself when he viewed the performance. The Emperor’s bed-room and the throne room, etc., are open to the public now, but they are all fenced up with ropes to keep people from pinching some of the articles. It would take a book to describe all the things to be seen there, and I am afraid I have to disappoint my readers since I do not possess the pen of a Robert Louis Stevenson. The damage done by the soldiers during the Boxer rising was still very evident everywhere. Brass windows carried away and not replaced, hands of idols knocked off, and several marks of bayonet- thrusts are still to be seen. The Royal boats are also of interest. There are three of them, one for the Emperor, one for the Empress and one for the Dowager. I tried the Emperor's seat and went into each of the boats, which were made of teak wood. There is also a steam launch said to be a present from the Emperor of Japan lying there on the lake in a dilapidated condition. It is a pity that these royal boats were not properly taken care of, since though they pre kept under a boat shed all of them are no leaky and filled with water. We spent about four hours in this place, and then we went off to the Hsiang San Temple, passing on the way the Yen Ching and other Universities. Several men were seen wearing flowers on their heads. An enquiry from the motor-car driver brought the answer that these people are worshippers. There were many of them who were very old fashioned, and it was not unusual to see men of middle age wearing pigtails. Women with bound feet were also to be seen. These worshippers were all young men and girls who had just passed their teens, and it seems a pity that youth should still be in the grip of superstition. Hsiang San temple was the place where Dr. Sun's body was coffined. The exact spot where the body was kept is now locked with an iron grille, and on peeping into it one can see all the scrolls which are still there. The coffin, which is Said to have been presented by Russia, was not used and is still there lying in the corner of the temple uncared for. It is said to he made of nickel and the inside of stone. A policeman was following us at a distance all the time, and when I noticed this, I pointed it out to our guide who told me that the policeman mistook us two for foreigners. The passage leading to the upper part of this temple was locked, but at our request it was opened to us and we registered our names in the book. It is a very small passage, just enough for one to pass at a time, and pitch dark. It took about half a minute to pass through to the upper part where a good bird's eye view was obtained of the surrounding countryside. Here again, on our return, we met the same group of Japanese children. Then we went to the Huang Kiting Yu temple where again we tried the wall, and lest some one might be playing the fool with us we spoke in the Dayak language and satisfied ourselves that it was indeed no trick. For curiosity's sake we tried the outside part of the wall, but could hear nothing. After having our last look all round we went to seo the seven meteor stones which are said to have dropped from the sky. Each stone is about three feet high at the highest and about five feet wide. There are eight in all, including a small one, all are of dark colour, and to my untrained eyes looked like artificial ones, hewn out from rocks. We returned to the hotel tired but. satisfied with what we have seen. THE GREAT WALL. At 7 a.m. on the 23rd we boarded the train for the Great Wall and at 9.30 a.m. disembarked at Nankow. We engaged three donkeys as transport, and at 10 a.m. set out for the Great Wall. Until then I had never ridden a horse or a donkey in my life, and my first ride was tried on a rocky path. You will imagine how uncomfortable I fell After riding for half an hour or so I begun to understand something of the art. This journey from Nankow to the Great Wall, which we reached at 2 p.m., was very strenuous,— just think of being jolted for four full hours on the back of a donkey. At one time I came down and preferred walking. Luckily the weather was cold, although the sun was blazing overhead. We passed through hills and valleys, villages and farms. Girls, whom I am certain were born after the Republic, still had bound feet, as had all the elderly women. Pigs here are all very hairy creatures, nature’s provision for the cold, no doubt. I was expecting a group of bandits to appear and kidnap usual any moment, and any signs of people coining towards us gave me many misgivings. At Inst we reached that part of the Great Wall known as Peitaling. We went up the wall, and there sat down and opened the basket we had brought with us. We swallowed our food, which consisted of bread, roasted fowls and sausages, and irrigated our dry mouths with aerated water, which we bought there. There we sat and looked all round, choosing Dayak and Malay dialects for our language, much to the perplexity of our guide. As we sat down our thoughts went back to the days when the Chinese built this long wall of some one thousand five hundred miles. Many parts of the wall are falling to pieces, but other parts are being repaired. On the top it is about twenty- feet wide with steps going down the middle, at short distances each, leading to the inner side of the wall. There are small towers at various points, each serving as a look-out point. Afterwards we rode over to Ching Lung Chiaw train station, a short distance from the Great Wall. Here we dis missed the donkeys and their owners, paying them a dollar each to their great delight, as they only asked sixty cents each. Ching Lung Chiaw is a small train station situated in a valley and having no shop and few inhabitants. The staff of the station consisted of less than ten men. if we had disembarked originally at Ching Lung Chiaw and then gone on to the Great Wall it would not have taken us so long or meant, such a strenuous journey, and we would not have needed donkeys for our transport. When I asked our guide (a man from the hotel, who had been bom in Peiping and had lived there all his life) why he had chosen the harder way, he said he had never been out side Peiping city ! We took second-class passages from Ching Lung Chiaw and arrived at Peiping at 7.30 p.m. This train was the dirtiest of all Chinese trains, full of dust, and the particular coach we were in ought to have been condemned long ago. On our return to the hotel we took our dinner in a burry. We had decided to leave Peiping that night, and before setting out for the Great Wall we handed over $100 to the hotel outdoor man to book our train tickets for Hankow, and reserve us a com partment with lower berths. He did everything nicely for us and, punctual to the minute, came to our room to take us off to the railway station. He brought us to our compartment, called the *boy,' and. pointing us out to him, showed him our tickets and placed our little basket and bundle on the berth. We tipped him $2. He gave us a how, followed by a salute which would have done credit to a regiment, and went out. At. 11.30 p.m. the train left Peiping station and flew the whole night towards Hankow. To HANKOW, THE CHICAGO OF THE EAST. So beautiful Peiping was left behind. To see all the sights in Peiping would have taken months, but what little we had seen in three days will remain, and will not be easily forgotten. Peiping is well worth a visit, and the cost depends entirely on how the traveller chooses to spend his money. The train glided on. and we went to lie on the b rths and soon fell asleep. When we woke up next morning we found ourselves far away from Peiping and passing large towns. We ordered our breakfast, which proved expensive. A slice of bread with butter cost ten cents, and a cup of tea with milk twenty cents. The train kept on moving, stopping at the numerous stations, and sometimes waiting for the coming trains to pass. Our midday meal consisting of three cups of vege tables and rice and two cups of tea and cost us $1.70. At almost every station we could see signs of poverty. Poor, dirty children and ragged men and women with fixed, vacant, brooding eyes—a sign of the times, a product of the years of toil and strife which have stricken the unhappy North. Freed from the shackles of the Manchus, only to fall again into the clutches of the communists, and again now into the power of men of an alien race, it pained our hearts to see the sufferings of a des pairing people. On the 25th we were still moving towards Hankow. On both sides of the railway line trees are planted. Some of the hills we passed are well forested but many are barren. The houses in the villages are low, and paths are muddy. The villagers, men, women and boys were all busy on their fields ploughing and planting rice bringing and irrigating water to their farms. They are hard-working and poverty is absent where the people can work and till the soil in peace. At 7 p.m. the train arrived at Hankow, and we came to the inspection shed where soldiers were examining all the passengers' luggage very minutely. Our baskets, two tiny little things, were totally ransacked; even our tea leaves in a tin were examined by stirring with a bayonet. It was a nice sight to see some of the passengers, especially girls, disputing with soldiers over the examination of their luggage. Our flower-seeds were cracked open and smelled to be certain that they were not red pills. Red pills are opium made into pills for use as "medicine pills." The soldiers were very curious about the stone we brought from the Great Wall. This examination done, we went out, hut the passage was blocked by hotel runners and rickshaw men and it was with the utmost difficulty that *we gained the street. Each of us jumped into a rickshaw, and we were pulled to the Pacific Hotel in the ex-British Concession. After we had cropped our hair we went out in a motor car and rode over a great part of Hankow city. We spent some time in the Chung San park, where there are a few things worth seeing Two draggons made of cement spouting water from their mouths attracted a lot of attention from the visitors. There is a big stadium for sports enclosed by cement fences which look like wood, and here and there arc models of houses, etc. If any of my readers should visit Hankow they should not fail to visit the Chung San park. We had a long ride over many parts of the town, and returned to the hotel where we passed our time in writing letters to friends. On the morning of the 27th we went out for a walk through some of the streets to have a look around. We went to see the Wu Chang Univer sity, but we could not gain admission, as, the students were in class. Though the buildings, are beautiful and large, the play grounds are very small, but there is a large lake used by the students for swimming on which are a few pleasure boats for hire. We also went to the Won: Hok Law temple, where we had our lunch. In the town we saw many groups of school children marching to the Memorial Hall all in mourning for the late Mr. Hu Han Min and pailons larches) were erected over the streets. Wu Chang, situated on the south side of Hankow, is a large town with good streets. The highest shop houses lire five storeys high. We had our dinner at 4 p.m. and packed up ready to go to Nanking. NANKING AGAIN. We purchased our tickets for Nanking and took a second-class cabin in the s.s. Kutwa, which was timed to sail at 9.30 p.m. Having handed our tickets and luggage over to the cabin boy we went on the open deck to have our last view of Hankow, known as the Chicago of the East. On board there were all sorts of hawkers selling fans, books, fruit and many other things. As the Kutwa steamed her way out of Hankow we made our way to our cabin, which we had to ourselves, undressed and jumped into bed. where we slept the whole night like good children until the cabin boy woke ns up for our morning tea. KIUKIANG. Kiukiang, which is in Kiangsi province, was reached at 9 a.m. We landed, and taking a motor car from the China Travel Service, we went round the town. Kiukiang is a small town and there is not much to see. The motor-car man insisted that we should pay one hour’s fare in full although we had only used the car for about 40 minutes; this driver was not civil like those in other parts of China. After we had our tea from a restaurant we returned to the kutwo to which a crowd of hawkers and beggars had flocked during our absence; the hawkers having for sale only porcelain in the form of vases, cups, models of beasts, etc., demand for which is necessarily poor, did not do much business. The beggars, consisting of urchins, women with babies in their arms, and old men, were a source of annoyance to all the passengers. Kiangsi at one time was under the domination of communists, and these beggars are the result of their rule. The ship's ‘boys’ have no heart, or if they have, there is no place for pity in them. Many beggars told and infirm men) were stand ing at the door of our dining room with a bowl in each hand waiting for a gift of rice. They were driven away by the boys, but hunger urged them to come back again. I had $3 on me in ten and twenty-cent notes, and overcome with the sight of them 1 distributed this among them. This was not sufficient, however, and we could not satisfy them even after we had emptied our pockets of all our small change, so I handed a five-dollar note to a policeman for him to distribute. You should have seen what a crowd followed him into the godown ! It was also strange to see how these beggars clasped their hands and shook them towards us as a sign of thanks; even the policeman saluted! At 1.30 p.m. we left Kiukiang and soon we fell asleep. After dinner we packed the various wares we had bought at Kiukiang from the hawkers. These were thirty pieces of china, and cost us $5.60. They were a great hindrance to us, we thought, and we regretted having spent our money on such things, but so pleased were our friends and family with them when we brought them back that we then regretted having bought so few of them. At dawn on the 29th Wuhu was reached, and the usual hawkers and beggars boarded the Kutwo in large numbers We closed our cabin door so as to keep them off, and opened the small window which looked out onto the deck. Immediately the beggars sported us and began to pester us. children pulling their hands in and women doing the same. Out of pity for them I changed a dollar to copper coins amounting to some 300 cents, and as each hand appeared through the window I dropped a few rents into it In order to escape. from them I threw some cents away on the deck, and when they were all busy looking for them I closed the window. I asked the female beggars, some, of whom were still quite young, with babies in their arms, why their husbands did not earn a living for them. They all said the same thing,—that there was no work for them to do. The country was not yet developed, and employment is not plentiful, but many unemployed had been given land by the Government, just enough for their families to till, one buffalo, and cash $20. The Kutwo steamed down river for Nanking, which we reached at 2.30 p.m.. and just before we arrived the cabin boy was not slow to ask for a big tip by telling ns that the gentleman in the next cabin had given so much. To cut short the argu ment we each paid $5.25 as tips. After that we soon heard our neighbours arguing with the boy next door, and refusing to give him even $2 each ! It will not be out of place for me here to say a few words concerning the way the boys, on shore and in steamers, are paid. The system is that boys are not paid by the employer; instead, they have to deposit with the employer an agreed sum of money as a guarantee of good behaviour before they are allowed to work at all. Food is supplied free, and any tips they get are paid to a treasurer of their own, and an account is kept of all money so received. At the end of each month the money is equally divided among the boys with, of course, always a little more for the head boy. The boys are very obliging, there is no doubt about it. We met several boys who. after having got their tip, explained that this would go to the general fund, and asked for some thing more for their own pocket. (to be continued). Shifting Cultivation in Sarawak. BY B. J. C. SPURWAY. DIVISIONAL FOREST OFFICER. SARAWAK. In the development of primitive countries the removal of the forest follows a natural course through the ignorance of the inhabitants. With the establishment of stable conditions, legislation to control uneconomic inroads into forest resources is too often absent from administrative policy. The population of Sarawak averages roughly nine- persons to the square mile. The greatest concen tration is along the coastal belt and in the middle and lower reaches of the rivers. In the interior, the population is sparse and semi-nomadic, living in self- contained communities under the long-house system. Before the advent of the Kayan and Iban or Sea Dayak who now form the major portion of the interior population, the greater part of Sarawak was inhabited by tribes of Kajang stock. The Kajangs and allied tribes were a true forest people subsisting on game and jungle produce, and their influence on the forest was negligible. The invading tribes were rice-eaters and brought with them rudimentary methods of cultivation. From this time, not longer than four centuries ago. shifting cultivation lias increased steadily in ratio to the growth of the population, especially in the case of the Iban who is now the dominant tribe. The population on the coastal belt and in the lower reaches of the rivers is stable and engaged in the cultivation of plantation rubber, sago, pepper, copra and the coastal fishing trade. Wet rice is planted but not to any great extent, as this portion of the population relies entirely on imported rice. When there is a heavy fall in the price of a particular commodity, those effected will turn to the cultivation of wet rice to tide them over till better times. The cultivation of plantation rubber, by reason of its suitability to the climate and ease of production with a minimum of labour, has spread to the inhabitants of the near interior from the coastal belt. The effect has been partially to stabilize them, and cause them to be a little less dependent on the cultivation of hill rice. Tn the far interior, with one exception, the population depends on hill rice or tapioca (Manihot utilissima) grown by the aid of shifting cultivation. The exception is a small community, completely isolated from its neighbours, established in a valley some 3,000 feet above sea level. This community carries on wet rice culti vation by irrigation and produces two crops each year. Through what channels this knowledge was acquired is not accurately known. The general method of cultivation of hill rice is as follows. The sites for the farms of each community or long-house are chosen with due regard to religious ritual in March or April after the harvest of the previous year. Felling commences in May or June and continues till August or September, depending on the weather. The burn is governed by the length of the south-west or dry monsoon associated with this period of the year, hut, usually it takes place in August. The bum is delayed as long as possible, so that the seed can be dibbled in just before the break of the north-east, or wet, monsoon. If this monsoon breaks early, any farms then still unburnt are either abandoned or the bums fail. The alternative is hurriedly to clear the secondary growth on a previous farm in the hope that a few consecutive fine days will make a small burn possible. It is not uncommon for a community to fail even in this, so that the fanning for that year is a fiasco and the long-house is on short rations till next harvest. Where the population is forced to use secondary growth, either through the scarcity of virgin forest or from becoming partially settled by the possession of a permanent crop such as plantation rubber, weeding is prevalent. Normally after planting very little is done to the crop until the harvest is taken. Virgin forest is preferred when it is available, in spite of the heavier labour entailed in felling it, because weeding is obviated and a rich soil obtained. Unless there is local restriction, when a community has destroyed the adjacent forest, it moves on to virgin forest elsewhere and will eventually migrate to another river or district. From this it will be realized that the stabilization particularly of the Iban population and the control of shifting cultivation is a matter of great urgency. The freshwater swamp forest, bordering the coastal belt has been little affected by shifting cultivation Nearly all land suitable for agricultural purposes v. Inch has been cleared is under permanent crop. or is fallow land suitable for wet rice and capable of development again when the necessity arises. It is in the dry inland areas that large tracts of country have been denuded of the original forest. which has been replaced by secondary growth composed of useless species. The total area of Sarawak is given as 46,000 square miles, 90 per cent, of which is forest and 10 per cent, agricultural or other lands. The forest area is again divided as 37 per cent, merchantable and 63 per cent, unprofitable or inaccessible. In this latter figure is included a conservative estimate of 40 per cent, secondary jungle directly due to shifting cultivation. At present the effects of this disforestation are physical and economic. The signs of physical deterioration, if they are observed, are probably not attributed to their proper source. Since the farms lie completely exposed to the incidence of the heaviest rains, the run-off is very great and the top soil is soon removed. A small proportion is carried down to the valleys and the riparian strips of the middle reaches of the rivers, but the greater part is carried in suspension to the lower reaches, where it is deposited with the slowing up of the flow. The river channels are being gradually silted up and cannot cope with a normal flow of flood water. The rivers themselves are tending to become wider and shallower. Year by year the banks are being undercut and eroded and large sand-banks forming, which will eventually greatly impede navigation. This is particularly evident, already in the river Batang Lupar, in the basin of which there has been intensive disforestation. In the Rejang and Baram rivers, two of the largest in the State, there has been a steady increase in the number and severity of the floods during the last decade. From an economic point of view the wastage of a valuable asset by reckless destruction of the forest needs no stressing. There is no immediate likeli hood of a timber famine, but it must he home in mind that the most suitable land for the shifting cultivator always carries merchantable forest. There is a belief prevalent amongst laymen that secondary growth left to itself will quickly revert unaided to original forest. Unfortunately this is not so, except in the case of small areas adjacent to high forest, when some of the climax species are reintroduced and form almost pure stands. The general rule is that, once the climax has been destroyed, an entirely new succession comes in composed of fast-growing belukar types. This secondary growth or damun, to give it its Dayak name, though apparently an effective cover and preventing serious gully formation, does little to hold up the run off. Through the absence of an absorbent layer of humus and the lack of height in its canopy, it cannot perform efficiently the function of high forest in arresting anil breaking flown heavy rain. One has only to have walked through both high forest and damun during heavy rain to realize this fact. To quote only one of the many examples of the importance of this function of rain-forest, it has been pointed out by the Orissa Floods Committee of India that if 6 per cent, of the flood waters of the Mahanadi in 1911 and 4 per cent, in 1920 had been delayed each for a period of five days the floods would probably not have oscurred. In other words the forests in the interior, which should have acted as a break, had been destroyed In isolated instances, where secondary growth has been repeatedly removed, red scars on the hill-sides are a warning as to what may be expected from gully formation. In addition there is the increasing danger from fire, which will continue and eventually complete the destruction and deterioration com menced by man. Rain forest as a rule is too humid to burn and the danger from fire is remote Repeated interference with the succession, however, leads to the establishment of very light growth which dries out very readily in the event of a short drought. Fire becomes at once an important factor and when of frequent occurrence rapidly brings about conditions ideal for the establishment of lalang grass (Imperata cylindrical). When lalang becomes established over a large area, that area becomes economically the equivalent of a desert Up to the present time there has been no direct legislation to control the shifting cultivator. In the head-waters of most inhabited rivers there is planted a pak or mark beyond which the long-house communities may not move or farm. The object of the pak, however, is the prevention of up-river communities moving too far away from the local administrative centre, rather than the protection of the forest. There are numerous instances of these marks being moved farther upstream when several communities have agitated for more farming land, i.e., virgin forest. By the end of 1936 some 950 square miles or 2 per cent, of the total forest area of the State had been dedicated to timber production through the agency of the Forest Department and a further 643 square miles preliminarily notified. This area is being increased as rapidly as a paucity of staff allows, but the destruction of primary forest continues and this work could be furthered considerably by the enactment of legislation confining the shifting cultivator to secondary jungle. Prior to 1934 areas dedicated to timber production were selected, demarcated and constituted forest reserves and consisted mainly of freshwater swamp. In 1932 further reservation was not permitted although exploration continued. This cessation in reservation was due partly to a need for economy at the trough of the world depression and partly to friction arising from the trespass clause in the Reservation Order. The reaction of a native to sudden and complete exclusion from what to him is still "just jungle" can be understood. It is more desirable to educate the native gradually to the idea of reservation, rather than to antagonize him by precipitancy, since reserves constituted in the interior can be under nominal control only and the headmen must be relied upon. In 1934 a via media was introduced and approved by which selected areas were protected. The constitution of a protected area follows the same lines as for a forest reserve. There are only two restrictions, fanning (which includes settlement) and the taking of major forest produce commercially. Otherwise the native is free to go as he pleases and may lake anything from the area for his own needs and even work minor forest produce commercially. The Forest. Department, however, retains the right to close not more than one-fourth of the area for technical reasons. This method of reservation has proved very satisfactory and has worked smoothly. Since its introduction, 414 square miles of merchant able forest have been saved from the depredations of the shifting cultivator. When condemning shifting cultivation a point often overlooked is that, when a hereditary form Of agriculture, however primitive, is forbidden or restricted; a better and a more stable form of agriculture must be introduced. When this occurs Forestry and Agriculture become interdependent. At the first opportunity a general survey should be undertaken from which must be decided the areas which are to be assigned to settled agriculture, timber production or maintained under forest for physical reasons. The shifting cultivator must be aided in the transition to more economic methods. The know ledge can be infused by the establishment of demonstration centres in nil suitable localities and the cultivation of irrigated rice made a main feature for the benefit of the population of the interior. On the experimental side attention should be given to the improvement of local agricultural products likely to be of marketable value and as food for the comm unity, rather than to the introduction and distribution of exotics of doubtful suitability or utility. The vernacular schools can also be used as a means of propaganda, since the rising generation is always more susceptible. Their elders are extremely conservative and will for the greater part be unwilling to discard the methods of their ancestors, even when the result of more economic cultivation has been demonstrated. This paper was tabled by Mr. B. J. C. Spurway, Acting Senior Forest Officer, at the Third Con ference of Malayan Forest Officers which was held at Kuala Lumpur in March, 1937.—ED.] Some Notes on the “Wangkang” Procession. ORIGIN OF THE CEREMONY IN SARAWAK. The following letters exchanged between , Mr. Ong Kee Hui of Kuching and Mr. Jee Eng Fui of Simanggang are reproduced by courtesy of the writers, and will, we are sure, prove of interest to our readers. We believe that Kuching and Malacca are the only towns in the Far East outside China in which this curious procession is held, and we should be grateful if any of our readers who may be in a position to know would confirm this. SIMANGGANG, February 2nd, 1937. DEAR MR. ONG KEE HUT, I shall be very grateful if you will assist me by answering the questions set out below, and by adding anything you may happen to know con cerning them 1. How did the "Wangkang" procession come to be a customary procession among the Chinese at Kuching once in every twelve years ? 2. Is there anything concerning it in Sarawak History? (i.e., it might be a mark of peace between the Chinese and the Rajah after the Chinese insurrection 1857?) I have tried my best to collect information from various old men here, but without any satisfactory result. One old man, however, gave me a very interest ing explanation of how the "Wangkang’’ proces sion came into existence. He said : "One morning the old Rajah (which Rajah?) used his telescope to look towards the mouth of the Kuching river, and he saw there a very curious junk. This caught his attention, and he became anxious tn see the junk when it reached Kuching. After waiting for some time, the junk never came, so he searched for it once more with his telescope but saw nothing. The next morning he looked in the same direction again; the same junk appeared and some days afterwards be sent a motor launch to the mouth of the river but the launch returned without having seen anything. He therefore told the story to the Chinese who informed the Rajah that it must be a "Wangkang," and told him about the rite as prac tised in some parts of Holden, China, (especially by seamen—thus the Heng Hua in Kuching take more interest in this procession than other races), therefore His Highness the Rajah approved a pro cession of this sort being held at Kuching. I have collected a lot of other information, but none concerning the Sarawak history of this procession. Yours sincerely, JEE ENG FUI. KUCHING, SARAWAK, February 25th, 1937. DEAR MR. ENG FUI, It has given me much pleasure to receive your letter dated the 15th instant. Your enquiries are of considerable interest to me, and I only hope you will excuse the delay in replying. As a result of enquiries which I have made from my grandfather, Mr. Ong Tiang Swee, supple mented by information gathered from my uncle Tock Khoon, I am able to answer your queries. I think you now know how the "Wang Kang" pro cession started in China, but in case you do not, I will give a brief account of its origin. A certain Emperor (Ban Lek?) in the Ming Dynasty was a most sceptical man in matters spiritual, and even went so far as to question the powers of his spiritual adviser, (Teo Thian Soo). He demanded some sort of proof of this man’s supernatural powers, and put forward a scheme to set the adviser’s powers to the test. He had a big tunnel dug, fully ventilated and well provisioned, and in the tunnel he put forty of his officers of the rank of Chiu Soo. Over the tunnel the spiritual adviser was told to use all his powers and try to kill the officers inside. The challenge was accepted, and as a result all the forty officers were killed. The Emperor was satisfied, but not so the spilite of the victims of the experiment. They haunted the palace and pestered the Emperor, who had no peace of mind. The cruelty of the whole thing invoked the vengeance of the Power above, and China was visited by an epidemic of cholera, which killed a large number of people. At last the Emperor bad to appease the spirits of the forty Chin Soo and make some sort of treaty with them. The Emperor promoted them all to the rank of "Wang" and empowered them to visit every dis trict in his kingdom as his representative. He also gave out that all honour and respect had to be accorded them wherever they went,—if not, they could wreak their vengeance on the people of the locality. The spirits were satisfied, and on an appointed day with much ceremony they were given a public send-off on their long, long voyage that was to have no end in a junk especially made for them, and thus was started the first "Wang Kang" procession in China. To come to the origin of the procession in Sarawak. The story of the old Rajah and the Chinese junk he saw has no connection with the origin of the "Wang Kang" procession in Kuching. What actually happened was that a serious epidemic of cholera broke out in Kuching; hundreds of people died, and as there were so many people dying each day no proper burial could be given them. As a result, the whole town reeked with the terrible smell of the dead. The Rajah (the late Sir Charles Brooke) was at a loss to know what to do. The older Chinese, recalling what had happened during the Ming Dynasty in China, came to the conclusion that the forty Chin Soo must have reached Sarawak at last, and the epidemic of cholera was an indication that they were here. So steps were taken after a public meeting to enter tain the visiting spirits, and to send them away with all honour and respect. Thus was started the first "Wang Kang" procession in Sarawak. The epidemic was then so bad that the Rajah really did not care a pin what the people did so long as normal conditions were restored, so no objection was raised and it transpired (whether it was coin cidence or not, we cannot say), that the epidemic stopped some time after the procession. An arrange ment was then made with the spirits concerning their next visit, and that was how the ten years' interval came into being. I need hardly add that there has been no epidemic of cholera in Sarawak since. Firm believers attribute this to the effect of the “Wang Kang" procession. Personally, I think that the real cause of the epidemic has been removed, namely a bad water supply. Kuching was in the old days dependent on the river for water, and you can imagine how dirty river water can be, especially during the dry season. No wonder there was cholera ! Now with the supply of good and pure water we have from Matang such a state of affairs no longer exists, and chances of serious epidemics are remote. Yours sincerely, ONG KEE HUI. The Sarong. Of all native articles of dress the sarong is one of the most characteristic. The word means covering, case, or sheath, and the thing must be woven in one piece. A standard size is about six feet long by three and half feet wide, and of various colours and shades. A sarong cut off by the yard will never do; it must have a kapala (head or begin ning) and a badan (body). The oldest form of kapala is rectangular; a later variety gives the “spear" or “turret'' pattern. The piggit or border runs along the sides that come uppermost and nethermost in wearing it. Like the weaving and batekking, the wearing is subject to endless rules. Those unaccustomed to the sarong will, when wearing it, look as if they have put on a bag or “bloomers"; the native women, however, neatly arranging the folds with a single movement of the hands, impart to it an inimitable elegance. It is the fashion to keep the kapala behind, a little to the right, where the cloth is doubled to bring it to the correct width, and taken up to the left hip so that the part adorned with the straight or spear or turret pattern hangs gracefully down. Then it is tucked in round the waist or under the arms and securely kept in place by its own weight. The fastening of a sarong in any other way betrays at Once inexperience or a free and easiness looked down upon with scorn by the native fair ones, who are extremely handy in its manipulation. They can put a clean, dry sarong over the head and let the wet one they have worn while bathing drop to their feet on the grass of the river’s bank so dexterously that they seem transformed by magic from water-nymphs into the Minas and Isas presiding over kitchens and nurseries. Ticket collectors at the “Sylvia’' and boys at the Sarawak Club put on detar and sabok dua jari to grace the occasion, this being the so-called “national dress.” -C. B. G. Films of the Month. MARCH. A very engaging characteristic of the average American is his startling naivet ,—engaging, because it is such a pleasant surprise to discover that in spite of all appearances to the contrary, his make-up contains a vein of truly child-like (one might almost say childish) innocence and simpli city. In decudent Europe we are too often inclined to regard the American—particularly the American “big business" executive—as a sort of superman, a ruthless creature, masterful and cunning, hard- boiled to a degree and utterly without illusions; there is some excuse for this, since it is the picture that popular fiction and the films have built up for us, and superficially it is more or less true. But only superficially, since often enough beneath that rough and tough exterior there lies an astonishingly soft core of sentimentalism and meek credulity. The hard outward crust conceals a heart, not of steel or of gold, but of butter. There is a fact well-known to that arch-realist, the cockney confidence trickster, who each year exploits his knowledge by separating visiting Americans from their wads with quite ridiculous ease. It is also a fact that has not escaped the notice of those shirt-sleeved tycoons who in their Hollywood offices gauge so accurately the cultural and entertainment requirements of their compat riots, for how else are we to account for the popularity of dear Little Shirley Temple? How, too, can we explain the making of a film such as San Francisco ? Here we had a picture which combined the talent of some of the best screen actors and act resses with really slick direction, and yet the result, apart from individual performances and some astonishing technical achievements, never rose above the level of Sandford and Merton. The story can be condensed into a very few lines; if an attractive girl, blessed with a delightful voice, chooses to sing in opera to a boiled-shirt-and-tiara audience, that will be okay with the Almighty. But if the same girl elects to use her voice to enter tain people who can only afford a glass or two of beer in a popular dance hall, then the Lord (that grim, purse-proud Deity of American puritanism) will register disapproval by sending an earthquake to shatter a whole city and kill thousands of its inhabitants. Well, if you can swallow that, good luck to you. Story apart, though, the picture was good enter tainment, the acting being of a high level through out. Clark Gable was perfectly cast as Blackie Morton, the ward politician and proprictor of a dance hall and cabaret patronised by the ungodly who could not afford the opera, and who would not have afforded it if they could, and he made the most of a fat part. Jeanette MacDonald was good as the golden-voiced girl torn between the con flicting attractions of respectability, dullness, and ll Travafore and the worldly charms of Gable and low but real and exciting night life. She sang like a nightingale and acted convincingly. Spencer Tracy, however, never quite succeeded in imparting reality to his presentation of a muscular Christian in the guise of a Catholic priest; old associations were too strong, and one continually expected to see him pull a gun from beneath his soutane and ram it into someone's ribs with a 'Stick ’em up !’ growled between twisted lips. Tracy and saint liness somehow do not go together The production was magnificent all the way through, the earthquake scenes being particularly realistic and impressive. How do they do these things? The agony and tension of the upheaval and the fire that followed were admirably put across, but one couldn’t help feeling that Jeanette MacDonald would have been more usefully employed in handing out soup to the refugees than in singing hymns to them. Incidentally, in view of the pious hopes loudly expressed at the close of the film that a New Jerusalem would arise from the ashes of destruction it is consoling to reflect that from all accounts the new San Francisco soon became every bit as sinful as the old. One Rainy Afternoon was a delightful musical piece starring that excellent singer and actor Francis Lederer, Hugh Herbert, prince of lunatic comedians, and Roland Young, who is one of the three best British actors on the screen to-day (Yes, Laughton is one of the remaining two, and you can please yourself about the other.) This splendid actor also starred in the Man Who Could. Work Miracles, Korda’s rendering of H. G. Wells’ delightful story which unfortunately was shown over Easter, when Kuching was almost empty of Europeans. Broad way Gondolier was another good musical show featuring Dick Powell, who is perhaps the least objectionable of all crooners, and the one and only Joan Blondell. This inimitable comedienne was not really given a chance to employ her gifts to the best advantage, since her part could have been taken by almost any other competent actress, find we only had a few scattered glimpses of the unique personality that has turned at least one critic into an ardent Blondell fan. Adolphe Menjou was perfect as a broken-down Italian professor of music; why is more use not made of tins exquisite actor? There is a finish about everything he does, a, sureness of touch that makes some of the big shots of Hollywood seem clumsy amateurs by comparison. The American civil war is always good material for a novel or a play, and in So Red the Rose a tragic theme was handled with dignity and restraint. The cast contained no famous names, but the picture was one of the best that has been shown at the Sylvia Cinema for a long time. The story was dramatic and impressive, the acting was excellent, throughout, and some of the photography was memorable. Technicolour is coming into its own. In Dancing Pirate, which was remarkable for a delightful performance by Frank Morgan as a rambling old, Spanish alcalde, the colour was beautifully done,, and it seems only a question of time before the majority of films will be shown in this medium. Whether this will he a loss or a gain from the artistic point of view, who can say? First Division News. FEBRUARY. At about 1 p.m. on January 19th. 1937, a human skeleton was seen suspended by means of a rope from a clump of nipah palms on the true right bank of Sungei Biawak. The discovery was immediately reported to the Police and, accompanied by an Assistant Commissioner, the Coroner proceeded to Sungei Biawak, arriving there at 9.15 p.m. The tide being then at its highest it was impossible to locate the position of the skeleton by reason of the fact that it was some 12 feet under water. At low tide the following day the skeleton was recovered less its right arm and right leg; a post- mortem examination disclosed that the remains were those of an adult male and that their condition was compatible with death having occurred within three weeks. A rain-coat and felt hat were found some fifty yards down stream from the point at which the skeleton was recovered. The rope by which the body had been suspended was doubly looped tightly around the neck. This fact lent support to a theory that the deceased had not himself put the rope about his neck. At the inquest heard on February 17th it was revealed beyond any shadow of doubt that the remains were those of a Kachew Chinese named Tan Ah Lee who had been missing from his home at Tanah Puteh. In view of the complete lack of evidence to show how deceased had met his death, an open verdict was recorded. On February 25th Native Officer Abang Zamhari proceeded to the Dayak village at Kuap in order to select a candidate to replace Pengarah Ganeng who had resigned earlier in the month. During the course of his visit, a Cantonese, married to a Dayak woman, requested permission to build a house in the village. The application was refused on the grounds that Chinese are not permitted to live in Dayak villages. At Bau an inquest on the body of Foo Chon Shin of Jugan, who died on the morning of February 10th, resulted in a verdict of murder against a person or persons unknown. During the night of the 9th/10th February a gang of masked men broke into the bouse of Foo Chon Shin who apparently opposed their entry, receiving injuries from which he died. Cash and valuables to the value of about $900 were taken. Investigations have resulted in the arrest of six men, but the inquiry had not been completed at the end of the month. Complaints were received from Singghi that Tua Kampong Ngidan was neglecting his duties. His excuse is that as he is a Christian he cannot take active part in heathen customs. It is probable that a number of Jagoi Dayaks will have to move over the N.E.I. border, as they are short of farming lands. The N.E.I. Government has hitherto allowed them to farm, but it is understood from the Montri at Siluas that if they wish to farm in Netherlands territory they must move and pay taxes there. Continued rain made work on the Bau roads very difficult, and the Batu Kitang-Siniawan road was closed to all traffic for three days for repairs The following table gives the individual output of gold from the various mines for January, 1937 :— Land Dayaks in the Serian district have started harvesting. Two of the applications last month made by Sebuyow Dayaks near Simunjan for land for coconut planting were approved, but the others were refused since trouble is foreseen with another Dayak kampong about rights to drainage through padi land. The applicants have been advised to look for another site. The Dayaks of S. Prin again asked why Tanjong Bluku has been made into a Government reserve; they seem to resent the holding up of this land. Yap Nam, who obtained permission last May to cultivate 100 acres of land in the S. Mata, Samarahan, has made good progress with the clearing of the jungle and the construction of ditches. He wishes to apply later for more land for another 10 families. The padi at the Japanese estate at Samarahan (Messrs. Nisa Shokai, Ltd.) is looking very healthy, and the two reservoirs should be ready next month which will enable further experimenting in planting out a fresh crop in June. The Government rest-house at Sambir was enlarged and whitewashed during February, and the rest-house at Semrah was pulled down and re-erected on the Government reserve further up river. This move was necessary as the traders at Semrah have now moved into the bazaar lots and the old rest-house was situated in the middle of the new bazaar. The still serviceable timbers from the old Simunjan wireless station were brought up to Serian and will be used either for construction of the Court-Writer's house or for bridges on the Tebekang- Serian road. The Serian-Kuching road was impassible during the month, though except for some very bad patches between Samarahan and Serian the road on the Serian side of Samarahan has stood up well to the landas considering that no labour has been employed on its upkeep since November. 231 catties of birds’-nests were auctioned at Serian on February 16th and were bought by Bong Ah Foh for $170. The following are extracts from a report by Mr. E. H. Elam, District Officer, Serian :— "I left Simunjan on February 1st, and, visiting most of the Dayak houses in the Batang Sadong, spent the night at Jai, where I noticed only six of the twelve Malays who had been ordered to vacate the new bazaar site hud complied with the order! They were told to remove before I returned to Simunjan at the end of the month, otherwise they would be summoned. Semrah traders have moved to the new bazaar so two Malay prisoners were transferred there to rebuild the Government rest-house and make a back lane in the bazaar. "I visited Moyan on 3rd when one trader at Serpan and one at Rebak were fined for not closing their shops as ordered. They both applied at once for lots in the new bazaar at Moyan. I spent the night at Sambir, which kampong at last is beginning to look tidier. I gave them some whitewash to apply to the mosque and the Government rest-house. Muara Tuang is deve loping well. "I visited most of the Sebuyow Dayak villages in the ulu Samarahan and ordered Abang Mustapha to re-hear one Chinese-Dayak case which had been settled quite illegally by a Tuai rumah who calls himself a Penghulu. I spent the night of the 8th at Panchor (27th mile) where the Dayaks are very poor. They say that the traders at Pengkalan Bentang charge 80% interest on padi borrowed from them." The total now collected or promised amounts to $7,698. It is hoped that the figure originally aimed at ($8,000) will have been reached before the end of May when this fund will be closed. Amount still to be collected $302. Junior Cambridge Examinations. ST. THOMAS' SCHOOL. Of the fifteen candidates for the Junior Cambridge Examination last December entered from St. Thomas' School the following were successful :— ST. MARY'S SCHOOL. At the Junior Cambridge Examination held in Kuching last December, seven Candidates from the above School entered and six were successful. The girls who passed were.—Ng Gueh Lang, Teo Kuang Eng, Kueh Pollie, Lee Siak Chin, Lo Shiew Chin and Lim Tshai Siok. It is interesting to remember that the first Candidate to be successful in this examination at the Kuching centre was entered from St. Mary’s School. This was Miss Tan Ho Eng who passed in 1929, and who is now a teacher in her old School. UNIVERSITY OF CAMBRIDGE. LOCAL EXAMINATIONS. KUCHING, 19th March, 1937. The Editor, The Sarawak Gazette, Kuching. DEAR SIR, I enclose a Schedule of the Entries and Passes for the University of Cambridge Local Examina tions. Sarawak Centre, up to and including the Examination held in December last and solicit the hospitality of your columns in publishing same. 1 am, dear Sir, Your obedient servant, E. W. H. JACQUES, Local Secretary, Sarawak Centre, UNIVERSITY OF CAMBRIDGE Local Examinations. Kuching Football Association. FOOTBALL LEAGUES 1937. Entries for the Kuching Football Association League (1st and 2nd Divisions) to be sent to the Honorary Secretary before 15th April, 1937. J. A. G. BENSON, Honorary Secretary, Kuching Football Association. Kuching Football Association. FOOTBALL LEAGUES 1937. Entries for the Kuching Football Association League (1st and 2nd Divisions) to be sent to the Honorary Secretary before 15th April, 1937. J. A. G. BENSON, Honorary Secretary, Kuching Football Association. RACE NO. 1. [2.30 p.m. THE TUAN MUDA'S CUP. Value $250. A piece of plate of the value of $100 presented by His Highness the Tuan Muda with $150 added. Second to receive $100. Third $40. A race for Division I ponies. Entrance fee $10. Distance 6 furlongs. RACE No. 2. [8.0 p.m. THE SEKAMA STAKES. Value $250. Second to receive $100. Third $40. A race for Division II ponies. Entrance fee $10. Distance 5 furlongs. RACE NO. 3. [3.30 p.m. THE DATUS’ STAKES. Value $250. $ . ............... presented by the Datus with $... added. Second to receive $100. Third $40. A race for Division III ponies. Entrance fee $10. Distance 6 furlongs. RACE NO. 4. [4.0 p.m. THE B.C.L. STAKES. Value $250. $50 presented by the Borneo Co., Ltd. with $200 added. Second to receive $100. Third $40. A race for Division I ponies. Entrance fee $10. Distance 3 furlongs. RACE NO. 5. [4.30 p.m. THE MATANG HANDICAP. Value $250. Second to receive $100. Third $40. A race for Division II ponies. Entrance fee $10. Distance 4 furlongs. RACE NO. 6. [5.0 p.m. THE PENDING STAKES. Value $250. Second to receive $100. Third $40. A race for Division III ponies. Entrance fee $10. Distance 3 furlongs. RACE NO. 7. [5.30 p.m. THE RANEE’S CUP. Value $250. A piece of plate of the value of $100 presented by Her Highness the Ranee with $150 added. Second to receive $100. Third $40. A race open to ponies of all Divisions. Entrance fee $5. Post entries at $10 accepted up to 4.30 p.m. on day of race. Handicaps published on the course. Distance 1 mile. Jubilee Silver Blaze Flying Fox Second Day, Monday, April 26th. RACE NO. 1. [2.30 p.m. THE MAIDEN STAKES. Value $200. Second to receive $75. Third $30. A race for ponies which have run at one or more official meetings of the Sarawak Turf Club and have not won a race. Entrance fee $10 (Entrance fees returned in the event of a pony winning on the First Day). Distance 4 1/2 furlongs. The winner of this race will not be penalized under Section 7 of the Races Regulations (i.e., no 7 lb. penally). — RACE NO. 2. [3.0 p.m. THE CORON A TION HANDICAP. V a l u e $ 2 7 5 . S e c o nd to receive $100. Third $40. A race for Division II ponies. Entrance fee $10. Distance 4 1/2 furlongs. THE GOLD MINERS’ PURSE. Presented by the Gold Miners of Upper Sarawak. Value $250. Second to receive $100. Third $40. A race open to Division III ponies. Entrance fee $10. Distance 3 furlongs. RACE NO. 4. [4.0 p.m. THE BANKERS’ PURSE. Value $250. Second to receive $100. Third $40. A race for Division I ponies. Entrance fee $10. Distance 4 1/2 furlongs. RACE NO. 5. [4.30 p.m. THE APRIL HANDICAP. Value $250. Second to receive $100. Third $40. A race for Division II ponies. Entrance fee $10. Distance 5 furlongs. RACE NO. 6. [5.0 p.m. THE SIOL STAKES. Value $250. Second to receive $100. Third $40. A race for Division III ponies. Entrance fee $10. Distance 4 1/2 furlongs. RACE NO. 7. [5.30 p.m. THE TYRO STAKES. Value $250. Second to receive $100. Third $10. A race for Amateur riders. Catch weights 10 st. 7 lbs. Entrance fee $10. Open to all Divisions. Horses need not have run on the First Day but having run in this race only are ineligible to run on the Third Day. Post entries at $10 accepted. The 7 Iba. penalty under Section 7 of the Racing Regulations does not apply. Distance 4 furlongs. Third Day, Wednesday, April 28th RACE NO. 1. [2.6 p.m. THE SARAWAK STEAMSHIP CO. STAKES. Value $250. $100 presented by the Sarawak Steamship Co., Ltd. with $150 added. Second to feceive $100. Third $40. A race for Division I ponies. Entrance fee $10. Distance 5 furlongs. RACE NO. 2. [2.30 p.m. THE SIME DARBY STAKES. Value $250. $50 presented by Messrs. Sime Darby & Co., Ltd. with $200 added. Second to receive $100. Third $40. A race for Division II ponies. Entrance fee $10. Distance 6 furlongs. RACE NO. 3. [3.0 p.m. THE ONG EWE HAT STAKES. Value $275. $50 donated by Mr. Ong Soon Tee of Singapore. Second to receive $100. Third $40. A race for Division III ponies. Entrance fee $10. Distance 5 furlongs. RACE NO. 4. [3.30 p.m. THE PADUNGAN STAKES. Value $250. Second to receive $100. Third $40. A race for Division I ponies. Entrance fee $10. Distance 4 furlongs. RACE NO. 5. [4.0 p.m. THE COUNCIL NEGRI HANDICAP. Value $250. Second to receive $100. Third $40. A race for Division 11 ponies. Entrance fee $10. Distance 3 furlongs RACE NO. 6. [4.30 p.m. THE TURF CLUB STAKES. Value $250. Second to receive $100. Third $40. A race for Division Ill ponies. Entrance fee $10. Distance 4 furlongs. RACE NO. 7. [5.0 p.m. THE CONSOLATION STAKES. Value $200. Second to receive $75. Third $30. A race open to any pony which has not won a race at the Meeting. Division I to carry 11 st., Division II 9 st. 7 lbs. and Division III 8 st. Post entries $5. Distance 3 furlongs. RACE NO. 8. [5.30 p.m,. THE RAJAH'S CUP. Value $300. A piece of plate value $150 presented by His Highness the Rajah with $150 added. Second to receive $150. Third $75. Fourth $40. A race open to all Divisions. Entrance fee S5.- Post entries at $10 accepted up to 4.30 p.m. on day of Race. Handicaps published on the Course. Distance the Race Course (about 1 1/3 miles). REGULATIONS. Entries.—All nominations, accompanied by en trance fees, description of ponies and declaration of colours, are to be made to the Secretaries not later than 1st April, 1937. Freight on Ponies.—An allowance of $15 will be made for all ponies entered from Sarawak out stations or other States of Borneo. Training.—The course is closed for training on Tuesday. Friday and Sunday. No pony may go onto the course before 6 a.m. Scratchings.—Owners scratching ponies before 5 p.m. on 23rd April, 1937, for First Day, before 5 p.m. on 25th April, 1937, for Second Day and before 5 p.m. on 27th April 1937, for Third Day, will receive back half their entrance fees. Handicaps.—Will be posted on the Notice Board at the Sarawak Club at— The maximum weight shall be 11 stone 7 lbs. and the minimum 7 stone. Course.—Will be opened for training on 13th March, 1937, at 6 a.m. Penalties.—Winners of any race at a meeting after publication of weights shall carry a penalty of 7 lbs. for each race with a maximum of 11 stone 7 lbs. Prizes.—20% reduction if under 5 entries. No second prize will be awarded if there are less than 3 runners and no third prize if less than 5. Jockeys.—Professional jockeys who are Sarawak subjects and have not ridden more than two winners under Sarawak Turf Club Rules, may claim an allowance of 7 lbs. The maximum fee to a winning Jockey shall be $15 and for second place $10 and for a ride $5 in the absence of any agreement to ride for a lower sum. Whip.—No whip used in any race shall exceed two feet in length. Spurs.—If spurs be worn these shall not have rowels. Ponies.—Must run on the First Day to be eligible for entry in races on Second and Third Days. Any Borneo pony of not more than 14 hands in height may be imported from B.N.B. and shall be eligible for entry in races open to Sarawak Ponies provided that their sires and darns were foaled io Borneo. All new ponies shall carry top weight on the First Day in the Division in which they are classified, which shall be as follows :— Division I over 13.2 hands to 14 hands. Totalizator.—As usual. Cash Sweep.—The promotion expenses of 20% to the Club shall be reduced to 15% the 5% being appropriated as follows ;— and the numbers of tickets on each race is increased to 2,000. Unlimited Cash Sweep.—Tho promotion ex penses to the Club is reduced to 15% and prizes will be divided as follows :— Note.—If there are only 4 runners the 3rd Horse gets 15% and the 4th gets 10% only. Visiting Members.—A visiting member shall pay a subscription of $5 per week or portion of a week during which he shall be a member of the Club. A nomination of such gentleman to be a Visiting Member shall be signed by two Ordinary Members as respectively proposing and seconding him. Strangers— Persons not members of the Club or strangers not introduced by a Member, may be admitted within the enclosure of the Grand Stand or of the Paddock during any Meeting on payment of an entrance fee of $5 for each day’s racing. Owners.—Are requested to see that their syces and jockeys obtain necessary badges for entrance to Paddock. Objections.—By owners shall be accompanied by a deposit of $10. Where not otherwise especially mentioned the Rules of the Race Course shall be the same as those adopted by the Straits Racing Association. The decision of the Committee of the Sarawak Turf Club shall be final in all matters of dispute. Communications to be made to THE BORNEO COMPANY, LIMITED, Secretaries, Sarawak Turf Club. MINUTES OF A COMMITTEE MEETING OF THE SARAWAK TURF CLUB HELD AT THE SARAWAK CLUB ON 31ST MARCH, 1937, AT 6.15 ting held on the 26th February were read and approved. (4) Annual General Meeting.—It was decided to hold this on Sunday, 25th April at 6.30 p.m. (5) Letter from Mr. H. Read.—A letter from Mr. H. Read dated 28th February, relative to charges on ponies, was read ; the Secretaries were instructed to inform Mr. Read that his suggestions would be considered by the Committee. (6) Jockey Scales.—It was decided to await particulars from a firm in New Zealand before coining to a decision. (7) Jockeys black-book.—Mr. Spurway suggested that a book be kept for the purpose of recording all complaints and enquiries held by the Stewards. This was approved. (8) Hand bell for Cash Sweep.- Mr. Spurway proposed that a bell should be rung five minutes before the Cash Sweep and Totes are due to close. It was decided that Mr. Spurway and Mr. Chan Qui Chong should arrange this. (9) Rules.—Mr. Spurway proposed "In the event of a horse being disqualified for interference, if it only affects 1st and 2nd place or 2nd and 3rd place, the offending horse may be placed at the discretion of the Stewards after full enquiry. (10) The Datu Shahbandar stated that it was unduly hard on owners if a jockey was suspended during a meeting as it was sometimes impossible at short notice to obtain a suitable jockey. He suggested that if a jockey is up before the Committee for any offence he may be fined fur the first offence and not necessarily be suspended during the race meeting at the discretion of the Stewards. (11) The Secretaries were instructed to arrange for the Tebassing of the inside of the Course between the 5th and 3rd Furlong Posts. (12) Programme.—It was decided to make the following alterations in the Provisional programme :— Rare II 2nd Day. 1st Prize to he $275. Race V 2nd Day. To be 5 Furlongs. Race III 3rd Day 1st Prize to be $275. Race VII 2nd Day. Horses need not have run on the First Day but having run in this race only are ineligible to run on the Third Day. Post entries at $10 accepted. The 7 lb penalty under Section 7 of the Racing Regulations does not apply. Race VII 1st Day and Race VIII 3rd Day. Post entries at $10 accepted up to 4.30 p.m. on day of race. Handicaps published on the Course. Race I Second Day. The winner of this race will not be penalized under Section 7 of the Racing Regulations (i.e. no 7 lb penalty). Traffic Regulations. SPRING MEETING, 1937. 1. After the hour of 11 a.m. on the 24th, 26th and 28th April, 1937, all motor vehicles must proceed to the race-course via Padungan Road or Ban Hok Road only, and up to the hour of 7 p.m. on these days must return by the Sekama Road only. 2. After depositing passengers at the grand stand, vehicles will line up on the extreme left-hand side of the grandstand road, one behind the other, and within three yards of each other, facing away from the grandstand. 3. Rickshaws and bicycles may proceed to the race-course at any time, and by any road, and must park on the bandstand plot. They will not be allowed to remain on any part of the road leading to the grandstand or roads leading to the race course 4. All vehicles must move to their parking grounds without delay, as directed by the Con stabulary. Sarawak Club. TENNIS. MEN’S DOUBLES SEALED HANDICAP AMERICAN TOURNAMENT. The draw for partners is as follows:— Mitchell and Large. Dee and Kitto. Philp and Benson. Hammond and Rothera. Digby and Baughan. Cargill and Harding. Each pair will play 5 matches of two sets consisting of 6 games “sudden death” (i.e. not advantage games). The sealed handicaps will be added to the total games scores when all matches have been completed ; and thus the winners will be the pair who score the most games after the addition of handicaps. It will be seen that the total possible game score would be 60 plus handicap. Dates for all matches will be arranged by the tennis sub-committee. Second Division News. FEBRUARY. Below are extracts from a report by Mr. H. E. Outfield, Acting Resident, Second Division. “The beginning of the month saw Simanggang bazaar crowded out with Dayaks, the commence ment of the tapping holiday and the approaching Regatta at Simanggang being the chief causes. Everyone brought in his rubber, and as all trading bandongs have to return at the end of each month the bazaar was chock full of rubber and it was found necessary to allow a temporary increase of maximum stocks to certain traders. This invasion, followed by the Regatta and Chinese New Year, must have been a most profitable business for the shopkeepers. "The Regatta, which was held on Saturday, February 6th, attracted a record crowd, and we were fortunately favoured by fine weather. As the tapping holiday was in progress and the padi harvest had not generally commenced, an unusual number of natives found time to attend. All European officers in the Division were present, and Major Bridges, D.S.O., and Mr. R. W. Hammond, O.N.E., were visitors at the time. “I visited Betong from 17th to 21st to hear a case in which Laus was charged with the murder of her husband, Merajan, in conjunction with Enkat, who had previously committed suicide while on remand. A verdict of not guilty was returned. "The night of my arrival another murder was reported, this time a Malay girl of 6 being badly cut up at K. Supa above Pusa. The Saribas has been most unfortunate lately in the number of serious crimes that have been committed. From Betong I proceeded to Pusa and Saratok, where a very successful Regatta was held. Great credit is due to the Officer-in-Charge and the officials who were responsible for the excellent arrange ments of both the Regatta and land sports. Abang Abu Talip, Native Officer, Saratok, was the most successful boat owner. “Ex-Penghulu Ramba and his brothers and followers who were fined for tuba fishing and refused to pay or open an appeal, as reported in my January report, have come to their senses and deposited pledges sufficient to cover all the fines. “The harvest was in full swing at the end of the month and very satisfactory crops are reported from all districts. ” At Simanggang, a ease of tuba fishing on a very small scale in a small side stream was settled by fines of twenty katties each on the two doors involved. Passages on Chinese launches from Simanggang to Kuching have been raised by fifty cents per person. Towards the end of the month the Malay school at Lingga collapsed. The school was built of leaf attaps, kajang and soft wood, and it is remarkable that it lasted as long as it did. The school is now temporarily housed in the Government boat-shed. A Dayak from Sebu arrived at Simanggang on February 19th asking for medical treatment. He showed two large teeth-wounds in the lower part of his right thigh, and said that some days previously he was out with his gun hunting pigs, and while crossing a small stream he was seized by a crocodile and nearly dragged under water: after a long struggle he managed to knock out the eyes of the crocodile with the butt of his gun. and the beast then let go. The Dayak states that the. crocodile was a fairly big one. The Right Reverend the Bishop of Labuan and Sarawak arrived at Simanggang on the 22nd from Betong and stayed at the S.P.G. Mission He visited Banting and ulu Lingga on his way back to Kuching. On February 16th the Tua Kampong. Supa. reported that a Malay girl aged six years had been murdered within a hundred yards of the kampong. The Senior Native Officer and members of the Constabulary left for Supa immediately in order to investigate the crime. Two arrests have been made, and investigations continue. This is the. fifth murder that has occurred in the Saribas during the past twelve months. A large number of Dayaks visited Betong early in February in order to pay taxes and also to clear the Simanggang road. The clearing of the road from the 3rd to the 6th mile has now been completed. Ten doors from the Spak applied to move to the Fourth Division, but though it was explained to them that their request could not be granted, they have notified their intention of applying in person to His Highness the Rajah. Alternate heavy showers anil light sunshine have encouraged farmers in the Saribas district to look forward to a good harvest. The reports from the uln continue to be satisfactory, and several houses have now commenced harvesting. Reports from Rimbas are not so good, however, since it is understood that the farms have suffered greatly from an invasion of rats. The Officer-in-Charge, Kalaka, states that on February 1st a Chinese hawker reported that while sleeping in a Dayak house, R. Bujang, Budu, he had $235 in notes stolen from a tin. Full enquiries have been made with no positive results; it is suspected that no theft took place, and that the man is swindling his towkay. The Chinese is being prosecuted for sleeping in a Dayak house. During the month it was reported by Dayaks in ulu Krian that a Chinese named Lim Geok Seng had been cheating them by selling cheap medicines at exorbitant prices; the case was still adjourned at the end of the month. All the Ulu Ai Penghulus visited Lubok Antu during February. Probationary Penghulus Ngali and Ningkan were confirmed in their appointments as from January 1st, 1937. They and Penghulu Tuning accompanied the District Officer to Simang- gang for the Regatta; while there, an aum was held in the Court House and ex-Penghulu Ramba’s conduct concerning tuba fishing was discussed. As a result of this the three Penghulus, accompanied by T.K. Salleh of Lubok Antu, left for Nanga Mujan on the 14th to inform Ramba of the Resident's decision, and to bring down pledges. They returned on February 22nd with sufficient pledges to cover the fines imposed. Some enterprising Dayaks from Nanga Musing, Ulu Ai. brought down about forty sana (coarse rattan and bark mats) for sale at about $1.20 or $1.25 each. Third Division News. FEBRUARY. The Resident, Third Division, reports that throughout the whole of his Division the high price of rubber is reflected in the glut of money in the bazaars and kampongs. Shops are full of goods, most of which may be classed as luxury articles, which are eagerly purchased by Dayaks, Malays and Chinese. The cost of labour is exhorbitant and it is feared that few persons are saving their money. Many people, mainly Dayaks, are clamouring to plant rubber and it is obvious that the late slump has taught them nothing. Mr. J. B. Archer took over as Resident. Third Division. from Mr. C. D Adams on February 1st. Mr. C. D. Adams, accompanied by Mrs. Adams, left Sibu for Kuching en route for England on the 4th. A large crowd representative of all com- munities. including the staff and pupils of both Malay and Chinese schools, were gathered to bid Mr. and Mrs. Adams farewell. At about 8 a.m. on Friday the 12th, the Melanau long-house at Kampong Nangka caught fire and was burnt to the ground in a very short space of time. The fire originated from a kitchen near the down-river end of the house and, due to a strong breeze that was blowing at the time, rapidly spread. Thore was only time for the inhabitants to save a few of their goods and run for safety. There was no attempt made to extinguish the fire, and even if the fire-engine had been on the spot, it is doubted whether it would have had much effect unless the origin of the fire had been located in its very early stages. Police with the fire-engine arrived as soon as possible at the scene of the fire, but as they had to pull the engine by hand for a distance of one and a half miles, they were only in time to put out the embers and enable the inhabitants to search for their valuables amongst the debris. Abang Salleh, the head of the house, and the other villagers who sustained a loss of valuables and goods worth thousands of dollars are to be deeply sympathised with. At a subsequent enquiry it was found that no blame could be attached to any particular individual. This house is one of the last Melanau long-houses in the country. There is one more at Kampong Nangka, one at Jemoreng in the Matu district, and one (partially dismantled) at Medong above Dalat. These relies of a former era arc interesting, and speak of the time when Melanaus had to band themselves together for mutual protection against Dayaks and Kayans. Thanks to the enterprise and keenness shown by Abang Median, the schoolmaster at Kampong Bawang School, Matu, a plot of land has been acquired close to the school to serve as a garden for the growing of various vegetables by the pupils of the school. During the month, consequent upon an appli cation for grazing land, the District Officer. Lower Rejang. paid a visit to Paloh and inspected the graz ing land there adjoining Pasir Mas. He was much impressed by the fine park-like appearance of the land and by its apparent suitability for cattle grazing, and remarks that there appears to be plenty of land available; at the time of bis visit some sixty-five head of buffaloes were observed there. The tapping holiday, which was in force for prac tically the entire month, seems to have been rigidly observed throughout the Lower Rejang district and there were no prosecutions in connection with the holiday. A most successful regatta was held at Matu on the 11th, Chinese New Year. A record number of boats entered for the various races and provided some most exciting finishes. Large numbers of people attended the regatta from both Matu and Daro, and the river banks adjoining the Court-house and Bazaar provided a colourful spectacle. No cases calling for comment came before the Kapit Courts during February with the exception of a civil case involving a claim for interest on money loaned when the deed embodying the agree ment stated no interest was to be charged, the interest according to the plaintiff being verbally agreed upon out of Court. The District Court held that the deed which was subsequent to the verbal agreement must be followed, and no claim for interest could be allowed. This decision was upheld on appeal, by the Resident’s Court on 26th. The case aroused great local interest owing to the custom involved, which has so far been followed by many of the pepper gardeners in this district. There were several cases of assault resulting from Chinese New Year. The epidemic of influenza followed by pneumonia in the Kapit district appears to have abated, although deaths are still being reported. On February 27th a boat of Rurnah Bansa, Balleh, capsized in a whirlpool and one youth was drowned; the corpse has not yet been recovered. Several rounds of ball were issued to Rumah Ingai, Nanga Mujong, Kapit, in an effort to get rid of a large crocodile which is causing trouble there. There have been several narrow escapes already from this particular crocodile, which, having finished most of the dogs, seems determined to have a human victim. Good padi crops are reported in the Kapit district, but the damage done by pig is enormous. In the Sut the District Officer saw quite well-made fences that had been torn up, and vast quantities of padi ruined. The pigs are ravenous, and apparently their daring has to be seen to be believed. The decision to allow approved Dayaks to buy five rounds of buckshot at a time has been received with universal appreciation. Owing to continuous high water many logs were brought down to Kapit from the ulu. Chop Lee Hua rafted 738 logs to Sibu during the month. Chop Hua Seng had 35 logs at Kapit at end of month. There has been a big exodus of Kapit Dayaks down river to tap rubber, and there is a shortage of labour in Kapit. This can only be explained by the up-river Dayaks' inherent desire to work in districts other than their own, and “to see the world.” An attempt is being made to put an end to the "peaceful penetration” by Malays and Chinese into the Kapit Dayak area by buying fruit trees, etc. It is proposed to draw up a register of all existing "alien" rights on the principle of land settlement, recognizing existing rights, but allowing no further acquisitions. It is amazing the extent of the rights over fruit in Dayak area which have been obtained by Chinese and Malays. A scheme is to be pro duced for the Resident’s approval. Hill padi farms are now being harvested in the Meluan district; good reports arc being received except from the Meluran pati Kanowit, though damage by, wild pig continues. Paya padi farms are also suffering from damage by pig. Sawah padi farms are reported to be excellent. Empam’s farm was inspected and the padi, now nearly ripe, is exceptionally good. The Dayaks of this house are already planning extensions. The crop obtained will be devoted to the purchase of more buffaloes. The success of this experiment and the adoption of this form of growing padi near Kanowit is, the District Officer thinks, now assured. A number of Machan and Ngemah guns were returned to their owners; the Penghulus are holding up all guns belonging to those who have not yet built substantial houses, unless adequate pledges to build within two months of the end of harvest are given. There is a general atmosphere of content and well-being throughout the Meluan district, attri butable to the price of rubber and the prospects of a good harvest. The District Officer, Meluan, is able to report that the Poi headmen appear to be more amenable and friendly than formerly, which is attributed to the collapse of Nyanggau's reputation, although the latter has started to build his house up a side stream which is strictly forbidden. Many new houses were being built in both Poi and Machan in spite of the close proximity of harvest. It was decided to move the Machan pak to N. Tiga, and this Penghulu Briak considers to be the limit which is permissible. An enquiry was held into the death of Eda bin Bakar at Balingian and it was found that deceased was attacked and killed by a crocodile while he was in a boat on rubber restriction patrol work. Health in the Mukah district was fair during the month, but a number of cases of influenza (gastric) and malaria were prevalent at the S.O.L. camp at Matadeng. The health of ulu Dayaks appeared to be much better than usual. The sale of mosque sago lands at Mukah realised $683, a very good price, and this added to mis cellaneous donations now raises the mosque rebuilding fund to well over $1,000. Certain kampong people are asking for the mosque to be rebuilt on a site on the old cattle ground instead of the site proposed some years ago just behind the present one. A final meeting in March will ascertain the wishes of the majority, whose proposals will be submitted to Government. The Dayak padi harvest in the Mukah district is just starting, and judging by standing crops observed during a tour of the ulu, they should have a very satisfactory (and badly needed) crop. A small sawmill has been started by a Chinese named Pek Kee Hoek on the Bedanga Road, under licence from the Forest Department, in order to work timber in the Sungei Sebakong. etc. Some of the bilian for the new Government offices in Miri is being obtained from the ulu Mukah by an S.O.L. contractor, Yong Khow, and also numerous sleepers for the S.O.L. track from the coast to the S. Tiris drilling site (about 12 miles inland). On February 22nd a haul ceremony was held at the Kuala which was well attended by large crowds of people pouring forth from all parts of Oya. On the 28th another kaul ceremony was held at lower Kampong Tanam, and was also well attended by Kampongs Tanam, Ud and Dalat people. Fourth Division News. FEBRUARY. In the Resident’s Court, Miri, Wong Ted Fob, a Shanghai Chinese of Sibuti, was convicted of fabricating false evidence and sentenced to nine months’ rigorous imprisonment. S’ng Meng Chai was convicted for house-breaking by night in order to commit theft, sentenced to three years' rigorous imprisonment, and recommended for repatriation on release. The Legal Adviser arrived in Miri in H.H.M.Y. Maimuna on February 9th in connection with the Vamco case. Mr. A. R. Snelus, who arrived from Lawas on the 8th, was Prosecutor. In accordance with arrangements made by the late Resident, Fourth Division, the following transfers of Native Officers were effected during the month :- Tuanku Suror from Baram to relieve Wan Ahmad at Niah. Wan Ahmad from Niah to relieve Abang Ali at Lawas. Abang Ali from Lawas to become Senior Native Officer at Miri. Work on the new market, new offices and customs godown at Miri continues satisfactorily. There is, however, a shortage of stones for the new offices, and the District Officer has been instructed to repair the Riam bridge so that stones may be obtained there by the contractor. During the month natives at Bintulu started the padi harvest; they did not, therefore, feel much hardship as regards the rubber tapping holiday. On account of the harvest very little damar was worked; the price, however, remains quite favourable. Reports on the padi harvest in the Bintulu district are generally satisfactory, and there should be no shortage of padi in the case of families who have made farms; unfortunately there are several who have been so attracted by the rising price of jungle produce recently that they have cither not made farms al all. or not paid sufficient attention to them. The Melanau population of Bintulu have not done very much sago-planting for the last three years, but it is now noticeable, due to the better price of sago, that there, is a general rush to plant more sago; this is a very good thing. On February 22nd Captain Baddeley, Marine Superintendent, the Straits Steamship Co. Ltd., visited Bintulu, returning to Sibu by m.v. Margaret on the 23rd. The District Officer. Limbang, reports that all the Penghulus, with the exception of Penghulu Tamanok Uyaw, were down during the month. Apart from a further complaint by the Skrangs in the Ulu Limbang of shortage of farming land, upriver affairs are quiet at the moment. The District Officer, Limbang, went to Ukong on 19th with upriver Agent Jaya to meet Penghulu Sisal and various other Bisayah chiefs and finished off the new Bisayah adat started by Mr. Bruce, returning to Limbang the next day. M.V. Subok and Brunei have maintained their usual run during the month. Mr. Baddeley, Marine Superintendent of the Straits Steamship Company, visited Limbang on March 9th in connection with the proposal to put one of this company’s bigger boats on the Labuan-Brunei-Limbang run to replace the m.v. Subok. which, it is understood, will go on the Labuan-Belait run. The Officer-in-Charge, Lawas, reports that the three Kadayan coolies who disappeared after a theft from the Lawas Estate at the end of January were eventually traced in Labuan. They have been arrested and detained by the Labuan Police and extradition proceedings are now in hand. Very few natives were seen in Lawas during the month, though there was the usual trickle of Kadayans and Muruts in the office taking out new gun permits and buying cartridges. On my visit to Trusan, the Officer-in-Charge was inundated with Muruts demanding new gun permits and cartridges. But the outstanding event there was the case of a drunken Murut who slashed a friend with a parang one midnight, for it is seldom that any brawling takes place in Murut houses no matter what state of intoxication the occupants may have reached. Normally a Murut gets happily and peacefully drunk until he passes gradually into the comatose state. On this occasion, however, the accused was apparently offended that his friend, who retired to his room and bed about 11 p.m., would not continue drinking with him till the small hours, and so he picked up what he thought was a lump of wood and started to hammer on his friend’s door. When the door was nearly smashed in the friend awoke and came to see what was the matter. Accused then attempted to hit him. still imagining he had a lump of wood in his hand, but the friend was almost too quick for him, getting away with only a slight gash over the eye. It appears that accused then collapsed. In Court he pleaded he was too drunk to know what he was doing and a large crowd assembled in court to see how this would “go down." Since it is impossible to persuade Muruts by mere force of words that they have now carried this drinking business too far, and that they are voluntarily killing themselves off, the opportunity was taken to show them that their phenomenal love of alcohol can lead to more obvious material disadvantages by giving the accused six months’ imprisonment, where he will learn—and, it is hoped, later teach others—what it is like to be sober for more than 24 hours on end. The Tapping Holiday was brought to a successful conclusion in the Lawas district, not a single offence haring been disclosed. The Lawas (Sarawak) Rubber Estate, Limited, exported 29,120 lbs. of dry rubber during the month. Below are extracts from a report by the Officer- in-Charge, Lawas and Trusan :— “I visited Merapok, Awat Awat, Trusan and Sundar during the course of the month. Having arrived at Trusan one afternoon, I was on my rounds of the Kampong roads that evening when a Village Constable came rushing after me with a message from Lawas that the telephone wires had been struck by lightning and the fort was a mass of smoke ! I was unable to get a telephone message through that evening to confirm that the wireless was also wrecked, and so early next morning I set off post haste back to Lawas on foot. I arrived there to find that there had been a slight misunderstanding owing to the general excitement, and there was no cause for worry. My presence was in fact unnecessary. True, the telephone wire had been struck by lightning just outside the fort and the flash had run along the wire into the fort; the main swithchboard was wrecked, fuses were blown, cell batteries were smashed and wires and connections burned up; but the wireless was quite unaffected and was in perfect working order, and the telephone operator already had repairs well in hand. Disgusted, I set off overland back to Trusan again and arrived about 6 p.m. thoroughly exhausted, but haring covered the 30 miles in the day.” CORRESPONDENCE. [The Editor is not responsible for the opinions of correspondents.] From Mr. H. R. A. Day. SHERRIFF'S HOTEL, BATH, February 9th, 1987. DEAR SIR, I am very much obliged by the receipt of your 1,000th number of the Sarawak Gazette. The Supplement attached is also most interesting; in the article by “Old Timer” I notice that he says communications were kept up in the early ’80’s by the Rajah Brooke,—I came out in 1886 and the boat then on the run was the Ranee, commanded by the late Capt. Joyce. The Rajah Brooke came subsequently, and was wrecked some time in the 90’s on Acasta Rock With reference to the Rajah Brooke, an amusing yam used to be current. Capt. Joyce was showing a visitor over her and said she was much more convenient than the Ranee, as she had more cabins. He remarked—“You can't put a lady and a gentleman in the same cabin,—not unless they are well acquainted, that is,—in fact, not unless they are married !" I don't lake in the Sarawak Gazette now, (hough I have all the numbers issued during my years of service bound in annual volumes. With many thanks for such a unique present as the 1,000th number, and best wishes for its survival for another thousand or two further issues. I remain, Yours sincerely, H. R. A. DAY. [Mr. Day was appointed a cadet in the Sarawak Civil Service in August, 1886, and went first to Baram and then to Kuching and Lundu, where he remained for four years; later, he was again in charge of this station for nearly two years (1898 to 1899). He served for shorter periods at Limbang, Mukah and Bintulu, was Resident of Upper Sarawak at Paku for seven years, and finally Resident, First Division, for one year. Mr. Day became a member of the Council Negri in 1903 and administered the Government for some months in 1909 and again in 1910, in which year he retired on pension.—ED.] From A Former Editor. OJI CHO I CHOME 698, NADA KU, KOBE, JAPAN. 12th February, 1937. The Editor, Sarawak Gazette. DEAR SIR, There is one slight omission in the list of Editors of the Sarawak Gazette published in your 1,000th number issue; this I can supply. When I joined the Sarawak Service towards the end of 1886 the Editor was Major F. I. Day, the Commandant of the Sarawak Rangers. He was also in charge of the embryo Museum collection. I am not sure when I took over the Editorship and Curatorship,—you gave it as 1887. I think it must have been quite the end of ‘87, if not ‘88. The old Roll Book in the Treasury should give the exact date on which I took over from Major Day. My first issue of the Gazette was the first number to be printed in the Chinese shop-house in Rock Road, to which the Printing Office was removed on the arrival of a new printing press and new type. As regards the Government Printer, who in my time was Mr. D. I. J. Rodrigues, a Maeno Portugese (Eurasian), I don't think he was self-taught. I always understood that as a small boy he was taken from a pirate junk in the China Seas by the Captain of an English man-of-war and was by him taken to England and there apprenticed to the Illustrated London News. How be ultimately found his way back to the East I did not hear. ‘Old Timer’s' water supply from a small lake in the “centre of the town" was only available some time subsequent to 1887 when the dam confining the water in a small valley running oft what was then Blacksmith Road was built by Ah Tet, a Chinese dam expert from Bau. Before this supply was available shallow wells were in use. though many in the Bazaar drew water from the pump at the Rajah's stables. Also river water at the end of the ebb tide was fresh, and was looked upon as good. The connection between the Pink ‘un and the Sarawak Gazette mentioned by 'The Optimistic Fiddler’ was as follows. A member of the staff of the Pink ‘un known to its readers as “the Salt" had been for a short period in the Public Works Department in Kuching. His name was Malcolm Drummond, and it was a brother-in-law of his who first drew my attention to the possibility of my obtaining employment in the Sarawak Service. I read the Sarawak Gazette with great interest and especially enjoyed the articles in the 1,000th special number. The Gazette has been much improved recently; at one time I thought of terminating my subscription, but as it is at present I shall continue as a subscriber so long as I live. Yours faithfully, JOHN E. A. LEWIS. [We are very glad to be able to print this letter from a former Editor. Mr. Lewis joined the Sarawak Civil Service in October, 1886. being appointed an Extra Officer and attached to the staff of the Courts in Kuching, where the whole of his service was spent. He retired on pension in June, 1909. having filled a number of posts including those of Acting Principal Inspector of Police (1889 and again in 1894), Acting Resident of Sarawak Proper (1899), and Clerk to the Council Negri (1897 to 1906). Mr. Lewis was Editor, Sarawak Gazette, and Manager. Government Printing Office, from 1887 to 1897. As regards the question of the Gazette's connection with the Pink 'Un, Mr. Lewis has solved the riddle propounded by the Optimistic Fiddler in the Special Supplement, and it is interesting to reflect that a Kuching office has sheltered one of the celebrated group of bohemians whose sessions at Romano’s were a byword in the ’eighties and 'nineties of the last century. It may not be widely known, though, that when the sub-editor in charge of the Pink ’Un’s “Answers to Correspondents” column replied to “Anon” telling him that his story was too hot for his paper, and advising him to try the Sarawak Gazette, his suggestion was not adopted for the simple reason that the story in question had already appeared in the Gazette ! This Happened shortly after the war, before the Editor of the Pink ‘Un had heen prosecuted and imprisoned, and at a time when the paper was at its most torrid; a story had to be hot indeed to be rejected, and those of our readers who are interested can fill in a wet afternoon by searching for this one through the bound volumes of former issues. No prize is offered to the successful finder.—ED.] The Sarawak Library. SARIKEI , SARAWAK , March 15th, 1937. The Editor, Sarawak Gazette, Kuching. SIR, May I suggest that the time has now arrived for the publication of a new edition of the Sarawak Library Catalogue? The last edition was published in 1932 and a previous edition in 1927. Since the publication of the 1932 edition some 900 volumes have been catalogued and there remains little space in the present catalogue for further entries. I am, Sir, Your obedient servant, R. G. AIKMAN. 