The Sarawak Gazette TUESDAY, JUNE 1st, 1937. Birth KOAY.—Born at the General Hospital, Kuching on Corona tion Day, May 12, to Jane, wife of C. G. Koay of the Sunny Hill School, a son, George Coronation Koay. Social and Personal APRIL. His Highness the Rajah sailed for Singa pore en route for England by the s.s. Vyner Brooke on May 3rd. As stated in our last issue it is understood that His Highness expects to be absent from Sarawak for about five months. Mr. E. Parnell, Govern ment Secretary, has been appointed Officer- Administering the Government. Another passenger on the s.s. Vyner Brooke on May 3rd was" Mr. M. J. Breen, late of the Hong Kong Civil Service. Mr. Breen had been in Sarawak for about two months, where he bad been preparing a report on the conditions of service in the Senior branch of the Sarawak Civil Service. Mr. G. S. Miller has left Kuching to take up a new appointment in Singapore. He had made many friends in Sarawak during the eighteen months in which he has been the local manager of the Straits Steamship Company, and several of them saw him off with due ceremonial when he sailed in the s.s. Circe on May 18th. Mr. G. R. II. Arundell returned from furlough on May 10th and on the 15th pro ceeded to Lubok Antu where he has been appointed Assistant District Officer. On May 21st Mr. Monnett B. Davis, American Consul-General in Singapore, and Mrs. Davis arrived by the s.s. Vyner Brooke for a short visit to Kuching. Mr. and Mrs. Davis proceeded to Miri by the m.v. Marudu on May 24th. H.M.S. Herald made a welcome return to Kuching on May 22nd. Commander Hardy and other officers spent the week-end ashore and cricket and football matches were arranged. H.M.S. Herald sailed again on the 24th. and at the time of writing is carry ing out survey operations between Tanjong Po and Sirik in the 3rd Division. The news of Mr. P. M. Adams’ retirement on the grounds of ill-health will be deeply regretted by his many friends in Sarawak. Mr. Adams went on furlough last October and we understand that he has been confined to a sick-bed for a large part of his leave. Mr. Adams was appointed a cadet in 1914, five years after his brother. Mr. C. D. Adams, who retired only last February, arrived in the country. For a short time he was attached to the Public Works Department, but he was soon transferred to Sibu, and, during the next few years, filled various appointments mainly in what are now the First and Third Divisions. In 1924 he became Acting Divi sional Officer First Division, and in 1930, after working as District Officer in various stations in the Third Division, Acting Resi dent First Division. He was appointed a member of the Council Negri in 1927. In 1933 he was promoted to Class IB and became Acting Resident Third Division. Tn March 1934 he was appointed Resident, Second Division, which post, with the exception of a few months in the Third Division when Mr C. D. Adams was on furlough, he filled for the remainder of his service. In lighter moments Mr. Adams was renowned as one of the best amateur jockeys who have ever been resident in Sarawak. He rode his first winner in 1914 on His Highness the Rajah Muda’s “Tearoba” in the last race meeting in which "whalers" took part. Racing lapsed during the war. but it was mainly due to a bet between Mr P. M. Adams and the late Dr. A. C. Hanton that the famous “Bullock Derby” of 1921 was run. Mr. Adams won this race by 87 1/2 lengths Soon after this the Kuching Race Committee met and decided to start once more with ponies from British North Borneo. In 1922 Mr. Adams went in search of the first batch and the first meeting was held in August of that year. Possessing a powerful memory. and. on occasions perhaps, a vivid imagination, he was a renowned raconteur and a powerful mimic. Armed as he was with these quali- ties, it is not surprising that his repertoire of songs was very popular, and in most stations in Sarawak it is no uncommon thing to hear someone, when pressed to sing a particular favourite, murmur shyly ‘I can’t do that; its Pim’s.” We are sure that a11 our readers will wish Mr. Adams a quick recovery and a very happy retirement. May 12th. being the occasion of the corona tion of His Majesty King George VI, was observed as a public holiday throughout the State. In the morning a service, at which most of the Kuching European community were present, was held at St. Thomas’ Cathedral, and in the evening the Committee and members of the Sarawak Club enter tained several hundreds of the leading members of the Asiatic community. It is seldom that the Club takes on as lively an appearance as it did on this occasion, and the celebrations continued until a late hour. The Kuching Military Band, present by kind permission of the Commissioner of Sarawak Constabulary, made their usual invaluable contribution to the success of the evening. Mr. B. A. Trechman and Mrs. Trechman proceeded on furlough by the s.s. Circe on May 29th. enquiries about the passage to Singapore in the s.s. Kam Sang which was scheduled to sail on the 19th. . We were informed that the passage by Kam Sang 2nd class was $42 including the com mission of the hotel and $92 by the Apear boat. We decided to use the cheaper boat though it was a slow one and handed over our passage to the hotel man to reserve a cabin for us. As the Kam Sang was sailing on the 19th and there were still a few days at our disposal, we decided to visit Macau, a Portugese port in Kwangtung province. We sent down our luggage which we did not want to take with us, for safe keeping by the hotel management. To MACAU. About 8 a.m. on the 14th we boarded the s.s. Tai Shan taking 2nd class passages, costing us 70 cents each, and waited till 9.30 when she sailed for Macau. We arrived at 12.80 and stayed in the Ng Chow Hotel, a nice room for $1 per night, with clean bath-room and W.C. not far from it. At 10 a.m. on the 16th we drove over to Choi Hang village where Dr. Sun Yat Sen was born, to sec his house. We hired a motor car at contract rate $12 Canton money and it took one hour for the motor car to smash its way to Choi Hang. There is nothing much to see in the bouse. After registering our names, a man showed us round the late leader’s bed-room, where a common bed. table and some chairs were put. said to be used by him when he was there. We only remained in the house for not more than 15 minutes and returned to Macau by our car RETURN TO HONG KONG. At 2.30 p.m. we boarded the s.s. Sui Tai for Hong Kong. We look 2nd class passages at 70 cents each. It was very crowded and the sun was terribly hot. We arrived at Hong Kong at 6 p.m. and went to the Tai Tung Hotel. After dinner wo went out for a walk and took some nice fruit and refreshment. On the 17th at 10 a.m. we went in a motor cai to the Colonial Office at the peak to have our pass vis d. After filling in the forms we were told to produce them to the Secretary of Chines -Affair office at Connaught Street and, after his signature, brought them back to the peak again, and were told to fetch the pass in three days’ time audio pay $10.50 each. Well, that was just too bad as we were now not financially well equipped. On our return to the hotel we were informed by telephone that we were wanted at the Colonial Office again at 2.30 p.m. and we went there in a motor car. We were asked to produce our Certificates of Identity again, and the official, after referring to a pile of correspondence, told us to wait. He went out to see the Colonial Secretary or some higher official. He came back and told us that visas were not necessary on our certificates of identity or passports and that we would be allowed to purchase tickets and allowed to land in Singapore. We could have leapt for joy as we did not have to waste $10.50 each. We could ill afford that sum as our pockets were not too full by that time. We returned to the hotel and counted our money. We had still $200 in Chinese National money besides a few $10 Hong Kong notes. We worked out the time the Kampar would be in Singapore and the number of days we expected to be in Singapore before we could sail for Sarikei. There were many acquaintances and friends, so there was no difficulty about money. With this idea in view we therefore spent our money in buying odds and ends, expensive clothes and nice food. On the 18th we spent our time out of doors spending and eating and had a last look at Hong Kong town and paid for our tickets. The day was very hot and it was very hot even at night. The electric fan working day and night made very little difference. BACK TO SINGAPORE. On the 19th we went out tor a walk and bought some articles like hair clips, etc. We paid our hotel bill $11 and at 2 p.m. left in a motor boat to the s.s. Kam Sang which cost us $2 for wages and tips, and the motor hire was already included in the bill. In the Kam Sang we were given a cabin in the stern part of the ship, a cabin of two berths No. 13 and 14. The inspection and vaccination of passengers took some time to finish and at last we sailed at 6.30 p.m. From the 20th to the 24th there was nothing much to write about. There were over a dozen cabin passengers who were all in many walks of life -professors, students, merchants, aviators, and workers, the majority of whom came from Hong Kong. We had good food sometimes and spent our time in talking—many of the deck passengers, can spin nice yarns and in enjoying music. We had a large space on deck for us. Water is plentiful and the sea was calm all through. There were two bath-rooms complete with shower-baths. We had a good company of co-passengers or else we would have felt dull on board as the slow Kam Sang, 3.310 tons, took six nights and five day’s to crawl to Singapore. Early in the morning on the 25th at about 2 a.m. we arrived at Singapore. At 6.30 a.m. the Port Health Officer and the Immigration Officer boarded the ship and the deck passengers were first examined and counted. Our certificates of identity were produced and we were, allowed to land. The ship came alongside the wharf at 9 a.m. and we landed, passing some sort of officers who looked at our certificates of identity. We left our luggage on board and went to the Wing Sang Chan Hotel. I accompanied their men to the Kam Sang to fetch our luggage. Before we could finish unloading our luggage the s.s. Sirdhana came in and occupied the wharf and discharged her passengers and we had to wail for ahout two hours to clear our luggage to go through the Customs. The examination officials were supervised by a European, and they minutely examined all and everything in the luggage. When we arrived from Sarikei the examination at Singapore was not so strict as when we arrived from China. Our luggage arrived at me notei about 11.30 a.m. In the afternoon we went out to find some friends so as to get some money and met some, but both of us were too proud even to hint at borrowing any thing In the evening we spent our time in the Great World and returned to the hotel rather late. On the 26th we went out to see some friends and again when we met a friend we disliked to mention the fact that we had run out of money. We paid off the hotel bill of $10 and went at night to the New World to spend our last cent. As the Kampar was timed to sail at 8 a.m. next day the hotel men advised as to go down at 6 a.m. enquiries about the passage to Singapore in the s.s. Kam Sang which was scheduled to sail on the 19th. We were informed that the passage by Kam Sang 2nd class was $42 including the commission of the hotel and $92 by the Apcar boat. We decided to use the cheaper boat though it was a slow one and handed over our passage to the hotel man to reserve a cabin for us. As the Kam Sang was sailing on the 19th and there were still a few days at our disposal, we decided to visit Macau, a Portugese port in Kwangtung province. We sent down our luggage which we did not want to take with us, for safe keeping by the hotel management. To MACAU. About 8 a.m. on the 14th we boarded the s.s. Tai Shan taking 2nd class passages, costing us 70 cents each, and waited till 9.30 when she sailed for Macau. We arrived at 12.80 and stayed in the Ng Chow Hotel, a nice room for $1 per night, with clean bath-room and W.C. not far from it. At 10 a.m. on the 16th we drove over to Choi Hang village where Dr. Sun Yat Sen was born, to sec his house. We hired a motor car at contract rate $12 Canton money and it took one hour for the motor car to smash its way to Choi Hang. There is nothing much to see in the house. After registering our names, a man showed us round the late leader’s bed-room, where a common bed. table and some chairs were put. said to be used by him when he was there. We only remained in the house for not more than 15 minutes and returned to Macau by our car RETURN TO HONG KONG. At 2.30 p.m. we boarded the s.s. Sui Tai for Hong Kong. We look 2nd class passages at 70 cents each. It was very crowded and the sun was terribly hot. We arrived at Hong Kong at 6 p.m. and went to the Tai Tung Hotel. After dinner wo went out for a walk and took some nice fruit and refreshment. On the 17th at 10 a.m. we went in a motor cai 10 the Colonial Office at the peak to have our passport vis d. After filling in the forms we were told to produce them to the Secretary of Chinese Affairs office at Connaught Street and, after his signature, brought them back to the peak again, and were told to fetch the pass in three days’ time audio pay $10.50 each. Well, that was just too had as we were now not financially well equipped. On our return to the hotel we were informed by telephone that we were wanted at the Colonial Office again at 2.30 p.m. and we went there in a motor car. We were asked to produce our Certificates of Identity again, and the official, after referring to a pile of correspondence, told us to wait. He went out to see the Colonial Secretary or some higher official. He came back and told us that visas were not necessary on our certificates of identity or passports and that we would be allowed to purchase tickets and allowed to land in Singapore. We could have leapt for joy as we did not have to waste $10.50 each. We could ill afford that sum as our pockets were not too full by that time. We returned to the hotel and counted our money. We had still $200 in Chinese National money besides a few $10 Hong Kong notes. We worked out the time the Kampar would be in Singapore and the number of days we expected to be in Singapore before we could sail for Sarikei. There were many acquaintances and friends, so there was no difficulty about money. With this idea in view we therefore spent our money in buying odds and ends, expensive clothes and nice food. On the 18th we spent our time out of doors spending and eating and had a last look at Hong Kong town and paid for our tickets. The day was very hot and it was very hot even at night. The electric fan working day and night made very little difference. BACK TO SINGAPORE. On the 19th we went out for a walk and bought some articles like hair clips, etc. We paid our hotel bill $11 and at 2 p.m. left in a motor boat to the s.s Kam Sang which cost us $2 for wages and tips, and the motor hire was already included in the bill. In the Kam Sang we were given a cabin in the stern part of the ship, a cabin of two berths No. 13 and 14. The inspection and vaccination of passengers took some time to finish and at last we sailed at 6.30 p.m. From the 20th to the 24th there was nothing much to write about. There were over a dozen cabin passengers who were all in many walks of life -professors, students, merchants, aviators, and workers, the majority of whom came from Hong Kong. We had good food sometimes and spent our time in talking—many of the deck passengers, can spin nice yarns and in enjoying music. We had a large space on deck for us. Water is plentiful and the sea was calm all through. There were two bath-rooms complete with shower-baths. We had a good company of co-passcngers or else we would have felt dull on board as the slow Kam Sang, 3.340 tons, took six nights and five day’s to crawl to Singapore. Early in the morning on the 25th at about 2 a.m. we arrived at Singapore. At 6.30 a.m. the Port Health Officer and the Immigration Officer boarded the ship and the deck passengers were first examined and counted. Our certificates of identity were produced and we were, allowed to land. The ship came alongside the wharf at 9 a.m. and we landed, pairing some sort of officers who looked at our certificates of identity. We left our luggage on board and went to the Wing Sang Chan Hotel. I accompanied their men to the Kam Sang to fetch our luggage. Before we could finish unloading our luggage (lie s.s. Sirdhana came in find occupied the wharf and discharged her passengers and we had to wait for about two hours to clear our luggage to go through the Customs. The examination officials were supervised by a European, and they minutely examined all and everything in the luggage. When we arrived from Sarikei the examination at Singapore was not so strict as when we arrived from China. Our luggage arrived at the hotel about 11.80 a.m. Tn the afternoon we went out to find some friends so as to get some money and met some, but both of us were too proud even to hint at borrowing any thing. In the evening we spent our time in the Great World and returned to the hotel rather late. On the 26th we went out to see some friends and again when we met a friend we disliked to mention the fact that we had run out of money. We paid off the hotel bill of $10 and went at night to the New World to spend our last cent. As the Kampar was timed to sail at 8 a.m. next day the hotel men advised as to go down at 6 a.m. On the morning of the 27th at 5.40 a.m. we had our tea and spent all our money with the exception of 25 cents in my pocket. Before we could reach the pier we were informed that the Kampar had sailed at 5.30 a.m. that morning. My readers may just imagine how we felt, having only twenty-five mighty cents in my pocket for both of us in a strange land like Singapore. We returned to the hotel and gave the manager a good tick off. He possessed a cool head and sent his man to find out if there was another boat sailing for Sarawak. There was the s.s. Vyner Brooke which was timed to sail in the evening for Kuching. We refused to use her as we had not yet bought our tickets. His man returned shortly and informed us that the s.s. Boribat was just about to sail for Sibu and we jumped into rickshaws (hire paid by the hotel) and wont to the pier. We got ourselves and our luggage on board the Boribat, but we knew no one in the ship. We paid off 20 cents for the boat tambang and we therefore had between us only five cents in a strange ship with no ticket and no friend. Something had to be done or we should have been dropped out of the ship like anchors. The day was very hot and we felt thirsty and hungry. From my reserve fund of five cents, two-fifths was spent on ice cream in order to quench our thirst and the remaining three-fifths was spent on two oranges. We looked around for the cook whom we found later and told him to supply us with food and drink payable on arrival at Sarikei, and agreed to pay what he charged. He willingly agreed, but there remained the other problem about our passage money. We looked for the Chin Chew here and there. At last he came at about 2 p.m. By this time I had plucked my courage up and my shyness about money affairs had temporarily dis appeared. I approached him and told him that we had finished our money and would pay the passages on arrival and that he could have our luggage as security. He looked at our luggage and the various hotel labels on the luggage must have convinced him that I was not a liar. He pulled out some money from his pocket, saying that he would pay for us first. I forgot how I thanked him but I did thank him heartily. We both thanked our stars for our good luck. Later some passengers also took passage by the Boribat. and a few we knew Passports and tickets were examined by people from shore and the Boribat sailed at 5 p.m. The Boribat was a slow and small steamer. Rhe tossed even when there were very little waves and I felt very uncomfortable for the two days she was on the sea. HOMEWARD BOUND. On the morning of the 30th Rejang was sighted and at 12.30 noon we arrived at Sarikei. After the usual inspection I called out to my relation to bring down $23 to pay for passage $17 and $6 for food, for both of us. When this sum was paid we took our luggage up and after the usual examination by the Customs officials we went home, and the first thing we did on reaching home was to have a good bath. On the first of July I went up to Sibu, and on the 2nd I left by the Rejang for a flying visit to Kuching and returned to Sarikei on the 7th at 6 a.m. At 8 a.m. on the same day I was in the office toiling as usual, with the noise of Shanghai still ringing in my head. Thus ended a long journey which took twelve weeks, my leave for four years slogging. I do hope many of my readers will do even better than I have done, and I hope that if one does, I shall be able to hear his story. A rough estimate of the distances in miles we had covered during this travel, and the amount of money spent in connection with this trip is given below, in the hope that they may be of interest. Total sum spent in Sarawak currency was $559.43 of which $485.55 was the actual sum spent in China and Hong Kong and $73.88 was spent from Sarikei and in Singapore. This was my own expenditure including everything and Mr. Lim Thian Seng spent just a few dollars more than I did. CONCLUSION. In conclusion I wish to bring to the knowledge of my readers that, since writing this article, conditions in China have changed considerably for the better, and these articles cannot be taken as a basis for “knowing” the China of to-day. (Concluded). A Visit to Japan. We print below extracts from the diary of a Kuching European resident who has recently returned from a holiday in Japan. This account makes an interesting com parison with Mr. S. B. Ah Koon’s series of articles on his visit to China, the concluding instalment of which is printed on page 127. Wednesday 31st March, 1937. Reached Hong Kong about 9 a.m. The mist was lying well down on the Peak and the place looked dull and grey, cold and miserable. However the sun came out later and we visited Kowloon. The ship berths there, the shops are good; one particularly first-class curio shop, and by taking a bus we saw quite a lot of the mainland, including the European quarters of Kowloon. The flowers are exquisite, mainly grown in pots and tubs; masses of colour all over the place. After lunch, the Peak still sulking and we took a car round the Island, and were speechless at the incre dible beauty of the place; grand, breath-taking vistas of the sea and bays and huge inland gullies. memories of the Highlands and its deep glens. Repulse Bay and its Hotel claimed us for tea. I can imagine spending a delightful holiday there; the bathing must be splendid but unfortunately the chill in the air forbade any sampling. Victoria itself is like all cities, grimy, and a trifle forbidding. We left Hong Kong next day, still cold and wet and the Peak invisible. The first day out was delightful; sunny and clear but the second was so cold that my bunk seemed the warmest place. It was rather rough too. Had 24 hours there, and felt much better. Sunday 4th April. Shanghai at daybreak, miles of dun-coloured river, junks and sampans, the latter containing whole generations of families in the utmost squalor and poverty. They clambered round the P.&O. shrieking for food and money, babies being exploited unmercifully, and small children armed with nets at the end of 7 foot and 8 foot bamboo sticks gathered up any refuse discharged from a boat. One haul was a mixture of pickled cabbage and egg shells; the shells were roughly separated from the cabbage and cast adrift, the cabbage I presume forming the stock for the family dinner that day. Everything was salvaged: papers examined and if useless returned to the river; very little was returned. The stewards of the P.&O. were awfully decent to the sampan people and from port holes were handed out empty choc-boxes, sweets, papers and even old dusters. We wore met on the wharf by friends and there followed a perfect orgy of shopping. That Mecca of shoppers, Yates Road; wonderful goods at very moderate prices. Shanghai is terribly ugly; so flat and drab; the much talked of Bund is miserably grey, though some of the Offices on the water front are hand some buildings. Beggars abound, exhibiting the most ghastly sores, no noses or no arms. They press their faces against the car windows and plead most dramatically for aid. Yet I believe the Beggars Union or Society is one of the wealthiest in Shanghai. We were taken through the Chinese City ; streets so narrow and crowded that cars were useless, and saw the famous Willow Pattern tea house. very grubby and distinctly unlike what I expected, clean and blue and willows all over the place. We had a guide otherwise we'd have got hopelessly lost. It was in this warren we were, accosted by a white beggar, a Russian I believe. They live there, some poor unfortunate people; no country, no homes, and no hope. Thursday 8th April. Reached Kobe after three delightful, warm, sunny, calm days. The famous Inland Sea at its best for us. We entered it at 5 a.m., and at 2 p.m. passed through the narrowest part very close to the shore and the wind whistling past. The first glimpse of Japan is entrancing hills and green valleys and comfy wee villages, every inch under cultivation and bright sunshine pouring down. The wildest rumours were going around the ship about the much dreaded Japanese Customs. How some unfortunate people hadn’t declared this or that or weren't allowed ashore, and how some were even shot at dawn. In the meantime we had filled up umpteen forms; parents names, birth place, age, occupation, why visit Japan, for how long, the places we hoped to see, etc., any books and author, any cigarettes, any brandy, and also we were told we might all be vaccinated. One passenger under “Books" put "Bible" and “Author Unknown” and just escaped the death penalty. We were ashore about 9.30 a.m. in Kobe, but we didn’t waste any time there as we knew we'd have a day there on the way home. Our first port of call was the Chartered Bank, and we were guided there by a polite youth, who, seeing us peer at a map, came forward and asked us where we wanted to go. All over Japan we met with wonderful kindness. The traveller need never feel a foreigner there for help is offered with almost embarrassing insistency, and the allowance made for the guest is elastic. We had decided to work from Kobe to Yokohama and Nikko touching various places en route. This proved an excellent plan though most people seemed to prefer the Yokohama to Kobe way. Beyond a very tiresome wait the Customs were, simple and easy. We were told to he in the lounge at 6.60 a.m. and there we all were in various stages of undress and there we sat for an hour. The crew, poor blighters, were lined up on deck for the examination in a bitterly cold wind. At 7 we solemnly walked passed 3 men (1 a Doctor), pre sumed our Medical cards, and that was all. Then passports, slow business, as each was compared with the already filled up declaration form. Then we were free. My advice to all future explorers on reaching Japan is to make a bee line for the Japan Tourist Bureau, to be found at every station and in many hotels. There you may buy railway tickets, have trains looked up and guide books thrust at you, hotels recommended and even rooms booked by phone, money changed; in fact your whole career could be solely put in their excellent and capable hands. We practically lived in the shadow of a bureau We found our first home from home at Kyoto, which we reached by electric train from Kobe in 1 1/4 hours. There we found hotels fully booked but were told by the J.T.B. that there was room in the Station Hotel. We never moved so quickly before but found that room and booked it for 2 nights. We raved about Kyoto, but looking back on the trip We would never have spent 2 days there. It was our first touch of Japan and it went to our heads. We walked miles and miles seeing shrines and temples and raved about everything. The hotel clerks, though bad English scholars, were very helpful and daily we left the Hotel, armed with guide book and instructions in Japanese. We made for the Department Store (everything hinges on the departmental store), and stood on the pave-- ment eagerly accosting every bus that stopped near us. We waved the instructions at the conductress and she either hailed us or shooed us off, just as she read, and somehow we were taken everywhere. The Imperial Palace, to which we went with such high hopes, proved a disappointment, as without a permit we weren’t allowed behind the all concealing high walls. We did try persuading a youth on guard and looked like succeeding but a terrifying elderly Japanese appeared. The guard withered up and so did we and all our hopes of sneaking in were squashed. Anyhow, we did hear that there is nothing but bare walls to see, so we felt com forted. My impressions of the Higashi Hongarni Shrine, a very large place, are massive pillars and huge ropes of human hair, coils of it, lying in glass cases. According to the literature attached no ropes were strong enough to carry the pillars during the build ing of the shrine, so the women of the district gave their hair which was woven into huge coils of great length and strength. The Sinka-Kugi Temple is so tiny and complete and the gardens surrounding it seem made for dainty Japanese ladies, not enlarged Europeans rolled in travelling coats and clutching umbrellas. It was there we had our first taste of green tea, which was awful, though I believe the flavour grows on one. We were fortunate enough to be in Kyoto for the celebrated Miyako Odai, or Cherry Dance only performed in April. The precision of the girls’ orchestra was wonderful. We heard the famous Nightingale Temple, a floor with special nails inserted so that at every footstep the floor gave forth a musical whine or whistle. It was built thus years ago to prevent spies and robbers entering. The secret of the nails is lost and so eventually spies and robbers will have an easy time. Departmental Stores are all over Japan, magni- ficient buildings and absolutely modern, but filled, to our western eye with junk, or perhaps we didn't see the first-class goods. From Kyoto we visited Nara and its famous deer, only 50 minutes by electric train. We didn't like Nara much, probably because it was such au intensely cold day, and there was no shelter from a biting wind. We drove all over the Park in rick shaws and admired the largest Buddha in Japan and the sacred deer. We saw the Tree of Con stancy, shrines innumerable, and lanterns by the million and would have given the lot for a hot water bottle. The one gleam in a dull afternoon was a guide who attached himself to us, a small sturdy peasant, who told us that in 7 years, unaided except by a dictionary, be had taught himself English, and jolly good English too. He was funny and got dreadfully mixed up at times and would talk of “the back side of the shrine.” Saturday 10th April. With the fatherly aid of the J.T.B. we left Kyoto at 10.20 a.m. for Miyanoshita. The day’s journey was most interesting. We got from the J.T.B. an excellent guide book, which led us gently from station to station, explained what we'd see from the train at certain times and the population and main trade of each town, and even told us when we'd see tea or mulberries or the famous mandarin oranges growing in the various districts. The scenery was beautiful, seascape one side and postural the other with huge mountains in the dis tance. According to the book “Through The Car Window" we were due to see Fuji at a given time and there she was. I spotted the white peak first and yelled “There she is" to a man. Japanese or Chinese. The whole car rose and peered. (We were the only Europeans on that train; but never once did we feel aliens and our path was always made easy for us). We bad many glimpses of Fuji afterwards but none so wonderful as that first view. At Odawara we were met by a porter from the Fujiya Hotel, our luggage put on a taxi and with many bows we set off on the very steep climb to the Hotel. Apart from the beauty of Miyanoshita, the Hotel is well worth a long visit. It is the most perfect hotel I have ever been to. It seems to be run exclusively for you, very reasonable terms, com pletely modern, steam heater, double bed-room with bath-room attached. Monday 12th April. Still at Miyanoshita and very loth to even think of leaving. We drove to the long Tail Pass to see Fuji and we had the most perfect view of the pride of Japan. Not a single cloud near and very majestic. The drive there and back terrified me. The roads were narrow with acute bends and too much traffic. The sheer drop (all roads in the country here have a cliff on one side), was sicken ing. We did gel into a traffic jam at one corner and all four cars stopped dead, but with intense courtesy all was arranged, the drivers bowing to each other and the cars sorted themselves out. Lake Hakone disappointed me, probably because the wind was really too piercing. We cable-carred to the top of a hill and then took a bus to the Sulphur Springs, smelly but interesting and guaranteed to blow up at any moment. Then a ferry to the Hakone Hotel for lunch. The job of bus conductress and ferryess is no sinecure, because they keep talking all the time pointing at the various beauty spots and places of interest. It gets very monotonous especially as we couldn't under stand a single word. On the ferry either a gramo phone or a girl’s voice entertained us, and as we left the boat the record “Auld Lang Syne" was put on. Even the Japanese saw the humour and we all bowed, mutually pleased with ourselves. Wednesday 14th April. Yesterday with regret we left Miyanoshita. I do wish we could have had another day or two there but Nikko, where we now are, is just as beautiful and the walks are really better. Miyanoshita was too hilly, here we are more open. There are miles of woods and paths and hills and I spent a whole morning roaming at will. Sometimes knee deep in beech leaves; clear atmosphere and bright sunshine, and one can’t feel tired. Again I was transferred to Scotland. We have only a few more days before we must rejoin the boat. I’d like to spend them all here. Nikko is famous for its shrines and temples. There are a mere 60 odd in the Park beside the Hotel; also the celebrated Lacquer Bridge, which 1 thought would have been improved with some Ronuk and elbow grease. We took a morning to see the most famous of the 60 shrines and temples. For the sum of one yen we had free access to them all. For 50 sen extra we saw a sword dance and the inevitable cherry dance. Two girl performers, one with a bad cold in her nose and an audible sniff. Friday April 16th. My very loveliest happiest, day in Japan. Though I’ve said that, before I really mean it this time. We went by bus and cable-car right up the face of a very steep hill, there lay this wonderful sheet of blue sparkling water, obviously a crater and surrounded by precipitous, snow-clad mountains. I walked the whole morning by a path which seemed to wind its way round the lake. Brilliant hot sunshine and air like champagne. At times plunging knee deep in dry powdery snow, next minute pulling wild flowers from banks. The British Embassy has a holiday house there, a very wise proceeding. We came back to the Hotel by car, a sheer drop down the mountain involving 30 sharp turns in about as many yards. Our ears hummed for hours when we were once again on the level. Saturday April 17th Tokyo. Here we are on the last lap of a most enjoyable holiday. We trained from Nikko in about 3 hours. The compartment was full and such a babble of sound I have rarely heard. America was well represented (both seen and heard), Dutch, Parsecs, Indians, Japanese, Chinese, English and Scottish all contributed to the general din. Tokyo is a beautiful city, but like many places we were told we must see, we found it a very dis appointing place and for the first time in Japan we were pestered to buy. The Imperial Palace, moat and huge walls are very beautiful, right in the heart of the city. I loved Tokyo best of all Japan’s large cities. We ate Suhiyaki at Yokohama in a Japanese eating house and again with friends in Kobe. The latter place produced most excellent suhiyaki. Wednesday 20th April. Left Yokohama and due at Kobe on the 21st. We shall have at least one whole day there, Friday 22 nd April. Had a delightful day in Kobe and Osaka with Japanese friends; ending in the excellent suhiyaki party referred to above, a lovely ending to a perfect holiday. The Chartered Bank of India. Australia and China. The eighty-third ordinary general meeting of the shareholders of The Chartered Bank of India, Australia and China, was held on the 31st March, 1937, at the Bank’s premises, 38, Bishopsgate, London, E.C. Below are extracts from the speech of Mr. A. D’Anyers Willis, the Chairman, who presided :— THE BANK'S BALANCE-SHEET. "Before proceeding to review the various aspects of world trade as affecting this Bank, 1 propose to draw your attention very briefly to the more striking changes in our balance-sheet figures, as compared with a year ago. Upon the liabilities side, you will observe an increase of £3,141,786 in the total of our current and other accounts—a reflection of the large amount of funds seeking employment all over the world, and is partly due to the improvement in the rubber and tin industries in which your Bunk is so largely interested. Fixed deposits, on the other hand, show a decrease of approximately £943,000. Another increase, which is very welcome, is shown in acceptances on account of customers of about £1,063,000, indicating greater participation in the movement of certain commodities, which in parts of the East employ this method of finance. Loans payable, with an increase of just over £2,000,000, reverse the decrease shown last year, and are now rather above the figure in our 1934 balance-sheet. As explained on previous occasions, these loans necessarily fluctuate considerably, and, generally speaking, represent temporary loans to finance exchange or other operations at a profit to the Bank. These items account for the increase of almost £5,000,000 shown in the sterling total of the balance- sheet. “Turning now to the assets, cash in hand and at bankers shows a slight increase of £413,000 at £4,834,863, whilst bullion on hand and in transit shows a comparatively large increase of nearly £1,000,000 from £249,861 to £1,230,534. Bills discounted and loans with a decrease of just over £500,000 and bills of exchange, including Treasury bills of about £700,000, illustrate only too pointedly the difficulty, to which I have referred in former years, of finding a profitable outlet of our funds. With an increase of over £3,000,000 in current accounts, deposits, and the decrease in loans and bills of exchange just referred to, we have been compelled to seek an outlet in the only other direction available, viz., Government Securities, which have increased by approximately £3,700,000. I should perhaps add that a very large proportion of the Bank's investments is in short-dated securities. “Other changes being of a minor character, I now turn to what is, I think, to both Directors and share holders alike, the most interesting part of our report —the profit and loss account. As compared with 1935, our net profits of £496,682 for the year show a small decrease of £1,961. After paying the usual interim dividend last September, we have available for distribution £167,719 18s. 10d., and we propose, subject to your approval, to pay a final dividend at the rate of 14 per cent, per annum for the half year, absorbing £210.000; to add £35,000 to the Officers’ Pension Fund; to set aside £40,000 on account of contingencies, and to carry forward to this rear the balance of £182,719 18s. l0d. OVERSEAS TRADE. "From this chair I have, as you know, been consistent in advocating that Great Britain's overseas trade should be fostered by every available means. It has been our policy, in the field in which we operate, to render every assistance when approached, towards the culmination of business proposals which have appealed to industrial and manufacturing interests in this country, provided, of course, they carry with them sound principles of finance, making them a reasonable banking risk. “Since the slump of 1931, a great shrinkage has taken place in the volume and value of British export trade. This shrinkage has been mainly due to the effects of "Economic Nationalism" which has resulted in the establishment in most foreign countries of quotas and exchange restrictions, preventing the free movement of manufactured and capital goods. Later on in my speech I shall indicate that the increased prices now being obtained for primary products, in most foreign countries in which we are interested, have produced a greater purchasing power. Resulting from this prosperity, it may be inferred there will be a tendency for a new or an increased demand for these very goods, the supply of which, hitherto, has been the mainstay of our overseas trade. Doubtless, in this con nection, I must take into consideration the manner in which our home trade continues to expand and how the consumption of domestic goods and purchasing power goes on increasing. Also how industrial expansion is proceeding at a great pace all over the country, due, without a doubt, directly or indirectly, to the Government rearmament scheme. No matter how much we realise, on peace grounds alone, the necessity for our rearmament programme, it does not follow that the industrial structure, which has been created as the result of it, need be on a healthy business basis nor its durability extend beyond the life expected of it. "It is natural that export trade should seem less important when domestic trade is expanding, but for the above reasons I wish to emphasise the desirability of serious attention being devoted to overseas orders, especially as. should they be neglected now, they may not be available when the present abnormal domestic conditions have dis appeared. I still hope at least when the overseas demand is not in actual conflict with domestic trade, it will not be entirely ignored, and that every effort will he made to retain a fair proportion of our pre War supremacy in this direction. Bearing on the subject of the extension of foreign trade, the Ottawa Agreements, which expire in August this year, are shortly coming up for review. If, beyond the limits of the Empire, the scope of overseas trade can be widened by inviting other countries desiring freer trade to negotiate for a reciprocal lowering of the existing banders, something definite may be achieved in furnishing a definite impetus to the volume of the world’s commerce. BRITISH MALAYA. "Before passing on to deal with rubber and tin —the mainstay of Malaya—1 must make some reference to the general all-round improvement which has taken place there during the past year. The ill-effects of the slump have now all but disappeared, and with rising prices of all her commodities, there is an air of prosperity and a feeling of optimism for the future which is in distinct contrast to the gloom of the past five years. "Both the Straits Settlements and the Federated Malay States have large accumulated surpluses, and their Budgets continue to be framed with great caution. RUBBER. "Last year the average price was 7 3/4d., and, towards the close, 11 1/4d. was touched. While this year there have been some reactions from time to time, the price tends to soar, and most estates must now be making very satisfactory profits. World stocks last year were reduced by 156,000 tons, while consumption for the first time in the history of the industry exceeded one million tons. "The enhanced prices planters are receiving for their commodity has naturally reflected itself in the improved buying capacity of the community in the Straits Settlements and F.M.S. "Provided consumption continues on the present scale 1 think we may reasonably look for the maintenance of a remunerative return for the product. DUTCH EAST INDIES. I am sure we all welcome the return to prosperity of the Dutch East Indies, which shared to the full the ill-effects of the recent depression. They are, as you know, very important suppliers of tin and rubber. Her wonderfully prolific sugar crop, unwanted during the slump owing to world poverty and to a large extent also owing to India's increasing self-sufficiency in that product, is now in increased demand for various markets. "Of great assistance to the trade of the Dutch East Indies during the past year was the devaluation of the guilder, and this has undoubtedly had the effect of encouraging purchases from the countries to whom they sell their produce; the devaluation of the guilder, by helping to increase exports, has tended to expand buying power in the Archipelago. This increased buying power should give a welcome fillip to the demand for imported manufactures, a business which has suffered severely for several years. THE PHILIPPINE ISLANDS. The Philippine Islands, where we have one principle branch and three sub-branches, are sharing in the benefits resulting from increased prices. ‘‘Their valuable output of coconut products, sugar and hemp all show greatly enhanced values compared with two years ago. The production of gold continues to expand, the output of the mines in 1936 being of a value of approximately 4 1/2 million sterling. CHINA. "Tn happenings in China, which have made the greatest impression on the Western banking world in the last year or so, probably that of the change in China to a managed currency, stands out relatively as the most important. In last year’s speech, misgivings were expressed regarding the ability of the Chinese Government to maintain a managed currency. So far the arrangements have been successful, and if. aided by a healthy export trade, and provided that no major political upheaval takes place to challenge the authority of the Central Government, there seems no reason why they should not continue to be a success. "At the time the currency reforms were intro duced in November, 1935, the Government announced its intention of converting the Central Bank of China into a Central Reserve Bank. So far this essential safeguard to the control of the note issue and to the effective supervision of the Commercial Banks—free from all political bias— has not been introduced, although I believe the matter is receiving attention. "The note issues of the three Chinese Government Banks which at the moment constitute legal tender, circulate freely in most parts of the country, controlled from Nanking. No doubt the right to issue notes by other banks in certain parts of China will he withdrawn in due course. I have every reason to believe that the Government , reserves of foreign funds, built to a great extent, I should say, from sales of bullion, are intact and have not been depleted in any way by the events of the year, which is all to the advantage of the currency control. According to Customs returns, during 1936, net shipments of silver were $249.6 millions, while gold shipments stood at $40.6 millions “Reverting to financial matters, as might have been expected, the Ministry of Finance, according to the figures of last June, have not been successful in securing a balanced Budget. Every endeavour has been made to increase the National Revenue, but the lack of proper political organisation in the country, and the difficulty of imposing an equitable system of direct taxation present difficulties which only time can overcome. In this regard. I think we can fully sympathise with China when we realise that the Maritime Customs, under a very efficient foreign Administration, have not been able to function as they were entitled in Northern China, with the result that the collection of full Customs duties has been interfered with, and the revenue of China as a whole has been made to suffer. On the expenditure side, the allocation for Army main tenance is still proportionately high, but the Central Government, to ensure the requisite control, have not found it possible to bring about any reduction. Under the able leadership of the Chiang Kai Shek Administration, good progress continues to be made, and the liaison which Nanking has now established with the Provinces of Kwangtung and Kwangsi is a co-ordination in the right direction. adding strength and power to the Nanking Authorities. ’To refer briefly to trade. I am very pleased to note that during and since the last quarter of 1936 a growing demand has arisen for China’s products at enhanced prices, which aided by a steady exchange, has made an encouraging change by the outlook for China generally. With a shortage of crops in other parts of the world, Chins has benefited and we begin to realise her advantage on the estimate that her crops, harvested last year, are worth $3,000 millions more than the crop- of 1935. “The returns of China's foreign trade for the year 1936 show imports valued at $941,000,000 and exports at $706,000,000 compared with $919,000,000 and $595,000,000 respectively in 1935. The excess of imports thus amounted to $235,000,000 in 1936 compared with $324,000,000 in 1935. Making allowances for differences in exchange, etc.. I find an important improvement has taken place in China’s trade position since our last meeting. “Having struck an optimistic vein regarding me . uplift which China is receiving from the makings of more prosperous times, I am drawn naturally in a reference to the potentialities of China as a market for British exports. I have already touched on this subject under the heading of “Overseas Trade.” “It is gratifying to observe that the Export Credits Guarantee Department of the Department of Overseas Trade has recently sent to China representative to explore and report upon commercial opportunities for British manufacturers. “For some time to come. China is likely to be an important market for capital goods, and in parti cular. for machinery, to equip the new industrial plants that are being created under the supervision of the Ministry of Industries. A great deal of Industrial progress is being made under the aedis of nationalised and semi-nationalised corporations. JAPAN. Japan has bad a difficult year. both from the political and economic point of view. The higher prices of the raw materials she imports for her manufacturing industries have recently put a strain on the exchange value of the Yen. There is necessarily a time-lag Before the higher value of her exports adjusts the position. I am glad to see that she is arranging for part of her gold reserves to be shipped abroad to strengthen her exchanges. This is a wise step, as, after all, reserves are of little value unless brought into front line defences when necessity arises. “The Finance Minister stated in Tokyo last month that the value of the gold reserve of the Bank of Japan was 1,700 million Yen (say 100 million pounds) as against a note issue of 1,400 million Yen. “The annual production of gold in the Japanese Empire is stated to be about 100 million Yen.” ,
$5000 .
.
.
12 1937, :- .
( ) Coronation Celebrations at the Maderasah Melayu. On the night of May 12th the pupils of the Malay Schools gave a display of Torch and Physical Drill in celebration of the Coronation of His Majesty King George VI. The display took place on the Maderasah Melayu grounds and was much appre ciated by the large crowds of spectators from the Kampongs who assembled to witness and admire the brilliant illuminations. Among those present were : the Datu Patinggi, Datu Imam, Datu Hakim. Datu Menteri, Datu Haji Mohiddin, Datins and Dayangs, Mr. and Mrs. C. H. Jackson. Mr. and Mrs. J. L. Noakes and Mr. F. R. K. Kitto. At the end of the performance Dayang Madihah binti Haji Bol Hassan rose, and on behalf of the School children, made a speech and thanked all those who, by their presence, had helped to make the evening a success. .
12 .
. . . . . . . . .
. First Division News. APRIL. The Resident, First Division, states that on the 1st. he spent the whole day in court at Bau, where six Chinese were convicted of the murder and gang robbery at Jugan on the night of the 9th/10th February. On the 14th. instructions were received by the District Officer, Kuching, to check the stencil register and issue number plates to all holders of rubber gardens in the district. Arrangements were made to engage a special staff for this purpose and notices were distributed throughout the district, On the 19th the work of checking and issuing number plates was started, the office over the old gaol having been acquired for the purpose. It soon became apparent that it was impracticable, if not impossible, to check the existing alphabetically arranged census register, and it was decided to write a new register as people came in with their stencils and titles. This new register is accurate and saves a lot of time and by the end of the month over 4,000 gardens had been registered. This checking of titles has resulted in a rush on the Land Office by people owing quit rent or holding gardens without any title and will therefore have a permanently good effect. The work connected with rubber restriction was well under way at the end of the month in Bau. but it is noticed that Chinese holders are not responding to the call nearly so well as Native holders. The demand for new stencils is heavy. Dayaks will persist in getting their plates and stencils mixed up which will lead to confusion in the future. Every effort is being made to avoid this but the attractions of the arrack farm lead to trouble. Another difficulty is that if a checker is dealing with a number of Dayaks from, for instance, Singghi, a man from Jagoi will cheerfully declare that he comes from Singghi in order to get his plate quickly, and, as they have no titles, this deception is often impossible to detect. As usual the Chinese headmen are the last to make any effort to register their holdings in spite of being asked to set an example. On the morning of the 16th a report was received at the Central Police Station, Bau, to the effect that four men had broken into the arrack farm, tied up the cashier, and robbed the till. The Constabulary promptly investigated the crime, and, within a few hours, the cashier was under arrest on a charge of criminal breach of trust, for which he was duly sentenced to one year’s rigorous imprisonment by the District Court. Two inquests were held at Bau during the month, a verdict of "accidental death" being returned on Dolly Lee of Batu Kitang, and of "found drowned" on Anggong anak Nipar of Pangkallan Tebang. The following table gives the individual output of gold from the various mines for March, 1937 :— Four Chinese hawkers from Nakong, Samarahan, were fined $10 each for rebuilding their godown after being informed twice that they were not to do so. In September 1936 the Resident ordered its removal and last February, after two notices had been served on the owners, the police removed the roof and walls. In March the owners rebuilt the shed and so in April they were summoned and fined. In the Serian district all natives have been busy harvesting and it appears that results are good throughout. The draw for the annual tennis tournament is as follows :— MEN'S HANDICAP SINGLES. Cargill scr. v. Baughan +15 odd games and +30 even games; Kitto scr. v. Digby +30; Rothera + 15 odd games and +30 even games v. Benson + 15; Philp +15 odd games and +30 even games a bye. MEN'S CHAMPIONSHIP SINGLES. Digby v. Baughan; Cargill a bye; Rothera v. Benson ; Kitto a bye. MEN’S HANDICAP DOUBLES. Baughan and Rothera +15 v. Cargill and Kitto - 15; Benson and Philp +15 a bye. Second Division News. APRIL. The Resident, 2nd Division, reports that His Highness the Rajah, accompanied by the Govern ment Secretary, visited Saratok and Kabong from the 13th, to the 16th. His Highness’ party also contained Mr. and Mrs. Ennion, and Mr. and Mrs. Spurway and children. On the 14th. His Highness the Rajah heard requests in open court at Saratok, and afterwards visited the Malay School. In the evening the Penghulus visited His Highness on board H.H.M.Y. Maimuna. On the afternoon of the 15th His Highness arrived at Kabong where he went ashore and heard requests in the fort. It is unfortunate that the day His Highness arrived at Saratok the Krian broke its record of good behaviour and a murder was discovered in the Awek, the first for some years in this district. At the inquest the body was indentified as that of a Chinese named Ting Sung Nguong. A verdict of murder by some person or persons unknown was returned and two arrests have since been made. In an appeal from a fine imposed by the Petty Court in Simanggang for "Ngumbai Ulun” (calling a person a slave), the District Court allowed the parties to dive as both were willing. The appellant lost the case as his diver lost consciousness after being submerged for 3 minutes 10 seconds All Penghulus, Tua Kampong, and principal Headmen in the Simanggang district were called during the month and wore instructed about indivi dual assessment and the preliminary measures to be adopted. Large crowds of Dayaks have been in paying taxes and obtaining rubber stencils and rubber garden identification plates. All the clerks engaged on rubber restriction work have been very quick in picking up their duties, but it is a slow and difficult job dealing with Dayaks as all information has to be dragged out of them at the top of one's voice so as to be heard above the general uproar. Up to the end of the month approximately 2,750 identification plates had been issued. It is thought that there are more unreported immature gardens than was at first expected, especially in the interior zones. The Court-room has been converted into an office for the issue of stencils, and the Court has been temporarily removed to Fort Alice. Tua Kampong Sa’at of Bakong reported on the 30th that a Malay hoy, aged 7, had been found, drowned in a well, by his parents. He had been seen playing by himself near the well and it is persumed that sometime during his play he fell in. Harvesting has finished in most localities in the Batang Lupar, and with a few exceptions excellent crops have been reported. Persons from almost every house in Penghulu Ringgit's district in Lobok Antu were fined and imprisoned during the month for illegally planting rubber. In consequence of this the Penghulu and five of his Tuai Rumah were fined $50 and $25 respectively. An aum was held in the fort at Lobok Antu on the 17th and 19th of the month and all the Penghulus and several Tuai Rumah were present for the purpose of having various Government Orders explained to them. All seemed to be satisfied with the explanations given by the Officer-in-Charge and requested that similar steps should be taken when ever a new Order is issued. The Ulu Ai Dayaks report having good crops with the exception of three or four houses in the Engkari that have failed. A sore eyes epidemic is again raging in both Engkilili and Lobok Antu and recovery appears to be very slow. Mr. A. W. D. Brooke, Officer-in-Charge, Lobok Antu, left on transfer to Baram on the 20th of the month. One case of theft from an assistant of a gambling farmer at a cock-fighting contest up river was dismissed in Betong. It was noticed that none of the assistants could speak Malay or Dayak. A case of Butang pasong di tanah came before the Magistrate's Court, Betong, and the accused was convicted and fined This appears to be a very rare offence in the district, the last known case being over ten years ago, and the present fine was based on the ruling made then. All the Penghulus of the Saribas visited Betong during the month. Dayaks of Sungei Klampi. above Kanga Tiga, visited Saratok to interview His Highness the Rajah, and were allowed to stay in their present house provided that each door put in a pledge for a period of two years as security for good behaviour. A total of $47,300 has been paid out in Betong from telegraphic transfers during the last two months. This reflects the increase of trade owing to the rise in the price of rubber, but even then a great deal of money must, have been lost by the dealers as a result of the drop in the price towards the end of the tapping holiday. Thud Division News. APRIL. The Resident, Third Division, reports that the cost of living and labour is fast increasing all over the Division and especially in the Rejang river. There is a genuine shortage of labour, and immigration in reasonable numbers might ease the position. Persons on fixed salaries are badly hit and this applies mostly to Government servants. Gambling in Sibu is so popular that a temporary hall has had to be rebuilt, as the Government shop house in which gambling formerly took place was not big enough. There was one appeal in the Resident’s Court which was allowed. There are a number of appeals from Lower Courts pending. Some of these no doubt are genuine but it is thought that a number of them are frivolous. There are numerous "petition writers’’ who, it appears, urge unsuccessful litigants to appeal, thereby obtaining fees for writing petitions most of which are ridiculous. Preliminary arrangements are being made for the rubber assessment. Owing to the brief notice much confusion has been caused but it is hoped that order will gradually emerge out of the present chaos. All Penghulus in Sibu district were called down during the month for explanation of the Rubber Assessment scheme. Tua Kampongs were likewise instructed, and in addition were given a copy of Kampong regulations which they were requested to enforce. A report was received in Sibu of an epidemic amongst Dayaks at Dorin and a dresser was despatched up river immediately. He arrived to find one woman dead from the after effects of influenza and about 15 others down with the same complaint, and reported that the affair was more of a scare than anything else. The patients are said to have made a quick recovery under treatment. On the 7th a Coroner's inquest was held in Sibu on a male Foochow by name of How Ping Tiong whose body was found at Pasai on the 5th. A verdict of “death from drowning” was recorded. The Coroner also held an inquest on a female Foochow, Wong All Tong, aged 18, of Tanjong Kungit, who had been previously admitted to hospital and was alleged to have drunk acetic acid. A verdict of “death by misadventure” was recorded but there was strong suspicion of suicide and investigations are continuing. Notice to determine his contract for upkeep of the Sibu Rural Area roads was received from Ting Chiew Hin, the road contractor. This is the third similar contract that has been rescinded in the last two months. Contractors state that they are unable to find and keep labour with the high prices which obtain in the district at the present time. Notice having been received of the arrival of the s.s. Sagres at Rejang district from Foochow, China, with a large number of immigrants on hoard, the ship was met at Rejang by the Polina, Health, and Immigration authorities in order to ensure that regulations were observed. The papers of the immigrants were found to be in order and the ship was allowed to proceed to Sibu. Being of 1,415 tons burthen and probably the biggest ship that has ever been to Sibu, sho had some difficulty in nego tiating the river at Lebaan and did in fact run aground on the sand bank there. She was. how ever, refloated the next day. She returned to China and was back again at the end of the month, again having difficulty in the river both coming and going. The advent of the tapping holiday filled the bazaar with both Dayaks and Chinese and silver smiths did a brisk trade amongst the former, who all appeared to have money to spend. Dayaks can get $1.50 to $2 a day tapping rubber and are diffident about taking on work for less. A Dayak woman named Limpar twice attempted suicide in Mukah. She was found to be pregnant and was convicted and sentenced to two weeks’ detention in the Police barracks. She appeared to be taking to heart the fact that her husband was in gaol for two weeks for a petty offence. The Sarawak Oilfields Ltd. rentis to the proposed Tins drilling location is going ahead and Forest Guards have been told to check up on timber used by contractors. A warning has been issued to possible speculators in the Sarawak Oil fields Ltd. area that no one can accrue any rights to land there, as any of it may be required by Government for station or town planning. Contractor Lim Khow was granted a licence, renewable every two months, for a motor omnibus which has been tested and passed for public service between Mukah and Mateding. On the night of 18th April, 1937, a Cantonese girl, 9 years of age, was brutally attacked by an unknown assailant in a rubber garden at Sungei Kijang, Binatang. The girl, Siong Ah Hap, died of her wounds in the Sibu Hospital on the 21st and at the inquest a verdict of murder by some person or persons unknown was returned. In a second inquest at Sankei a verdict of suicide was returned on the body of a female Foochow named Neo Mee who had succumbed to the effect of a dose of acetic acid. The padi harvest this year throughout the Lower Rejang district is likely to be very satisfactory. All reports received up to the present are good and most Melanos at Matu have obtained more than eight pasus of padi each. Meetings of all rubber garden owners were held at Paloh, Daro, Matu, Balawai, Rejang, and Selalang and the District Officer explained the new system of individual restriction, and the work required from garden owners in respect of clearing of boundaries and fixing identity plates. Similar meetings were held and attended by the District Officer at the Malay school in Sarikei and at four Chinese schools in the Sarikei district. Further meetings were held at seven schools in the Binatang area. More deaths have been reported in the Song district, apparently from influenza followed by complications. Twenty-six Dayaks from the Katibas area pro ceeded to Mukah at the request of Sarawak Oilfields Ltd. Dayaks have commenced to rentis their own rubber gardens and consequently the bazaar people are having great difficulty in obtaining labour for that purpose. Seven doors of “orang batak” have been allowed to return to the Katibas but have been split up amongst trustworthy houses. Their old leader, ex-Tuai Rumah Ibang, has died while in “exile" in the Igan. Nearly all harvesting was completed by the end of the month in the Kapit district. With few exceptions good crops have been obtained. The Katibas have a bumper crop and in the Entulu Merirai Rumah Limbang have enough for three years; several houses in the Mujong are in a similar position. The heavy continuous rain has laid some of the padi and some of the late harvesters have lost part of their crop, it having rotted with the alternate rain and sun. On the 2nd an Iban Dayak appeared in Song with a gun which bad burst in his hands. The gun was hardly recognizable as such, but strangely enough the holder did not receive even a scratch. Two crocodiles, 15 feet and 10 feet, have been caught by Rumah Ingai, Mujong, one of which contained human remains. Fourth Division News. APRIL. The Senior District Officer visited Baram, including Lobok Nibong, from the 2nd to the 4th and interviewed all Foochows who wished to see him regarding negotiations to sell their rubber gardens to Lawas (Sarawak) Estates. It is understood that the alleged discrepancies in Government demar cation of the holdings are in fact comparatively negligible. An involved land dispute appeal case from Niah was settled in the Resident’s Court on the 8th and the decision of the lower court reversed. In another appeal case regarding compensation for goats killed by dogs the judgment of the lower court was upheld. On the 13th a Chinese named Chua Boon Heng was found hanging in the grounds of the Hailan Kongsi in Miri. An inquest was held on the 15th and a verdict of suicide returned. A quarrel arose between the local Imam and Khatib in which both were at fault. It was found that the root of the trouble was long bickering over the division of Mohamedan marriage fees, and a definite procedure for the future was laid down. On the 5th the Air Officer Commanding, R.A.F. Ear East, arrived from British North Borneo with four flying-boats of 205 Squadron R.A.F. He was accompanied by Wing-Commander Dunn. The flying-boats anchored at Kuala Baram and left for Kuching on the 6th. The inquiry into the death of Santok at Baram was held on the 5th and a verdict of murder by some person or persons unknown was returned. On the 9th one of the two persons detained on suspicion confessed to the crime, saying that lie had been short of money and giving theft as his motive. He was a young Malay named Mohamad bin Unus, living near Lobok Nibong, and he was very well acquainted with the deceased. He claimed to have taken only fifty dollars from the body, and insisted that, apart from the hundred dollars dropped in a hurry, there was no more than that in the belt. On the 13th lie was taken to Miri for trial and was convicted and sentenced to death. On the 14th a report was received that a Kayan woman, named Usun Oyoh, of the Uma Puh tribe living nr Long Atip, was accidentally drowned whilst bathing. The body has been recovered and the death is being investigated. A Long Sabatu Kenyah from Long Ikang, named Moyong Jakong, was admitted into hospital on the 19th and died a few hours later of Bacillary Dyseutry and Cardiac Deficiency. Unfortunately his friends and relations had only brought him in as a last resource when his condition was so serious as to leave little hope that medical attention would Tuanku Talia and Dresser Chakraverty visited the Tinjar during the early part of the month to investigate the reports of an epidemic. It was found that many of the villages were suffering from Pneumonia, consequent on neglect and exposure too soon after recovery. On the 21st Penghulu Nyaloi reported that a young Than girl of about thirteen had been missing for several days, and, since her clothes were found near the flooded Dabai river, it was feared that she had been drowned. Abang Suleiman was sent to investigate, and, after the fifth day’s absence, she was found by her father sitting quietly in the branched of a tree, which was surrounded by flood water several feet deep. She is apparently con sidered mad as she is liable to see visions and is subject to epileptic fits. She is now under observa tion in the hospital. Several parties of Kelabits arrived at Marudi during the mouth to pay their taxes and sell produce. On the 14th the Resident’s Court in Bintulu, with Mr. K. E. Le Sueur presiding, tried the case in which Allih bin Sutir, a Melano, was charged with the murder of his father. The accused, who was convicted and sentenced to death, was sent to Kuching on the 16th. Apart from the alleged theft from the Customs godown of one parcel containing drugs belonging to Dr. R. T. A. Morrow, no serious crimes were com mitted during the month in Bintulu. Tn Bintulu the reports of the harvest were satis factory in practically all cases. The prices of sago and jelutong remain good and natives are generally prosperous. Lawas (Sarawak) Estates Limited. The Directors submit their Report, with Statement of Accounts duly audited, to December 31st last. The net profit for the year, after making provision for Income Tax, amounted to .£11,318 1s. 11d., to which has to be added the credit balance of £1,164 13s. 2d. brought forward, making a total of £12,482 15s. 1d. The Directors now propose a Dividend payment of 5 per cent, free of Income Tax at 4s. 9d. in the which will absorb £10,449 19s. 4d. gross, leaving a credit balance of £2,032 15s. 9d. to be carried forward. During the year a restricted crop of 1.022,899 lbs. of Rubber was harvested, which compares with 964,063 lbs. for the previous year. The average gross price realised was 8.18d. per lb., against 5.924. per lb. for the year 1935. The cost of production f.o.b. Labuan for the year was 4.59d. per lb., and the “all-in" cost after charging London expenses, freight, insurance and selling charges, was 5.48d. per lb. This compares with an f.o.b. Labuan cost of 4.57d. and an "all-in" cost of 5 42d. for last season. The total area vested in the Company is 8,207 acres, of which 4,488 acres are planted and mature. Particulars are detailed overleaf. The Directors are nt present negotiating for the purchase of a further Property planted with Rubber. A cabled report received from the Company’s North Borneo Manager, Mr. J. N. BLACKWELL, is considered satisfactory, and the full report should reach London before the Annual General Meeting to be held on 19th instant. To finance the purchase and further development of the new area, if acquired, if becomes necessary to increase the issued Capital of the Company, and as a preliminary step the Board will invite Members at the forthcoming General Meeting to pass a Resolution increasing the authorised Capital, as set out in the accompanying Notice convening the Meeting. In accordance with the Articles of Association, Mr. G. D. F. SINCLAIR retires by rotation, and being eligible offers himself for re-election. The appointment of the Auditors rests with the Members, and Messrs. JAMES, EDWARDS & Co. offer themselves for reappointment. By order of the Board, BOWE, WHITE & Co., LTD., Secretaries. 4, LLOYD’S AVENUE, FENCHURCH STREET, LONDON, E.C.3. April 9th, 1937 REPORT OF THE AUDITORS TO THE MEMBERS OF LAWAS (SARAWAK) ESTATES LIMITED. We have audited the above Balance Sheet dated December 31st,1936, witu the Books and Vouchers of . the Company in London, in which have been incorporated the Accounts from the Estates as certified by the local Auditors, ami the Agents' Accounts as certified by them. We have obtained all the information and explanations we have required. No provision has been made for Depreciation. We have been unable to inspect Title Deeds representing 50 acres, which we are informed are in the East. Subject thereto, in our opinion such Balance Sheet is properly drawn up so as to exhibit a true and correct view of the state of the Company’s affairs, according to the best of our information and the explana tions given us, and as shown by the Company's Books in London. 5, COLEMAN STREET, LONDON, E C.2. April 9th, 1937. JAMES, EDWARDS & Co., Chartered Accountants. The Chartered Bank of India, Australia & China. The Directors have now to submit to the Shareholders the Balance Sheet and Profit and Lose Account of the Bank for the year ended 31st December last. These show a net profit, after providing for all bad and doubtful debts, of £677,719 18s. 10d. inclusive of £181,037 16s. 1d. brought forward from the previous year. The Interim Dividend at the rate of Four teen per cent, per annum paid in September last absorbed £210,000. The amount now available is therefore £467,719 18s. 10d., and the Directors propose to pay a Final Dividend at the rate of Fourteen per cent, per annum less Income Tax; to add £36,000 to the Officers' Pension Fund ; to set aside £40,000 on account of Contingencies, and to carry forward the balance of £182,719 18s. 10d. The Directors have to announce with regret the retirement of their esteemed colleague, Mr. Archibald Auldjo Jamieson, who, during his period of office, rendered valued service to the Bank as a Member of the Board Mr. Arthur d'Anyers Willis, Mr. Colin Frederick Campbell, and The Earl of Inchcape, the Directors who now retire by rotation, present themselves for re-election. The Auditors, Mr. David Charles Wilson, F.C.A., and Mr. Henry Croughton Knight Stileman, F.C.A., again tender their services. The Dividend will be payable on and after Monday, the 5th April. By Order of the Court, J. F. DUNCAN, Secretary. REPORT OF THE AUDITORS TO THE SHAREHOLDERS. We have audited the above Balance Sheet and Profit and Loss Account with the Books, Vouchers and Securities in London, and with the certified Returns from the Agencies and Branches. In our opinion such Balance Sheet is full and fair and properly drawn up so as to exhibit a true and correct view of the state of the Bank's affairs according to the best of our information and the explanations given to us aud as shewn by the Books of the Bank. D. C. WILSON H. C. K. STILEMANF Chartered Accountants. LONDON, 17th March, 1937. 