MONDAY JANUARY 4th, 1937. Death. DAYANG SALEHAH, aged 34 years, eldest daughter of the late Inchi Mohamed Ali and beloved wife of Abang Haji Mustapha, passed away peacefully on 17th December, 1936, at Ward’s Rent No. 8, Mosque Road, Kuching. Acknowledgements. Abang Haji Monsili (Dato Hakim) thanks all friends and relatives who sent letters of condolence during his recent bereavement and also those who attended the funeral of his daughter-in-law. Dayang Salehah, the eldest daughter of the late Inchi Mohamed Ali, and beloved wife of his eldest son Abang Haji Mustapha, on 18th December, 1936. Francis C. Kim Joon begs to tender his thanks to all friends and relatives who sent wreaths and letters of condolence during his recent bereavement and also chose who attended his beloved and loving wife’s funeral on 15th December, 1936. Local and Personal. DECEMBER. To-day the thousandth number of the Sarawak Gazette makes its appearance. In order to mark the occasion we publish a Special Supplement containing an account of the Gazette a history and a brief survey of the development of Sarawak since 1870, when the Gazette was first published. We take this opportunity of thanking those who have conti United to this Special Supple ment and also the staff of the Government Printing Office whose co-operation has made its production possible. Her Highness the Ranee, accompanied by Miss F. Mann, arrived at Pending by s.s. Darvel on December 7th. His Highness the Rajah and Mr. H. B. Crocker, Acting Government Secretary, went down to Pending in H.H.M.Y. Maimuna to meet Her High ness; the Maimuna arrived at Kuching at 10.30 a.m. and anchored opposite Astana, where a few friends were gathered to meet Her Highness. Among those present on this occasion were a number of European Officers, the Datus and their wives, Mr. Ong Tiang Swee, and Mr. Wee Kheng Chiang. After Her Highness had greeted the assembled guests, Mr. H B. Crocker wel comed Her Highness back to Sarawak in a short speech, concluding by proposing the health of Her Highness, which was drunk by all present. We understand that. Her Highness the Ranee and Miss Mann intend to leave in February for Hollywood, where Her Highness will take part in the production of a film dealing with Sarawak's early history. We wish Her Highness all success in this new venture. A memorial service for Her Highness the late Ranee Margaret was held at St. Joseph’s Church, Kuching, on December 2nd, Mon seigneur A. Hopfgartner presiding. His Highness the Tuan Muda and Dayang Anne, who travelled home by air, reached London on December 10th. Hari Raya Puasa was heralded in Kuching by a salute of 14 guns fired from Fort Mar- gherita battery at 8.0 a.m. on December 15th. After the morning service at the Mosque numerous parties of Malays called on Their Highnesses the Rajah and Ranee at Astana, and in the afternoon Their Highnesses paid the customary calls on the Datus. Fortunately the weather on Malam Raya was exceptionally fine, the night being dry and windless. As a result the illuminations in the Kuching kampongs, which this year were really beautiful, were seen to great advantage. The Datu Shahbandar's house and grounds presented a memorable spectacle, and even the smallest houses had displays of Chinese lanterns and pelita. turning the whole kampong area into a sort of fairyland. Mr. R. G. Aikman and Mr. C. F. Birt returned from furlough by s.s. Darvel on December 7th. Mr. Aikman, who has been appointed District Officer, Lower Rejang, left for Sibu the same day and took over the Lower Rejang district from Mr. F. ,L. Crossley, who relieves Mr. J. C. B. Fisher as District Officer. Oya and Dalat. Mr. Birt has resumed duty in the Public Works Department. Messrs. J. C. B. Fisher and A. G. Taylor left on furlough by the Marudu on December 12th. We understand that Mr. Taylor in tends to return home via Malaya, India, Iraq and Central Europe. We wish both Mr. Fisher and Mr. Taylor a pleasant voyage and a good leave. An R.A.F. flying boat, with Wing Com mander C. R. Cox, O.B.E., A.F.C.. Squadron officers arrived at Pending on December 28th Leader F. Woolley, O.B.E., D.F.C., and three other officers arrived at. Pending on December 28th and returned to Singapore on the 31st. Kuching has been suffering from a mild recurrence of the diphtheria epidemic of some months ago, among those stricken being the Acting Principal Medical Officer. Advice has been received that His Ex cellency Vice-Admiral Sir Charles Little, K.C.B., R.N., Naval Commander-in-Chief of the China Station, intends to visit Miri, the Rejang River and Kuching in H.M.S. Fal mouth towards the end of January. H.M.S. Falmouth is expected to arrive at Pending on January 31st. We are informed that the response to the Hari Raya and Christmas greeting telegrams inside Sarawak has exceeded all expectations. In Kuching alone more than 400 Hari Raya and 500 Christmas messages were handled, this constituting a record. Mr. G.J. Dickson of Messrs. Sime. Darby & Co., Ltd., sailed by the Vyner Brooke on December 7th to take up his appointment as Manager of the firm's Ipoh branch. Mr. Dickson, who was very popular in Kuching, will be greatly missed, and we take this opportunity of wishing him all good luck in the future. We hope that the distractions of Ipoh will not cause him to forget his many friends in Sarawak. Mr. A. Willis, C.B.E., who has been ap pointed Sarawak Delegate to the International Rubber Restriction Committee, arrived at Kuching by the Marudu on December 12th, having travelled from London to Singapore by air Mr. Willis expects to return to England, also by air on January 9th. We welcome to Sarawak Mr. C. B. Murray, who arrived in Kuching on November 30th in order to join the staff of the Land and Survey Department. Mr. Murray, who comes from New Zealand, served for eleven years on the permanent, establishment of New Zealand Government, resigning his post in order to come to Sarawak. Our readers will be interested to see in our Special Supplement a message from “Anak Singapura” of the Straits Times, whose entertaining column is much appreciated in Sarawak. In a recent issue of the Straits Times “Anak Singapura” mentioned that he was probably the only columnist in the world who had made no reference to the recent Constitutional crisis; we are proud to share this distinction with him. Messrs. Nissa Shokai’s padi-planting scheme, which was inaugurated about five years ago, is making great progress, some 200 acres at Samarahan estate being now planted with swamp padi. This area, which was under virgin jungle not very long ago. is well worth a visit from anyone interested in agriculture; the whole area is admirably laid out and drained, and pests, which are methodically combated, have not proved any great nuisance. The Company hope eventu ally to have over 1.000 acres under padi, and clearing and stumping proceeds steadily. Apparently two varieties of seed are used, one from Saigon and one local, and the Company have engaged an expert one of whose tasks it will be to obtain a cross suited to local conditions. Yields so far have been satisfactory, and it is interesting to note that Samarahan padi already commands a higher price in Kuching than native padi. Selamat Hari Raya. Pada 1 hari bulan Shawal 1355 ia-lah Hari Raya Puasa bagi pihak kaum Muslimin, oleh itu kami anggota Sarawak Gazette mengambil peluang meng- uchap-kan Selamat Hari Raya serta salam kepada pembacha-pembacha yang bijakaana ter-utama sekali kepada sekalian kaum Muslimin, mudah- mudahan Tuhan lanjut-kan umor kita di-dalam kebahagian dan kebejikan sepaya dapat ber-jumpa pada tahun di-hadapan. 1355 . KING GEORGE VI. ----------------------------------- MESSAGE OF LOYALTY AND DEVOTION FROM HIS HIGHNESS THE RAJAH. On December 17th the following telegram was despatched by His Highness the Rajah to His Excellency the British Agent for Sarawak — I would ask Your Excellency to convey to His Majesty the King an assurance of the loyalty and devotion of myself and my subjects and of all His Majesty's subjects in Sarawak and on December 22nd His Excellency transmitted to His Highness the Rajah the following reply — “Your telegram of 17th December has been laid before the King. I am commanded by His Majesty to request you to convey to His Highness the Rajah of Sarawak an expression of his deep appreciation of the sentiment of loyalty and devotion contained in the message.” Drink. BY E. BANKS. For charitable or other reasons the pagan natives of Sarawak usually offer a visitor to their long-house a glass or two of an alcoholic drink made mainly from fermented rice and occasionally from sweet potatoes, sugar-cane or even fruit. This excellent custom helps to loosen tongues and to place the hosts and their visitors at ease, when they may more freely discuss vital matters and intimate details which in the ordinary way they would hesitate to bring forward. The mature drink such as they offer important guests is fairly potent, and two glasses .are usually sufficient to produce the required intimate glow, anything further producing results uncertain, save for a fat head next morning, for many natives prefer their drink very sweet. The best drink is usually reserved for the more important visitors and people of the house, the others filling up on a lesser brew, and a house that has not something special put by for such occasions is genuinely apologetic, although the harvest on which they depended may have failed through no fault of their own. Almost invariably the drink is ostenta tiously tasted by the givers before passing it on to the visitors, for although the custom has now also passed on, there were not wanting at one time those who secreted poison under one finger nail, which, when dipped in the beer, helped to speed a laggard guest. Save on exceptional occasions the women do no more than taste or take very little of their own brew, for fear, it is said, of premature intoxication, but the fact that on occasion they will consume quantities of European spilite without effect points to their abstemiousness at home as a sort of “family-hold-back rather than a quite unnecessary dread of inebriation. The effects on natives of large quantities of their home-made drinks varies in detail according to individuals, and whilst the power of speech—and even song—is many times accentuated, their foot steps are .apt to be less sure than they were before, and a fat head with a great thirst is almost inevitable next morning. It is noticeable that after the preliminaries, when the natives have really settled down, that is to say, the charms of the girls seem less and less provocative, and indeed they usually fade away without persuasion or protest; it is not all improbable that visitors of unknown intent were formerly regaled with a mild anaphro- disiac in this way as a sort of minor safeguard for the hosts’ women-folk. The Land Dayaks of the Kuching and Sadong districts in western Sarawak prepare a very sweat, yellowish-brown and clear drink from a medium- sized reddish-orange fruit, known as tampoi, by which name they also call the beverage. The analysis of tampoi from a Land Dayak house at Sennah, Sarawak River, is as follows — The Land Dayaks are a timid somewhat forlorn people who have never really recovered from centuries of oppression, and though they will drink a little with a guest, or on special occasions, they have a quite unnecessary dread of doing something original whilst intoxicated, and so they only fall quietly asleep without making any trouble; indeed, they are not in any case a quarrelsome people. The Sea Dayak or Iban brew is sweet and milky, and is known as tuak. It has much the same potency and after-effects as the others, reaching about 20% alcohol by volume. The Sea Dayak up-country is a singularly sober person on his own account, and it is probable that no alcohol passes his lips for months at a time; this is not because he docs not like it particularly, for he will take what he can in bazaars or from traders, although even this amounts to very little, for be is too shrewd and thrifty to spend his money in this way. When drinks (usually European spirits) are free, both men and women will drink astonishing quantities neat” without at the lime showing any ill-effects, and the Sea Dayak's usual sobriety is partly a matter of thrift and lack of opportunity. On the few occasions during the year, usually in connection with the crops, when a feast or begawai is held, the Sea Dayak men and women may sometimes make up for their normal abstemiousness by drinking to excess, vomiting and then drinking again. Ibis process making a beqawai utterly undesirable to attend more than once. On these occasions the Sea Dayak is somewhat more truculent and aggressive than usual, but fortunately he reaches a state of helplessness before serious quarrels can happen, and there are as a rule no permanent ill consequences. Apart from this, Iban hospitality in the up-country districts is showered on the visitor by a long line of girls, each bearing a bowl of drink, each dressed in her best and singing a short song of welcome before presenting the offering. As nobody wishes to drink eight or ten glasses of doubtfully clean rice spirit, the later glasses may be shared with the givers or any willing helpers so long a few sips are taken, and drink is not as a rule dished out to all and sundry, the object being rather to stun the visitor, leaving themselves in full possession of their wits. Drink plays a very large part in the life of Kayans and Kenyahs. no births, marriages and deaths are complete without a liberal supply for anyone who cares to attend, the long and self-imposed pantong periods in connection with their crops are relieved to some extent by the cup that cheers, and the stranger within the house may receive a wet” welcome according to his inclination and the state of his hosts' resources. Nothing, probably, is freer than borak, as they call it, and even if one does not wish to drink deep, it is usually necessary to take a few sips in order to show that there is no ill feeling, and although Kayans and Kenyahs are philosophical enough to accept an absolute teetotaller and not insist, they do not profess to understand it. It is clear at once that the necessary large supply of yearly liquor cannot be brewed side from very abundant crops, and as these vary greatly during hard times, sweet potatoes are sliced up and sugar cane crushed and either mixed with a certain amount of cooked rice, or allowed to ferment alone. The work of brewing is confined to the women as a rule, and reaches quite a fine art, for although they sometimes know they are going to make something pretty good, nobody knows what it will finally be like, nor can they make the same again for certain. Cooked rice mixed with water is the mainstay, and they will drink this prepared on the spur of the moment if they have nothing else, though since it is like a very sloppy porridge with lots nf solids floating about and is apt to cause stomach-ache, it is not offered to the best people. Besides rice and water are added occasionally fruits and berries according to inclination, a yeast or ragi either being obtained from the bazaar, or from the fine powder left after winnowing the husked rice. The resulting liquid may be brown, green, red. white or yellow, pale or clear, sweet or sour, and of normal or almighty potency, largely according how long it is kept. A greenish and slightly sour liquid is the usual result, an analysis of which is given below, and it will be seen that within limits it is an intoxicant without the sugar and fatty acids likely to produce unpleasant after effects. Analysis of borak from the Murik house at Long Semiang, Baram River — The sweet and brown brew is on the whole to be avoided, for apart from its sickliness it contains all those elements contributing to a hang over” next morning. Analysis of borak from Leppu Tau Kenyah house, Long Mou, Baram River — Strong alcohol is distilled occasionally from borak by an ingenious system of cooking pots, bamboos and cold water, but is looked on more or less as a curiosity. Nevertheless women of rank skilled in brewing will sometimes produce either a clear drink tasting like gin, or a brown drink not unlike brandy and of almost equal potency, not to be drunk by tlx tumblerful, but this again is not made univer salty but is kept for a long time to bring out on special occasions; doubtless some of the other brews would attain this consistency if given a chance, but they do not keep their drinks long. The etiquette of drinking is considerable, and though men will freely toast their friends, the women are usually allowed to lead off, singing in high falsetto a song of welcome in which every few lines the audience, consisting of the entire house, repeats the last line or two as a chorus, allowing the singer a breather” and to think what she is going to say next, although some songs are of more or less permanent repetition. Having carried on like this for us much as five minutes, the glass is presented and the whole house joins in a deep ueh, rising in tone as the glass is tilted, and dying away as the glass is lowered again—for they do not favour heel-taps—and the whole process, dim lights, kng- house. weird and distorted faces, the often very musical song, and the chorus and final roar rising to a peak and falling away, create an immense impression the first time. After a decent interval, for they are too well-bred to be insistent, the dose is repeated, and may be repeated ad. lib. according to inclination, though it is always permissible to pass an unwanted drink back to the giver, or on to some willing and thirsty helper. It will be seen that to these, people drink is an indispensable and often-indulged social custom, and on the occasions of births, marriages and the placation of spirits in charge of crops, friends and relations will toast each other good luck and success in the best of spirits and in moderation, without any intention of overdoing it, the women participating without fear or prohibition. After a decent interval both sexes will proceed to work off superabundant energy by a series of sometimes very intricate dances, solo or deux. Individual Kayans and Kenyahs can consume without apparent effect quantities that beggar des cription of their own drink or of neat European spirits, and as a rare they hold their liquor extremely well. Among themselves quarrels when in drink are rare, and anyone who inclines to become obstreperous or wants to be ill is removed at a sign from the chief or head of the house, and does not return; even those who have drink taken maintain a commendable equilibrium, and though possibly extremely cheery, keep well within the bounds of good behaviours These people, too, are divided into social classes, and men of the ruling classes who see their fol lowers going on the spree automatically restrain themselves a little, and though they join in and arc by no means spoil-sports, they yet preserve a sufficient detachment instantly to intervene in any possible over-exuberance, and if they and their visitors want to let go they retire some other time to their own room and enjoy themselves as much as they like their followers leaving them to it. Already possessed with a considerable sense of humour, the influence of borak increases their sense of companionship, and mitigates rather than aggravates differences and quarrels, apparently nothing said or done on these occasions being afterwards used as evidence; a European returning from a two months' tour was once overtaken in the first Kayan house to be reached, and subsequently discovered from some Malays—Moslems, and of course teetotallers,—that he had stayed there two nights, although he only remembered the first one. On meeting these Kayans later he mentioned his lapse, and hoped all had been well while he was out, and his memory a blank they replied that they were pretty sure that nothing untoward had happened although they could not be quite certain, since they, too, had drunk deep, and their memories were also blank. A most gentle manly gesture, and one which to this day has prevented the European concerned from finding out what exactly did happen. We have seen, therefore, the Land Dayaks of the West are abstemious rather from, fear of inebriation Sea Dayaks abstain from motives of thrift and lack of opportunity and desire, rounding off their on the wagon periods with an occasional begawai orgy; and that Kayans and Kenyahs, whilst not regarding drink as quite an everyday custom, yet make social use of it sufficiently often and without excuse as to make it very prominent in their scale of important customs. We now pass further North to the Kelabits and Murats, racially the same people, but living under different conditions. Whilst the former is a mighty drinker, the latter has nearly drunk himself out of existence, and illustrates the evils of excess just as the Western people conform to the vicissitudes of abstention. The Kelabit lives in the headwaters of the Baram River and in a small portion of the Limbang at a height of anything from one to three and four thousand feet, much higher than any of the other natives mentioned; it is cold at night, and he has no blankets, so he shuts up his house tight, lights ns many fires as possible down the length of the verandah and in the room part of his house, takes a long drink, and manages to keep himself warm. There are several kinds of Kelabits and whilst a few probably make drink a nightly habit, there arc others who do not make it a routine, though I do not suppose a week passes but that they have one or two cheerful nights. Partly owing to the nature of the soil where they live, and partly through their very considerable industry their rice crops are large and frequent, seldom failing, and by this means they are able to supply themselves with plenty of food and with about an equal sufficiency left over from which to brew drink. Their hospitality is amazing, and should upwards of a hundred people descend on a house, never very large, they are dined and wined freely as a point of honour, and there is no sign of stint. If they have notice of distinguished visitors they will brew borak as good as that made by most Kayans and Kenyahs, but in the ordinary way it is cooked rice and water, which never gets a chance to last long enough to be particularly appetizing to a European taste. Nothing much can be done in a Kelabit house without them having this preliminary drinking bout; they will not hurry, and will provide the most astounding excuses for not doing so, but once custom is satisfied by giving their guests a cheerful night, drinks are off,’ and they will work quite cheerfully and willingly, staggering off under their loads usually to the next house, where the process is repeated nor is it possible to get Kelabits past any half-way houses without stopping for many beers. Though they can stand a vast amount of drink, they are eventually overcome, and though unduly cheery and quite polite, they then become rather stupid and a nuisance usually being led quietly away by some one more sober-minded. Considering the amount and frequency of their potations, quarrels are scarce, this being largely due to the enormous quantities they will eat both before and at intervals during the drinking bout. thus providing the necessary blot ting paper for absorbing the extra drink. The women join in and neither dislike nor fear too much drink, for at these times the sex question seems for the moment to be shelved in the general cheerful atmosphere, and both men and women may develop a positive rosy glow on their cheeks when they are under the influence. For all this, the Kelabit is not an out-and-out drunkard,—a hard worker as these things go in Borneo, he will entertain visitors up to the limit, and if he hasn't got any visitors handy be will send out and invite his friends from the next house. Without some such incentive many do not drink at all, and those that do only occasionally and to such a small extent that it scarcely matters. Friends and visitors are toasted by the men Kayan and Kenyah fashion, but the women do not per form, the usual song of welcome with, every few lines, a less-deep chorus from the audience, novel together different airs being used. As the wears on the songs are dispensed with, and as far as I ran discern, sleep is banished, everyone talks at full speed and nobody listens at all. the whole ensemble sounding like a flock of immense starlings going to roost. Doubtless demands of hospitality did not origin- ally demand these excessive libations, which reach their heights at, and may have first started with, the wake attendant on the removal of the bones of the dead to their final resting place; among Kelabits and Muruts the dead are kept for a year in their coffins at the back of the house, and the bones then collected to be buried in a jar in the ground. For celebrating such an event the relations kill a buffalo or two, or some of their tame cattle, also various pigs and fowls which seem to be kept for no other particular purpose, prepare the booze, invite all and sundry, and settle down to it for a day or two. Less than a hundred people will finish up 300 gallons or more of rice spirit in two nights and a day, the buffaloes and domestic animals serving as blotting paper frequently resorted to at intervals, being, indeed, the only thing that keeps them going. The scene is almost indescribable. and though once seen is quite enough, it is a pleasing reflection on the Kelabits that though most of them haven't the faintest idea half the time what they are doing or where they are going, and all authority of their Chief has long since faded away for the moment, they do not quarrel unduly or get into trouble, and accidents are surprisingly few, the most serious being the firing of the house, which brings the session to an abrupt end. One therefore sees alcohol carried somewhat to an excess yet without offence among Kelabits, and though their state of inebriation as a rule surpasses that of the others they are far from being habitual or daily drunkards, and there is no sign of their fertility or their considerable ability or energy being seriously impaired. Indeed, it is an open question whether their desire for large crops to provide the surplus for malting borak does not actually cause them to exert themselves to make and maintain their large farms. The final stage is reached among the Muruts of the Limbang and Trusan rivers, who resemble the Muruts of the Padas river in North Borneo and are not to be confused with the Muruts in the rest of that State. In language and customs Muruts and Kelabits are very closely allied but I think it is fair to say the drink has got the former down their hospitality and “wake ceremonies do not indeed, could not—exceed those of the Kelabits. but their drinking is a mighty affair, and it is scarcely an exaggeration to say that many are incapable every other day in the year. One may see a man come home from his farm and after food settle down to his own jar until he falls ever side ways to sleep without going to bed, and wakes where he fell to stagger off to work next morning. They too work hard and maintain large farms to provide the necessary surplus, and are very strong walkers and excellent hunters when they can be lured away to the chase, but the convivial pot claims them too often; their fertility is declining, their physique fails early, and the generally indes- cribably filthy conditions under which they live is telling and has told on them for so long, that the race is declining, and not many generations hence may be little more than a name Many of them still live at heights of two and three thousand feet like the Kelabits, but others are settled down-country and the drink is a serious question with them all. for there is nothing like the conviviality of the Kelabits, Kayans and Kenyahs. In parts, it has even become a com petition ; as elsewhere, a large jar full of drink is tapped at the month by two bamboo tubes, through one of which one must suck the beverage, while in the other is a float attached to a most aggravating little pith-gauge at the top. It is one’s painful duty by sucking the one tube to lower the gauge the necessary half-inch or so prescribed by custom. The competitive spirit arises to sec who can sink the float the furthest, and there are ways and means of mixing it or making it stick to fool the boastful entirely foreign to the jovial convivial drinking parties of some of the other tribes. One therefore sees in the West of Sarawak Land Dayaks who only drink a little on special occasions, and are abstemious partly from lack of desire and partly fear of inebriation. Further North are the Sea Dayaks, who, when left to themselves are abstemious also from lack of desire, from thrift or for the sake of their health, but who let them selves go to the limit a few times a year on special occasions. Then the Kayans and Kenyahs, to whom drink is a necessary and frequent custom, but with whom it is not overdone to the extent of impairing fertility, health, strength or good behaviour. The Kelabits, of whom it can only bo said that they drink deeply and cheerfully when occasion arises, but that they are not so far impaired in health and fertility, carry it a stage further, but their Murut cousins have overstepped the border, their drinking being neither jovial nor convivial but just a beastly debauch with conse quent deleterious effects on their numbers and constitution. I am indebted to the Pathologist, Sarawak Medical Department, for the analysis of the above- mentioned beverages. [We reproduce this interesting article from Volume XIV of the “Sarawak Museum Journal,” which is at present in the press.—ED.] The Shark Industry. We print below an interesting article on the shark industry which appeared in the November number of the Ceylon Trade Journal, and which was brought to our attention by one of our readers. The Curator, Sarawak Museum, to whom the article has been submitted, states that all the variety of sharks mentioned are found in Sarawak waters, but that since the larger specimens inhabit depths of from twenty to forty fathoms, they would only be taken off Kedurong and Tanjong Datu. He adds that there is no reason why the exploitation of the smaller sharks should not also be a paying proposition, and there is no doubt about the abundance of these off the Sarawak coast six-footers are sometimes taken by natives when pukat fishing along shallow beaches, and large catches of small sharks are often made when line fishing in ten or twelve fathoms of water. We understand that shark-fishing is carried on with considerable success in British North Borneo, and there seems to be no reason why it should not be equally successful in Sarawak. We commend the idea to anyone with enterprise and capital. MARKET FOR SHARK PRODUCTS. SHARKS are at present caught in Ceylon waters in considerable numbers and they are valued in the local markets mostly for the meat and the fins. The meat is consumed locally usually fresh, but the fins are dried and exported to the Straits Settle ments. During 1935, 486 cwt. of shark fins valued at Rs. 28,443 were exported. Small quantities of the skin of the shark and the oil which is rendered from the liver are prepared for local use. The former is in demand in the furniture industry for polishing wood-work and the latter is used for varnishing fishing canoes. The local market for these products is limited and there is no regular trade in them. There is now. however, a strong demand for wet- salted shark skins in England, which it is difficult to supply and consignments are readily saleable. Shark oil too has at present a high commercial value and prices range from .£23 to £24 per ton. Inquiries show (hat it would be to the advantage of producers to endeavour to meet this demand, but it is important that supplies should be offered in regular consignments and not intermittently. Shark Skins. Skins of Tiger, Blue and Sand Sharks are suitable for the leather industry, while rays, the hammer-headed shark, saw fish and all kinds of sharks similar to the saw fish which are known under the names ‘‘connecting links” do not yield skins suitable for the leather industry. But the meat, liver, and fins of the latter varieties can be utilized in the same manner as the parts of sharks whose skins are in demand. Only sharks of at least 6 feet long should be skinned, as smaller skins do not have enough cutting surface and are, therefore, of no commercial value. Buyers prefer skins of 10 square feet and over in area, but there is a prospect of developing business in smaller skins down to 5 feet. The skin of a tropical shark in wet-salted state weighs approximately 1 lb. per square foot and the price offered for skins in bulk supplies varies from 6d. to 9d. per lb. The shark must be skinned as soon as pocsible after being caught. This is very important. Home, species spoil quicker than others, but any shark will spoil in 24 hours or even less. The hide as well as other by-products (e.g liver oil. dried meat, dried fins) should, therefore; be prepared within a few hours after the shark is removed from the water. It is also necessary to avoid exposure, of any of the shark products to the sum, and special care should be taken to prevent the hides or other shark products from coming into contact with fresh water. The first operation in skinning is to remove all the fins and the tail. These fins are cut off with a sharp knife, the cutting being done in a curve into the fin, thereby leaving little or no meat or skin on the fin. The fleshy part of the fin which now remains should be trimmed off as close as possible to the carcass. The tail is then removed by cutting it completely off just above the root which is indicated by a small knob on the back of, the shark. The second operation is to split, the shark. The knife, which should be very sharp, is inserted in the holes made by removing the Dorsal Fins and the hide is split along the back as straight as possible towards the tail end of the point where the tail has been cut off. then towards the head, midway between the eyes to a point where the brain is located. This point is indicated by small holes (pores) on the head. Then begin to cut sideways around the shark (on both sides in the same manner) down to a point in line with the eyes and top of the gills; next out in the direction of the eyes, passing just above the eyes and the gills, until the holes made by remov ing the side fins are reached. Then proceed to cut again in the direction of the jaws towards the lower jaw, and cut along the rim of the mouth, keeping an inch or two from the edge. These two cuts (one of each side) will meet midway under the mouth and this part of the hide constitutes the chin flap. The third operation is the actual cutting. Turn the carcass on its belly and straddle same, facing in the direction of the head. Take the left side split of the section of the hide near the head, on the left hand, holding firmly while the right hand operates on the skinning knife (which should be very sharp) and peel off the hides by cutting away the carcass. Great care should be used in operating the skinning knife, to avoid cuts to the hide. There is no barm in leaving too much meat on the hide as this surplus meat can be removed by fleshing. If skinning is done too close, cuts may result at the slightest slip of the knife. After the left side is skinned, turn around facing the tail end, and skin the other side in the same manner as before. The left hand should always keep the hide pulled tight, while skinning. After the hide is taken off the carcass, it should he washed thoroughly in sea waler to remove all the blood and slime. The next operation is to remove all the surplus flesh; this is done on a beaming hoard with the use of a beaming knife. The beaming knife is a large curved knife with a handle on each end. The beaming board should be about 6 feet long, and about 3 12 feet wide. One end should rest on the floor, while the other end Iris a support, keeping it to the height of a man's waist. The beaming board should have a curve to correspond to the curve of the beaming knife. The board should be absolutely smooth. In flesh ing. it is important that the hide is kept smooth on the board, and that no meat particles or other substances are between the board and the hide. If for some reason the hides cannot be fleshed at once, they should be put immediately in brine where they may stay overnight. The brine should be strong enough to float an Irish potato about 4 inches lung. It is desirable to avoid keeping the hides m brine for more than two or three hours and if hides are kept in brine for more than twelve hours they gel spoiled. On the other hand, if the hide are kept in brine for only two or three hoars, it will assist in removing the blood and slime better than if only sea water is used. White the hide is still on the beaming board, it should be trimmed. The outer edges and the confers and the small meat particles which may hang over after fleshing, should be cut off. The hides should he split in the tail end. This is done simply by cutting from the hole left by the Central Fin towards the tail end, passing through the hole left by the Anal Fin and then straight back to where the tail has been cut off. The Leopard Shark has on the tail end two keels or bony ribs, one on each side, running from the tail along the body 4 to 12 inches. This part of the hide of the Leopard Shark is worthless. and has to be cut off. The Saw fish is not split in the tail, but this species also has two keels or bony ribs extending from the tail end 4 to 12 inches, which part of the hide is worthless, and should be cut off. After the fleshing and trimming, the hides should be thoroughly washed in sea water. No blood or slime should remain on the hides which should then be salted for curing. The curing is done in the following manner Sprinkle some salt on the platform or floor where the hides will be laid. Then lay one hide on flat, flesh side up being sure to smooth out all the wrinkles, and sprinkle salt so as to cover every part of the surface. Put plenty of salt on the bide. On top of this side put the next one, flesh side up, and salt in the same manner, and so on. It is preferable to lay the hides on a platform, which has a straight incline, so that the water and brine can run off. The pile of hides should be built up as evenly as possible without any bumps or depressions. The large hides take about 8 days to cure. Even smaller hides should be left in this salt pile for 5 or 6 days during which period they must be covered with plenty of salt. Whilst curing they should, of course, not be exposed to the rays of the sun, or come in contact with rain or other fresh water. The hides arc prepared for shipment in barrels in the following manner. Shake the hide slightly so that the surplus salt falls off. Then lay the hide on the floor, fresh side up and sprinkle some dry salt over the entire surface, and next fold it so as to make a flat square bundle of each hide. A 55-gallon barrel will hold 25 average shark hides. The weight will be about 275 pounds net. If the transportation company will take hides packed in other containers than barrels, they can he used. Watertight barrels are sometimes required by certain steamship companies on account of the leakage of brine en route. The salt used for curing and packing hides should not be too coarse. Medium grain fishery salt gives the best results. Mineral salt is preferable to sen waler salt. Care should be taken tn ensure that the brine is not too weak, and that sufficient salt is used. The surplus clean salt may be used over again, in which case a larger quantify must be used, as it gradually loses its strength. The value of the hide depends on the size of the shark, and the price schedule is the same for all species. Before packing for shipment the hides should be measured. The measurement is taken from tip to tip lengthwise and the value is calcu lated on the number of lineal inches. Shark oil.—Shark oil is prepared from the liver which is practically all oil. It is important to see that the liver is fresh. A liver which is not fresh yields a rancid and foul smelling oil. As soon as the livers are cut out of the carcass, they should be washed thoroughly in sea water and the galls cut off. The oil can be economically rendered for industrial purposes in a steam jacketed copper kettle. If steam is not available, a plain iron kettle can be used with a fire underneath, in which case, the kettle should contain about one-third sea water. The kettle should not come into direct contact with the fire and a high temperature should not be used to render the oil as it will bum very quickly and become discoloured. The fresh livers after being put into the kettle should be boiled for three or four hours and stirred frequently to render the oil from the livers. As soon as the oil is rendered and cooled, and the gutty settled, the oil can be dipped off and strained with several layers of fine cloth into a 50-gallon wooden barrel or iron drum. If water is used, great care should be taken not to dip out any of the water used, as water in the oil lowers its value greatly. This, method of winning the oil is primitive and now-a-days this process is done by an oil-extraction plant. After the oil is rendered it should not be allowed to remain long in open containers but should he barrelled, as the air is injurious to the oil when used tor certain purposes. The livers or the barrels should not be exposed to the hot rays of the sun. There does not appear to be any standard speci fication determining the quality of shark oil but consignments are sold on analysis. It is desirable that oil from different species should be shipped separately in view of the difference in analytical figures commonly found, particularly as regards vitamin content. Samples of local shark oil were recently sent to London tor examination and were reported upon as follows — Buyers are prepared to pay 2s. 3d. to 2s. 6d. per gallon c.i.f. London for shark oil of the description A” and inquiries for this product have been received from London. It should be borne in mind that the removal of the skin lowers the value of the meat which is used for local consumption, as it deteriorates more quickly and the depreciation in value is approxi- mately 20 per cent. Dried and salted meat is in demand abroad and ruling prices range from £20 to £28 per ton. The meat of the back part is cut into about 1 lb. pieces and cither salted or dried direct. If salted, the pieces should be put with plenty of salt into a barrel tor two days and then dried in the sun. A vacuum drying plant would dry tbe meat in three hours, and of course such meat must not be salted. The dry meat is packed m strong canvas (sack cloth) into hundredweights and shipped. M.C.H. Presented to Mr. R. Pearse. EXAMPLE OF LOCAL RECRUITMENT. I congratulate you very heartily,” remarked H. E. the Governor, Sir Shenton Thomas, shaking hands with Mr. R. Pearse, Engineer Surveyor of the Singapore Municipality whom he decorated with the Malayan Certificate of Honour when the Legislative Council met on Monday. Present at the ceremony were the President of the Municipal Commissioners. Mr. W. Bartley, and Mr. G. L. Ham, who has acted as deputy president. Mr. Pearse was born in Sarawak on February 21, 1889, and entered the service of the Singapore Municipality on July 1, 1911, as an Assistant Surveyor and Draftsman. His ability and good record of work obtained him rapid promotion, and on October 14, 1925, he became Engineer Surveyor, a post graded as a Prize Appointment in the, Depart ment of the Municipal Engineer. Oh January 1, 1930, this post was raised, tor the period of his tenure of it. to Class TV of the Senior Service. He has fully justified that promotion said the Governor. He has carried out his duties with ability and tact, and received special mention from Mr. Farrer before the latter retired from the post of President of the Municipal Commissioners. Both his professional attainments and his personal characteristics emphasise the possibilities of locally recruited candidates tor public employ ment and the standard which may be expected from them, given reasonable opportunities.—Straits Budget. log and gave it one almighty heave into the next county Its flight was so fast that the eye could scarce follow it, and when it came to earth it blossomed into a great tree, then into a huge forest, and finally swelled into a tall mountain covered in jungle. From that day to this that mountain has been known by two names, one, Tiang Laju (a swiftly-moving post) and two, Tangga Saran, or 'his wife Saran saw him do it,' (from the old Dayak word tangga—to take particular notice of ). From that time on, no more headhunting occurred. All quarrels were brought to old Tungkup, and owing to the hard work necessary in those days in felling old jungle, it came to be a custom to bring up their cases in the interval between harvest and the next felling, to fill in the slack time they used to occupy with getting two up on the next village. Such is the story the old man. the very old man. told. And as such it shows that history repeats itself. For to this day when headhunting, which must have broken out again in the earlier Historical times, is again no longer considered fashionable for bachelors with a couple of months time on their hands, the said slack period is once more filled in by raising Cain in the Law Courts. —B. “George Washington.” We print below an interesting and amusing extract from “Anak Singapura's column in the Straits Times. Mr. H. E. Davidson, of course, is well known in Sarawak, and is at present living at Sungei China, Matang, where he settled some years ago— A retired planter writes to tell me that he thinks the author of the “Nursery Rhyme For Planters in the Straits Times Annual (first published about 20 years ago) was not George Davidson. as stated by us. but H. E. Davidson. The latter, univer sally known as George Washington, was a famous character in F.M.S. planting circles 30 years ago. In addition to a keen brain and an amazing memory he had a ready wit, as the following story shows. A certain Government official, noted for his pomposity and fondness for reminiscence in an egotistical vein, was holding forth at the Selangor Club. “I was in Piccadilly. he said. and saw a nursemaid push a pram on to the road. A hansom cab was rushing up and I jumped out to save the nurse and child. A well-dressed stranger lifted his top-hat to me, complimented me on my presence of mind and passed on. Another stranger said 'Do you know that was the Prince of Wales'' I dashed after the Prince and apologised profoundly for not recognising him. ‘Not a bit, not a bit, sir. I was only too pleased to see how you saved that maid and child,' said His Royal Highness At this point George Washington’s impatience could be restrained no longer. Leaning across the table he grasped the astonished raconteur’s hand aud shook it vigorously. “I was that child.’’ said George. Anti-climax EDUCATION. RETORT TO BE PREPARED. His Highness the Rajah has asked Mr. R. W. Hammond to prepare a report on the present position of Education generally in Sarawak and to make recommendations regarding the Govern ment's future educational policy. Mr. Hammond is anxious to afford to any who are interested in any aspect of Education the opportunity of expressing their views to him and will be glad to arrange for interviews or to receive written statements. Mr. Hammond’s office (Tele phone No. 197) is next to that of the Secretary for Chinese Affairs. As Mr. Hammond will he touring other divisions for three months, from about January 20th, 1937, he would prefer to hear the views of Kuching residents before leaving the division. Films of the Month, DECEMBER. It seems a long time since we saw Harold Lloyd on the screen, and his appearance in The Milky Way was a welcome event. He retains all the attractive personality that made him one of the most popular stars of the silent films, and in all essentials he is still the gay young man who ten years ago blithely performed incredible feats of mountaineering over sky-scrapers. and at first he seems as funny as ever. Yet something is missing. Just what this is cannot be defined we laugh loudly nt his antics, we follow his every movement with delighted antici pation, we agree that the film is excellent, entertainment, and yet we are conscious that, in spite of all this it just misses being the success that it should have been. Perhaps we expert. too much perhaps the inclusion in an unsympathetic part of Adolphe Menjou. another ghost from the silent past. made the film seem too obviously an attempt at a come-back perhaps it was the inevitable contrast with Modern Times, which brilliantly succeeded.— whatever it was. we left the theatre with a wistful feeling Hint some of the glory had departed, and that the talkies, although they have given us much, have also taken something from us. But all the same, as has already been stated, the picture was excellent entertainment. The idea of an inoffensive milkman mistakenly being credited with flooring a world champion in a street brawl, and as a result bring pushed into the position of challenger tor the title by crooked promoters, framed fights and the yellow press. is one that has great possibilities. and the most was made of this intriguing theme. Harold Lloyd had all his customary bland innocence, which, combined with a kind of naive impertinence, is sometimes irresis- tably funny ; his knack of getting into all kinds of difficult situations was only excelled by his ingenuity in getting mil of them. He was supported by a strong cast, and was sensible enough to give all the other actors plenty to do. Adolphe Menjou, however, was miscast as a tough light-promoter. He should stick to his old line of the suave And immaculately dressed cosmopolitan. In The White Angel Warner Brothers followed up their success with The Life Story of Pasteur which was also shown at the Sylvia Cinema during the month) with a good, if rather sentimentalised, version of the life of Florence Nightingale. Kay Francis took the chief part with d gnity and sincerity, hut the character she drew for us was not that of Florence Nightingale, that ruthless bundle of energy and lire who drove all before her by the force of her personality (How the real Florence Nightingale would have laughed, incidentally, to hear herself described as a white angel'!). In some ways the film was not historically accurate.—for instance, it is true that on arrival in the Crimea Florence Nightingale had to light unbelievable incompetence and out-of-date red-tape, but did she really have to combat such diabolical personal malice and animo sity on the part of the army doctors She had plenty of purely bureaucratic opposition to start log and gave it one almighty heave into the next county. Its flight was so fast that the eye could scarce follow it, and when it came to earth it blossomed into a great tree, then into a huge forest, and finally swelled into a tall mountain covered in jungle. From that day to this that mountain has been known by two names, one, Tiang Laju (a swiftly-moving post) and two, Tangga Saran, or 'his wife Saran saw him do it,' (from the old Dayak word tangga—to take particular notice of . From that time on, no more headhunting occurred. All quarrels were brought to old Tungkup, and owing to the bard work necessary in those days in felling old jungle, it came to be a custom to bring up their cases in the interval between harvest and the next felling, to fill in the slack time they used to occupy with getting two up on the next village. Such is the story the old man. the very old man. told. And as such it shows that history repeats itself. For to this day when headhunting, which must have broken out again in the earlier Historical times, is again no longer considered fashionable for bachelors with a couple of months time on their hands, the said slack period is once more filled in by raising Cain in the Law Courts. —B. “George Washington.” We print below an interesting and amusing extract from “Anak Singapura's ’ column in the Straits Times. Mr. H. E. Davidson, of course, is well known in Sarawak, and is at present living at Sungei China. Matang, where he settled some years ago — A retired planter writes to tell me that he thinks the author of the Nursery Rhyme For Planters” in the Straits Times Annual (first published about 20 years ago) was not George Davidson, as stated by us. but H. E. Davidson. The latter. univer sally known as George Washington. was a famous character in F.M.S. planting circles 30 years ago. In addition to a keen brain and an amazing memory he had a ready wit, as the following story shows. A certain Government official, noted for his pomposity and fondness for reminiscence in an egotistical vein, was holding forth at the Selangor Club. 1 was in Piccadilly.” he said. and saw a nursemaid push a pram on to the road. A hansom cab was rushing up and I jumped out to save the nurse and child. A well-dressed stranger lifted his top-hat to me, complimented me on my presence of mind mid passed on. Another stranger said Do you know that was the Prince of Wales’ I dashed after the Prince and apologised profoundly for not recognising him. ‘Not a bit, not a bit, sir. I was only too pleased to see how you saved that maid and child,’ said His Royal Highness At this point George Washington’s impatience could be restrained no longer. Leaning across the table he grasped the astonished raconteur’s hand and shook it vigorously. I was that child,” said George. Anti-climax ! EDUCATION. REPORT TO BE PREPARED. His Highness the Rajah has asked Mr. R. W. Hammond to prepare a report on the present position of Education generally in Sarawak and to make recommendations regarding the Govern ment's future educational policy. Mr. Hammond is anxious to afford to any who are interested in any aspect of Education the opportunity of expressing their views to him and will be glad to arrange for interviews or to receive written statements. Mr. Hammond’s office (Tele phone No. 197) is next to that of the Secretary for Chinese Affairs. As Mr. Hammond will be touring other divisions for three months. from about January 20th. 1937, he would prefer to hear the views of Kuching residents before leaving the division. Films of the Month. DECEMBER. It seems a long time since we saw Harold Lloyd on the screen. and his appearance in The Milky Way was a welcome event. He retains all the attractive personality that made him one of the most popular stars of the silent films, and in all essentials he is still the gay young man who ten years ago blithely performed incredible feats of mountaineering over sky-scrapers, and at first he seems as funny as ever. Yet something is missing. Just what this is cannot be defined we laugh loudly al his antics, we follow his every movement with delighted antici pation. we agree that the film is excellent entertainment and yet we are conscious that in spile of all this it just misses being the success that it should have been. Perhaps we expect too much; perhaps the inclusion in an unsympathetic part of Adolphe Menjou. another ghost from the silent past, made the film seem too obviously an attempt at a come-back perhaps it was the inevitable contrast will Modern Times, which brilliantly succeeded.— whatever it was. we left the theatre with a wistful feeling Hint some of the glory had departed, and that the talkies, although they have given us much, have also taken something from us. But all the same, as has already been stated, the picture was excellent entertainment. The idea of an inoffensive milkman mistakenly being credited with flouring a world champion in a street brawl, and as a result being pushed into the position of challenger for the title by crooked promoters, framed lights and the yellow press, is one that has great possibilities. and the most was made of this intriguing theme. Harold Lloyd had all his customary bland innocence, which, combined with kind of naive impertinence, is sometimes irresis- tably funny ; his knack of getting into all kinds of difficult situations was only excelled by his ingenuity in getting out of them. He was supported by a strong cast, and was sensible enough to give all the other actors plenty to do. Adolphe Menjou. however, was miscast as a tough fight-promoter, He should stick to his old line of the suave and immaculately dressed cosmopolitan. In The Whitt Angel Warner Brothers followed up their success with The Life Story of Pasteur , (which was also shown at the Sylvia Cinema during the month) with a good if rather sentimentalised, version of the life of Florence Nightingale. Kay Francis took the chief part with dignity and sincerity, but the character she drew for us was not that of Florence Nightingale, that ruthless bundle of energy and fire who drove all before her by the force of her personality. (How the real Florence Nightingale would have laughed, incidentally, to hear herself described as a 'white angel’ !). Tn some ways the film was not historically accurate,—for instance, it is true that on arrival in the Crimea Florence Nightingale l ad to fight unbelievable incompetence and out-of-date red-tape, but did she really have to combat such diabolical personal malice and animo sity on the part of the army doctors She had plenty of purely bureaucratic opposition to start with, but history shows that, once she got started the authorities came round to her side, and gave her all the help she needed (or her reforms. The picture, however, was moving and dramatic, the war scenes in the Crimea being particularly well staged and photographed. Ian Hunter was excellent in the part of Fuller, the Times' war correspondent, and Donald Crisp and Halliwell Hobbs fitted the parts of Dr. Hunt and Lord Raglan to perfection. Although Nigel Bruce only had a small part, that of Dr. West he played it with the skill and understanding which he brings to even the least important role. An excellent picture, remarkable for fine acting and intelligent direction. Incidentally, it is interesting to note that The White Angel, which appeared at the Sylvia Cinema on December 14th, was first shown in London at the Tivoli on November 16th,—less than a month earlier. Not bad for a small cinema in Borneo If you like the Marx Brothers you like them very much indeed, hut if you are not a Marx Fan, you yawn all through their performance. Strange as it may seem, it is a fact that a number of people fail to see anything funny in the antics of this celebrated trio; on the other hand, their admirers are equally numerous. The fact is that they have a peculiar brand of humour which not everyone appreciates, but which is irresistable to those with a well-developed sense of the. indicrous. The moment the three crazy brothers appear on the screen we are transported into another world where ordinary values no longer hold good, ft is a lunatic world of dreams and fantasies, and one which we commend to the surrealists, who could certainly draw much inspiration from it. One can no more describe a Marx Brothers' film in detail than one can describe a dream one can only say that each of the brothers is a finished artist, and that together they make a splendid team. A Night At The Opera showed them at their best. On the last day of the month a notable film was shown, namely The Prisoner Of Shark Island. Warner Baxter gave the finest performance of his career as a Virginian doctor unjustly condemned to life imprisonment in a military prison off the coast of Florida for complicity in the murder of President Sarawak Library December, 1936. The following books have been added to the Library First Division News NOVEMBER. Three inquests were held at Kuching during the month, one on a Tamil by name Katang alius Saug- guji who was found drowned in a ditch on Rock Road, one on a Dayak by name Bayong who died of heart failure at the Race-Course, and one on Teo Lian Hong, Chinese, who committed suicide by taking sodium cyanide. Abang Zennorin, Probationary Native Officer, visited villages at Merdang Gayam, Merdang Lu- mut. Bayor ulu, Bayor Malaban, Bayor Pala’i, Merdang Limo, Jeranang, Ni-adah, Tabuan Dayak, Bayor Nuara. Stigang, Kuap Setakan. Sijitin, Kruin, Stainpin and Stutong. None of these villages has been visited by an Administrative Officer during recent years. Abang Zamhari, Native Officer, Lundu. was admitted to hospital on November 19th and dis charged on the 24th. At an inquest held on the body of Kaweg anak Ngudu, who was found shot dead at Kampong Skio, Bau District, a verdict of suicide was returned. On November 13th a report was received at Buso that a gang of men had broken into a house, ill- treated the inmates, and stolen gold ornaments and cash. Two men, near neighbours, were arrested, as the householder claimed that she recognized them, but in the absence of further evidence the case was dismissed. Notice of appeal was given at once. 377 persons were treated at Bau Dispensary during November and 56 N.A.B. injections were given. A coolie from Wing Lee Mine was admitted to hospital suffering from an abdominal wound said to have been caused by falling on a crowbar; the wound was dressed, and the man was removed to Kuching Hospital, where he died the same day. Padi prospects in the Bau district continue to be good as far as can be made out from conflicting reports, though such reports indicate pests in the Left-Hand Branch. Abang Haji Adenau, Native Officer, proceeded to the Left-Hand Branch on November 29th in order In call chiefs to meet the Travelling District Officer in Bau early next month. He will also investigate the reports of famine-in the Left-Hand Branch. Seburan Gold Mining Syndicate continues to do very well. Their average charge assay for November was 23.6 dwt, and they obtained 198.06 ounces from 171 tons of ore. Many of the mines are working two or three pennyweight ore. so that Seburan is one of the best producing mines at the moment. The average price of gold was $59.33 per fine ounce, and the. total production amounted to 1,967.6289 ounces. The following table gives the individual output of gold from the various mines for October. 1986 . Dresser Chong On returned to Serian from Simunjan on November 7th with a patient named Snang, an ulu Simunjan Dayak, who had sustained a gunshot wound. The accident occurred whilst stalking wild pigs in a thick undergrowth; the trigger of his gun caught in a liana and the gun went off, hitting the left palm of his hand. He was sent to Kuching in charge of the Dresser the following morning for medical treatment. The Sebangan Malays complain that a large number of bears are making excursions from the jungle and destroying their sago trees. It will be remembered that similar reports were received from the Melanaus of the Igan River and Rejang Delta some time ago; it looks as though honey-bears are beginning to acquire a taste for raw sago. St. Thomas' Day 1936. DISTRIBUTION OF PRIZES AND CERTIFICATES AT ST. THOMAS’ SCHOOL. The Annual Distribution of prizes and certificates for the School Year 1935 - 1936 took place on St. Thomas’ Day, Monday, December, 21st, 1936. H.H. the Ranee accompanied by Dayang Valerie distributed the prizes. The guests present included the Chief Justice and Mr. R. W. Hammond, the Rev. Fathers of the Community of the Resurrection, members of the Mission Staff and several parents and relations of the students. On being asked by the Chairman, the Rev. Father W. Shelley, C.R., to read his report, the Principal said “Your Highnesses, Rev. Fathers, Ladies and Gentlemen.— Trie staff of St. Thomas’ is happy to Welcome you within its walls. Both musters and boys are glad to see this recognition of their labour and the more successful will look back with pride on the honour of receiving their awards from the hands of Your Highness. “During the lime I spent at school I never occupied a very prominent position on Prize- giving Day mid as examination after examination passed by I remember that I formed the opinion that my examiners always seemed to try to find out what I did not know, and not what I knew. On one occasion, however, I did win a prize, and and that was for a subject for which I never entered it was called general proficiency. I was very pleased al the time, but as years have gone by 1 have come to the conclusion that general proficiency must, mean that a person is not particularly good at any one thing. The main object of our gathering to-dav is the Prize-giving and I must not take up a long time over my report. In making a report I always think one should look back over the past, con centrate for a few minutes on the present, and try to visualise something of the future. The Past. The most notable event look place last March when the results of the Senior Cambridge Examination were published and we discovered that St. Thomas’ had broken the world’s record by obtaining 120% of passes. All the boys we put in officially were successful, and one other candidate, whom the school had failed, but who with the characteristic perseverance of St. Thomas boys, decided he would sit privately, and succeeded in flooring the examiners at home. Two of the successful students reached the required standard exempting them from the London Matriculation. Of these two, one is now on our staff as a Master, and the other through the kind assistance of friends in England is con tinuing his studies at the Hong Kong University in the Faculty of Medicine and hopes one day to return to his native country of Sarawak as a Doctor and Missionary. The Junior Cambridge results were also satisfactory, but owing to the forced closing of the school, following the out break of diphtheria there were a certain number of failures, practically all of whom, however, had been warned by the school that their chances of success were very flimsy. “The next outstanding event of the past was the celebration of our Golden Jubilee last October. The Bursary Fund in commemoration of the event has now reached $6,500 as against the $8,000 we set ourselves to collect. The School Chapel has been enlarged and a new covered way erected from the old building to the Chapel. An unexpected expenditure has been the rewiring for electric light of the four boarding houses. The School put out a good team in the Second Division League, but unfortunately in the final match we were not able to retain the coveted shield. In the inter-house matches Logie House became champion. The House is to be congra- tulated in that this is the first time that one of the Day Boy Houses has won the cup. Present.—We have had no Senior Cambridge Class this year as we Felt that it entailed too much time and attention being devoted to a few boys at the top of the school to the detriment of the standards where foundations ought to he laid. The school has sent in fifteen candidates for the Junior Cambridge Certificate, the result of which will not be known till the Spring. The numbers have remained about the same and the results of the annual examination have been good. Many of the papers have shown that some really excellent progress is being made. Future.’—As one looks to the future one sees many needs, Iwo only of which will I mention, but both of which I hope will become realities in the near future. (a) A music-room properly furnished. This will entail more building. At present. I can see no immediate possibility of carrying this out, but being optimistic by nature, I have no doubt it will come about sooner or later. (b) The enlarging of the football field This all depends upon the speed with which we carry out the work of levelling at the far end of the compound, which in turn depends largely 4 upon the number of boys whose names appear on the punishment gang next year. (Laughter) I must not end my report without extending to the staff my sincere thanks for all their loyalty and haul work during the year. It would be invidious to mention names, so J will not do so, but to one and all I say ‘Thank you.' Before finally sitting down, I would, if 1 may, like to offer to Dayang Valerie the congratulation of the staff and students upon her twenty-first birthday, which was celebrated yesterday, and I now wish Dayang Valerie in my own name and , in the name of the staff and members of the school many happy returns of her natal day. The Rev. Father Shelley then aked H.H. the Ranee to distribute the prizes and certificates. After a few words of thanks to Her Highness by Father A. Blair, C.R.. on behalf of the school for attending and distributing the Prizes, the Ranee visited the School Chapel and admired the painting on the walls executed by one of the masters. The Christmas Holidays were, then announced, and these will terminate on January 12th. 1937. A.—CREDITABLE CERTIFICATE. 1. Ong Guan Bee. 2. Hung Heong Chua. 3. Basil Temenggong. 4. Soon Keng Seng. 5. Lim Hong Chin, 6. Heng Kin Hem. 7. Un Cheng Kui. 8. Au Lai Soon. 9. Sitambaram. 10. Kang Eng Swee. 11. Wong Hie Su. 12. Phua Ghee Teck. 13. Kueh Giok Khoon. 14. Chan Khiok Hean. 15. Ou Han Eng. 16. Law Lip Tong. 17. Chan Hiok Syn. B.- ORDINARY CERTIFICATE. 1. Jee Eng Joon. 2. Wong Hon Chiong. 3. Law Hoo Teng. 4. Ho Yin Kui. 5. Kow Han Ching. 6. Poh Kheng Howe. 7. John Timban. 8. Wee Soon Hee. 9. Jam Choon Leng. 10. John Lee. 11. Tan Kheng Chua. 12. Jam Peng Guan, 13. Wilbert Nappalli. 14. Chi Lam Seng. 15. Chui Kim Hon 16. Cheng Chiap Fatt. 17. Soo Bang Huat. 18. Wee Peng Tong. 19. Yeo Choon Joo. 20. Wong Wui Shen . 21. Mathew Lee. 22. Lim Sek, Hong. 23. Edmund Law. 24. Lim Lian Tsze. 25. Lim Poh Kui. 26 Wee Boo Chiong. 27. Yeo Ah Eng. 28. Ruggis 29. Chan Boon Chee. 30. Chin Hon Leong C.—ORDINARY CERTIFICATE. 1. Kho Liang Song 2. George Nappalli. 3. Sim Kheng Chiang 4. Kho Tiong Khiong. 5. Lim Choo Tiong. 6. Wee Peng Lum. 7. Robert Cheyne. 8. Baking. 9. Nobuo. 10. Chiang Hoon. Sarawak Union Club. OFFICE-BEARERS FOR 1937. At the 37th Annual General Meeting of the Sarawak Union Club held on Saturday, 5th December, 1936, the following gentlemen were elected office-bearers for the ensuing year —Pre sident His Lordship the Bishop of Labuan and Sarawak Vice-President Venerable the Archdeacon of Sarawak ; Honorary Secretary Mr. Tan Kui Choon; Honorary Treasurer Mr. Chan Weng Yen ; Committee Members Messrs. Kuek Choo Seng, E. W. Howell, C. Mason, Phillip Soh Fu and Ngui Ah Thiam. Sarawak Union Club. ANNUAL REUNION DINNER. On Monday 21st December, St. Thomas' Day, the members of the Sarawak Union Club held their annual Re-union Dinner in the Club premises which were elegantly decorated with streamers and flags for the occasion. There were 112 persons who participated in the function, including the mission- aries of the S.P.G. Mission, who were the guests of the members. Soon after the dinner was over, Archdeacon Hollis, who presided, proposed the toast of His Highness the Rajah, which was drunk with a full spirit of loyalty while the band played the Sarawak Anthem. Mr. Tan Sum Guan next expressed his regret that the President of the Club (His Lordship the Bishop was not present with them, being away in Hongkong on holiday, and he called for the toast of His Lordship, which was responded to with due respect. As Vice-President of the Chib, Archdeacon Hollis, in his speech, said that it was with a real sense of pleasure that in the absence of the Presi dent of the Club, the duty fell on him to preside at the meeting and recalled that he had been associated with the Club for far more years than he liked to think, but be believed it was true to say ; that never in the last ten odd years had the Chib been in so flourishing a Condition. The spirit of good fellowship and friendship was far greater than he had ever before realised as was evidenced by the very large gathering present on that occasion. He was very happy to feel that it was the old days of St. Thomas’ School who were the hosts that night, and it would be his aim and endeavour to make the past students of St. Thomas’ School always keep in close touch with their old school. In moving the toast of the Sarawak Union Club, he asked his friends, the old boys of St. Thomas’ School, to weigh well and fully the responsibility that was theirs in keeping ever green the traditions of their old school, and to keep and guard its history for the benefit of those who are to come in the long, long years which arc to follow in the future. He concluded his speech by asking those present to drink the toast of the Club coupled with the name of its very reliable and efficient secretary, Mr. Tan Kui Choon. On behalf of the Committee and members of the Club, the Honorary Secretary replied thanking the guests for the honour of their presence. He made a reference to the seating arrangements which were rather cramped, due to the fact that the club room was much too small to hold a gathering of such an enormous size, but he hoped everybody was com fortable, and should there be any imperfect hospitality on the club’s part, he hoped the guests would excuse it. At the conclusion of his speech, be asked Miss E. Andrews to give away the trophies to the undermentioned members who had won the various tournaments during the year — With the lovely music kindly rendered by Mr. G. Solosa and his party, the members spent a very pleasant and cheerful evening, making the function a real success. —T.K.C. Sarawak Turf Club. Provisional Programme for the Special Meeting 1937 in aid of the Jubilee Recreation Ground Fund In view of the praiseworthy object to which the nett profits of this meeting will be devoted, it is to be hoped that the races will receive the whole-hearted support of all sections of the community. A RACE. Value $200. Second to receive $75. Third $30. A handicap for ponies of any Division. Distance round the course (about 1 13 miles ). Entrance lee $10. $5 refunded to non-acceptors. Handicap published on the Course. Post Entries allowed at $20 but no refund. REGULATIONS. Entries.—All nominations, accompanied by en trance fees, description of ponies and declaration of colours, are to he made to the Secretaries not later than 23rd January, 1937. at noon. Scratchings.—Owners scratching ponies before 5 p.m., 12th February. 1937, for First Day and 5 p.m.. 14th February, 1937. for Second Day, will receive back half their entrance fees. Handicaps.—For First Day will be posted on the Notice Board at the Sarawak Club at noon on the 30th January. 1937, and for the Second Day at noon on 14th February. 1937. The maximum weight shall be 11 stone 7 lbs. and the minimum 7 stone. Course.—Will be opened for training on 16th January, 1937. Penalties.—Winners of any race at a meeting after publication of weights shall carry a penalty of 7 lbs. for each race with a maximum of 11 stone 7 lbs. Prizes.—20% reduction if under 5 entries. No second prize will be awarded if there are less than 3 runners and no third prize if less than 5. Jockeys.—Professional jockeys who are Sarawak subjects and have not ridden more than two winners under Sarawak Turf Club Rules, may claim an allowance of 7 lbs. The maximum fee to a winning Jockey shall be $15 and for second place $10 and for a ride $5 in the absence of any agreement to ride for a lower sum. Whip.—No whip used in any race shall exceed two feet in length. Spurs.—If spurs be worn these shall not have rowels. Ponies.—Must run on the First Day to be eligible for entry in races on Second Day. Any Borneo pony of not more than 14 hands in height may be imported from B.N.B. and shall be eligible for entry in races open to Sarawak Ponies provided that their sires and dams were foaled in Borneo. All new ponies shall carry top weight on the First Day in the Division in which they are classified, which shall be as follows — Fitting Members.—A visiting member shall pay a subscription of $5 per week or portion of a week during which he shall be a member of the Club. A nomination of such gentleman to be a Visiting Member shall be signed by two Ordinary Members as respectively proposing and seconding him. Strangers.—Persons not members of the Club or strangers not introduced by a Member, may be admitted within the enclosure of the Grand Stand or of the Paddock during any Meeting on payment of an entrance fee of $5 for each day's racing. Owners.—Are requested to see that their syces and jockeys obtain necessary badges for entrance to Paddock. Objections.—By owners shall be accompanied by a deposit of $10. Where not otherwise especially mentioned the Rules of the Race Course shall be the same as those adopted by the Straits Racing Association. The decision of the Committee of the Sarawak Turf Club shall be final in all matters of dispute. Communications to be made to THE BORNEO COMPANY, LIMITED, Secretaries, Sarawak Turf Club. MINUTES OP A COMMITTER MEETING OF THE SARAWAK TURF CLUB HELD AT THE SARAWAK CLUB ON THE 8TH DECEMBER, 1936, AT 6.15 P.M. Present— Mr. Tan Sum Guan (in the Chair), Messrs Wee Kheng Chiang, Chan Qui Chong and G. T. Bates. Attending.—Mr. W. F. Dick (on behalf of the Jubilee Recreation Ground Fund Committee.) Absent.—Datu Shahbandar, Messrs. H. B. Crocker, C. D. Adams. P. M. Adams, E. S. Holl, J. B. Archer and B. J. C. Spurway. (1) Gymkhana Meeting.—Mr. Dick explained that the Turf Club might assist the Jubilee Recrea tion Ground Fund by holding a Gymkhana” the profits to go to the Jubilee Fund. (2) Mr. Bates, for the Secretaries, read letters from various members giving their views. (3) Mr. Chan Qui Chong proposed and Mr. Wee Kheng Chiang seconded that subject to the approval of His Highness the Rajah a two-day meeting be held on the 13th and 15th February. Thia was passed 3 voting in favour and one abstaining. (4) It was decided that the usual distance races should be run. (5) Prizes,- For this special meeting it was decided that the prizes and sweepstakes should be as follows — (9) Totalizator.—Same as usual. (10) Handicapping.—As usual by Mr. Holl. (11) Course.—To be open for training on the 16th January. (12) Entries. To be in by the 16th January. (13) Handicaps.—For the First Day's racing will be posted in the Sarawak Club on the 30th January at noon. Second Division News. OCTOBER. The following are extracts from a report by Mr. H. E. Cutfield, Acting Resident, Second Division — “On the evening of October 2nd the Police reported to me (owing to the absence of the District Officer and Cadet) that Enggat, who was under remand for a serious wounding case and under medical observation as a suspected lunatic, had gone completely mad and was breaking up his cell and causing considerable damage. He had torn his clothes and bedding to shreds and broken up his wooden bed, part of which he was using as an implement to break open the railed window and peep-hole in the door. The expanded metal in the small window was destroyed, and the same metal in the peep-hole of the door had been wrenched out of its framework. Fortunately Enggat by some contortionist manoeuvre got his feet and legs through this small aperture and this simplified his capture, which otherwise would not have been pleasant. It was necessary to bind both hands and feet for a few hours and inject a sleeping draught until the fit had passed. “Mohamad Jawa, a well-known and respected member of the Malay community here, died on October 6th. A careful and hardrd-working man with considerable property, lie will be remembered by most former officers of Simanggang with deep regret. “From October 28th to 31st I visited Betong and Spaoh. The Betong stat ion was looking very neat and showed every sign of prosperity. Although I personally consider the bazaar to be unnecessarily far from the river bank, the station is a great improvement on the Betong of the old bazaar previous to the fire. “The question of starting a station at Spaoh with a Court Writer and Native Officer has been proposed and recommended on several occasions, but it seems to have died a natural death. This I consider a great pity. “Spaoh, recently, has been exporting more rubber than Betong itself, and although the bazaar buildings are not all that might he desired, its prosperity is obvious; the whole district, in fact, is very rich. The distance between Spaoh and Betong may not be great as the crow flies, but owing to the tides a visit to Betong usually entails a two-day trip if business is to be transacted.’’ No serious crime was reported at Simanggang during the month. Mr. E. H. Elam, District Officer, Serian, left Simanggang with the District Officer in m.l. Para on October 2nd and reached Munggu Embawang the same day. The purpose of this visit was to settle a Divisional boundary dispute between Ulu Lingga and Ulu Simunjan, from Bukit Tekalong Mit to Bukit Buri. The rentis was inspected in the presence of the disputants and the Native Officers and Penghulus of each district; the dispute was amicably settled, and only necessitated a su portion of new rentis being cut. On October 11th a party of Kayans from Poetoes Sibau, N.E.I., arrived at Simanggang; some went on to Kuching, the others returned home. While in Simanggang they gave a display of Kayan dancing. The first mechanically-propelled vehicle to be seen in Simanggang for some time arrived in Simanggang on October 12th, this being a motor Cycle belonging to Mr. Shave. Sunday, October 18th. was St. Luke's Day, and the first post of St. Luke’s Mission Church at Bukit Sabun was erected. The Mission have been using a temporary Chapel since they removed to this site. Literally thousands of flying foxes have been attracted by the durian flowers at Lubok Antu, the sky being full of them in the morning and evening. The Gezaghebber of Semitau arrived overland at Lubok Antu on October 15th and discussed various matters with the District Officer. He left overland from Engkilili for Merekai on the 18th. Very few Dayaks visited Saratok during the month, being too busy planting. Farmers of hill padi report that their planting is finished. _ ... ___ A shooting range has been made at Saratok, and the Police without exception have shown themselves keen marksmen. Sergt. Suleiman and Cpl. Omar are responsible for the snap-shooting target, which has proved very popular. On October 4th four Malay kampong houses were blown down by a hail-storm at Kampong Kupang. Nobody was hurt, but jars and padi were lost. These houses, however, were little better than farming langkaus. The high tides experienced at Saratok at the end of the month flooded out the bazaar; sampans were to be seen anchored outside shophouses. Many Dayaks visited Betong during the month, and it was reported that hill padi burns have been generally successful. Betong Malays have not yet commenced farming in earnest, although, as in past years, every effort has been made to induce them to do so. These natives are invariably late, and their crops are far from successful. It was proposed to clear part of the Betong- Simanggang road, hut it was not possible to find naties who would accept work at 40 cents per diem. The Fact that a rapping holiday was in force at the time makes this shortage of labour the more significant. NOVEMBER. The following are extracts from a report by Mr. H. E. Outfield, Acting Resident, Second Divi sion — “I visited Engkilili on November 9th - 10th. The station itself was in moderately good condition considering there was only one prisoner, but the bazaar scavenging and maintenance of back lanes was far from satisfactory, and a new arrangement for bazaar scavenging is to be instituted. “In the evening of Friday 13th the Dresser at Betong rang up to say that a corpse had been found in the babas at the 5th mile, Betong- Simanggang road. He aud the Native Officer were ordered to proceed there immediately to investigate; the District Officer was already away investigating the murder of T.R. Merajan. They returned in the early hours of the morning to report that the body was that of a Chinese who had obviously been murdered. I left as soon as possible with Mr. Digby and Inspector Juing. The body, although very decomposed, was identi fied as that of an old Chinese named Goh Lye Heng, who had left Simanggang for Betong five days previously after collecting money in Simang gang and Lingga in order to return to China. Mr. Digby proceeded to Betong with the Inspector to investigate from that end while I returned to Simanggang to make inquiries there. “Mr. Digby remained at Betong until the return of the District Officer via Skrang and Simanggang on the 18th. As a result of inquiries a Kheh Chinese is detained while further investigations are being made. “On November 17th the District Officer, Lubok Antu, telephoned to report that Penghulu Sambau had come to relate a story of strangers throwing spears and stones in his people's padi-farms at night. A patrol was already in the Ulu, but the District Officer was instructed to go up river to investigate, although there is little doubt that these stone-throwing scares are imagination, or put-up jobs. “On the 21st Penghulu Bakar and some Skrang tuai arrived to report three cases of spear-throwing and stone-throwing in the Skrang. The stones brought down for our inspection were huge boulders which a man could not possibly throw more than a few yards, and if thrown would not reach the roof, even if the marauder were standing immediately outside the house. It was obviously a blind to mislead Government in the investiga- tion of the Merajan murder which took place in a house on the boundary between the Skrang and Layer. Abang Zin, Native Officer, was instructed to proceed up the Skrang with the Penghulu and levy pledges on every door in the allected If any more of these practical jokes tire reported these pledges will revert to Government. “Everything has been peaceful since these pledges have been received. “On November 23rd I left with the Assistant Superintendent of Lands and Surveys for Kalaka; we arrived at Kabong, where we were met by the Officer-in -Charge, Kalaka, the same evening, and Saratok was reached the next morning. While at Saratok I received wireless informs tion from Betong to the effect that Erikat, who was detained for the murder of T.R. Merajan. had hanged himself. Evidence was very strong against this man. and further evidence had ben received that afternoon including the finding of the weapon with which the crime commited. The minutes of a full inquiry have been sub mitted by the District Officer.” Two civil appeal cases came to the District Court, Simanggang, during November, one being an appeal against the decision of the Orang Kaya Jaul regard ing the farming land dispute; the decision of the Orang Kaya was quashed, respondent being ordered to pay costs of the case. The other was an appeal against the decision of Lingga Petty Court regard ing a fruit tree dispute; the District Court could see no reason why the decision of the Lingga Petty Court should be altered, therefore the appeal was dismissed with costs. The usual season of fruit-tree disputes opened during the month. The District Officer, Betong, heard from T. R. Punggor of N. Redau. Spak, that Lias, a Dayak of N. Penabun, Ulu Skrang, had been spreading rumours that Jeti’s (executed murderer) two brothers were in the Ulu Lay ar and were wanting to kill the persons responsible for Jeti’s arrest. Rumours were also heard of stone-throwing at R. Balim N. Pau, Ulu Akup Skrang. On the 21st Penghulu Bakar reported that at R. Sait, Darai, Skrang, a Dayak named Jantum narrowly missed being speared when leaving the house in the evening some days ago. No trace of the assailant could be found. Some days later a woman named Jelendang who was sitting on the ruai in the middle of the house was speared from below the house, the spear piercing her clothing. Again no one managed to see or chase the assailant. Stone-throwing was also reported at N. Mejong. It is thought that the alleged spearing and stone throwing is being done by the Dayaks themselves, to make Government think that outlaws are the cause of it, and to divert attention from the spearing which occurred in the Ulu Padeh when a Dayak was killed, a local Dayak being on remand in Betong for this murder. On November 3rd Mr. Cordiner, Acting Manager of the Sarawak Electricity Supply Co.. Ltd., arrived at Simanggang. The purpose of his visit was to see if electricity would pay at Simanggang, and he seemed confident that if the scheme was approved by the Directors and by Government, it would prove a paying proposition. Two Dayaks were imprisoned at Lubok Antu section. 177 S.P.C. for impersonating other Dayaks who had taken a pass to Kuching, but who did not go owing to bad dreams. Other cases of the same nature are being followed up, and the persons con cerned punished. Gases of this nature appear to be getting very common and cause trouble when pledges (for travelling outside the Division) have to be repaid, or passage money has to be collected, or when witnesses are wanted on a Court case, etc. On November 8th Sergeant Bait, Corporal Kalom, L.-C. Singka, Native Officer Abang Mansor aud twelve constables left Lubok Antu to patrol the Dutch border between Bukit Makup (Akup) and Bukit Nalan Ketupong. They split into two parties, one under Sergeant Rail which went up S. Mujan and pal rolled Bukit Akup and Betong and one under Corporal Kalom, who went up S. Jengin and patrolled Bukit Guran, Bukit Lobang Tanah, Bukit Batu Lemak, Ulu Delok and Bukit Ketupong area. They met at Kubu N. Mujan on the 22nd returning on the 24th, reporting no sign of any outlaws. This patrol was sent up in con- nection with the Dutch patrol which went up the Lebuyan and other side streams in the Ulu Kanyau at the same time, hoping to drive the outlaws back over the border. On the evening of November 1st Tuai Ramah Merajan of Pelepok Padeh, Saribas District, was speared through the floor of the ruai of a long-house and died of wounds the following morning. Several arrests were made, and the preliminary inquiry was commenced on the 28th. On the evening of the 13th the body of an elderly Chinese was discovered at the 5th mile. Simanggang Road. It has since been ascertained that deceased, who had been murdered, was Goh Lye Heng, a 68-year old Teochew who was on his way from Simanggang to Betong. It is understood that he had been collecting subscriptions towards the expenses for his return to China, and it is thought that robbery was the motive for the crime. There is good reason to believe that the murder took place between 8 a.m. and 11 a.m. on Novem ber 10th. One arrest has been made. On November 25th at 10 p.m. Enkat, a Pelepok Dayak who bad been detained in connection with Padeh murder, hanged himself in one of the cells of the Belong Prison. A Coroner’s inquest has becn held and a verdict of suicide was recorded, the Coroner exonerating the Prison Authorities from all blame. The following are extracts from a report by Mr. J. C. IT. Barcroft, District Officer, Saribas River — At about noon on November 2nd Penghulu Jabieng arrived at Belong and reported that Tuai Rumah Merajan, Pelepok, had been speared the previous night at about 7 p.m. and was expected to die of his wounds. I immediately phoned the Resident, Second Division, and received orders to proceed up river. “At 1.55 p.m., accompanied by the Dresser, Penghulu Jabieng, one N.C.O. and three men. 1 set out overland for Pelepok. Rain fell in the afternoon so paths were under water, the river was in flood and consequently progress was tortuous and slow. I arrived at Pelepok at 10.30 p.m. to hear that Merajan had died that morning about 9 a.m. “Immediately on arrival I held a brief inquiry to ascertain the main facts of the case, and sub sequently decided that no useful purpose would be served by instigating a search that night. “The next morning at day-break tongkats were sent for Penghulus Igoh, Bakar and Mandai Chaing instructing them to nikup check up on kampars and orang temuai, and to make their way to Pelepok. “At 8 a.m. I split up my men, sending Peng- hulu Jabieng and one party via Blawang and Tebat towards the Skrang, and taking the other up the Tebat towards the Spak. The Dresser returned to Belong. “Both search-parties returned to the long-house about 3 p.m. but neither had anything to report. On arrival we were informed of two incidents, firstly, that there had been stonc-throwing at Ajong the previous night (a statement that I took with a pinch of salt), and secondly, that one of the farming langkaus had been disturbed. There was also some uneasiness that the grave-yard might be disturbed and deceased's head taken. “By this time Pengarah Isek had arrived and I decided to send Penghulu Jabieng and party to Ajong and take Isek with me to spend the night on the farms. “With darkness, and in a downpour of ram, my party crept into a langkau near S. Pelepok. No lights, smoking or talking were allowed, and in wet clothes and pestered by mosquitoes we spent a most unpleasant night. “As nothing untoward had occurred by 3 a.m. J paid a visit to the graveyard about a mile away, and having satisfied myself that nothing had been disturbed, returned to the langkau to wait for the dawn. At about 8 a.m. we returned to the long- house. The morning was spent obtaining more detailed statements from the Dayaks. “At 5 p.m. on the 4th Inspector Juing and a party of Police arrived from Simanggang; they had made searching inquiries in the Skrang but failed to discover anything of value. That night the facts of the case were again related for Inspector Juing’s benefit. “At noon on the 5th Inspector Juing and Police left for the Spak, visited N. Tapih and made a night raid on langkaus and houses at Sanggau and Engkalat; they arrived back at Pelepok about 4 a.m., but had nothing to report. “Shortly after midday on the 5th Penghulus Igoh, Bakar and Mandal Chaing arrived; they had made inquiries in the Ulu Spak, Layar and Skrang without hearing anything of suspicious kampars, nor had they anything of interest to report. The situation was again discussed but no helpful suggestions were forthcoming. “Pengarah Isek and Penghulu Bakar suspected that the murder was the work of munsoh (out laws) and thought it highly probable that Kayan was m biding in the Spak. Penghulu Jabieng was equally convinced that it was a local job. “After further discussion it was decided that the Penghulus should return the following morning and instruct their tuais to keep a careful look-out. Furthermore, I reintroduced the old order that after dark Dayaks moving about must have lights, and on approaching a house must give a bail. “Early on the 6th having banded over affairs at Pelepok to Abang Morni, I walked to Ajong, and boated down to N. Krun. Further inquiries were made in all houses in the Padeh, and I arrived hack in Betlong on the morning of the 8th. “On the 12th I again proceeded up the Padeh arriving at Ajong at 3 p.m. “The night was spent here, and several impor tant clues were discovered. Early the following morning 1. walked to Pelepok, arriving there about 10 a.m. A further and fuller inquiry was made into the murder, and as a result three arrests were made. These three persons were sent to Betong in the custody of Abang Morni , Native Officer. I decided to leave a Constabulary patrol in the Ulu Padeh and on the 14th. accompanied by two Constables, I walked via Blawang to Tibat and boated down to N. Murat Skrang, arriving there at 4.30 p.m. The night was spent at this house. Early the next morning I boated down the Skrang. reaching Tabarong at 1 p.m. where I found m.l. Rentis waiting. I was in Simang gang soon after 3 p.m. “ I returned overland to Betong on the 18th.’’ Several complaints have been received from members of the public at Belong regarding the service of Chinese launches, and inquiries have been made as to whether Government would consider taking action in the matter. The service, which is at all times irregular, has lately become impossibly bad. a result of the withdrawal and cancellation of numerous passenger licences by Government, only one passenger boat remains on the Betong run, and this boat, is limited to ten passengers. In view of the population and general prosperity of the Saribas this service is ridiculously inadequate, and it is con sidered that a commission should be appointed to inquire into the present unsatisfactory state of affairs and to endeavour to suggest a remedy. Penghulu Entri reported to the Officer-in-Charge, Kalaka, that lie had been round his district, and stated the padi crop in the Nyabor and Roban this year is likely to be very poor. He strongly advo cates that the Dayaks in the Ulu Roban, who in many cases possess no rubber gardens, be made to plant sago as the land is well suited for such a crop. The Resident has approved the suggestion that a regatta should be held at Saratok in February on Her Highness the Ranee’s birthday. The proposed regatta at Kabong at Christmas has been cancelled, as the Malays are afraid that it will clash with the fruit season, which promises to be late this year. Two applications for erecting sago factories in Saratok were received from local Chinese. The two Chinese steamers sailing between Kuching and Saratok have recently been carrying cargoes of this commodity. Visit of Dutch Officials to the Second Division. On December 9th Mr. Bjknik, Resident of Sin- tang, Netherlands East Indies, and Mr. Hipps, Gezaghebber of Semitau, together with one Demang (Native Officer) and three Police arrived at Lubok Antu. Ulu Ai, where they were met by the District Officer and a guard of honour furnished by a detachment of Section “B of the Sarawak Constabulary. The following morning the party made an early start, reaching Engkilili at midday; here they were joined by Temunggong Temiang of Ulu Kantu, leaving again for Simanggang by m.l. Rentis at 1 p.m. On arrival at Simanggang the same afternoon an official reception was accorded to the Resident, Sarawak Administrative Officers being in uniform and a guard of honour being mounted. The officer's present were —Mr. H. E. Outfield. Acting Resident, Second Division, Mr. J. C. H. Barcroft, District Officer, Saribas, (in the absence of the District Officer, Simanggang), Mr. F. A. Moore, District Officer, Lubok Antu, and Mr. K. II. Digby. On the following day a meeting was held in the Residents’s office, and problems affecting both Sarawak and Netherlands East Indies territory were discussed. The Dutch officials, accompanied by the District Officer, Lubok Antu, left. Simanggang by m.l. Rentis on December 12th; they reached Lubok Antu on the following day, and crossed the border into Dutch territory on the 14th. Third Division News. NOVEMBER. Proceedings were commenced in the Coroner’s Court at Sibu into the case of a Chinese who is alleged to have jumped into the river at Durin, after attacking and seriously wounding his wife with an axe. The proceedings are at present adjourned until the wife is discharged from hospital in order that she may give evidence. Major W. F. N. Bridges, n.s.o., arrived at Sibu on November 30th. Native Officer F. Ansin returned from a tour of Penghulu Kcndawang’s district on the 18th. Maps of all Dayak districts. Sibu, showing the position of Dayak houses and number of doors in each house have now been completed. The District Officer. Sibu, records with regret the death of Haji Unus bin Singel. Tuan Belal, Sibu. The Land and Survey revenue for the Division during October amounted to $5,762,87, a welcome increase over the previous month, but still not altogether satisfactory. November was a busy month in the offices and a further improvement is expected. It is evident, however, that the revised estimates for 1936 were on too optimistic a basis. Registrar's work was very heavy dining November, 494 deeds being registered as against 312 in the previous heaviest month this year. The increase in the number of deeds seems to be caused mainly by direct speculation in rubber lands, while some people are buying poor rubber gardens in the hope of getting permission to replant. On one occasion during the month the pump at the Sibu waterworks failed to work. It was found that a snake had entered the inlet pipe and obstructed the suction check valve. This was put in order in a few days. The roof of the new Sibu Hospital is now finished, work such as plastering and construction of outhouse roofs being now in progress. On November 9th a sum of $200 was alleged to have been stolen from the safe of Loh Khong Chiong's Gambling Kongsi at No. 19, Blacksmith Road. On investigation it was discovered that the theft due to the carelessness of the Treasurer of the Kongsi, who had lost the keys of (he safe two days previously. The money has been repaid by the Treasurer. Although investigations are being made no further information has as yet been obtained. On November 21st a report of attempted murder and suicide at Ilir Durin was made. It appeared that a Khch Chinese by the name of Kong Chaw See suddenly attacked his wife with an axe and inflicted severe injuries on her. He then ran out of the house and jumped into the Rejang River. His body was recovered on 23rd, and the wife was admitted to hospital the same day. The only eye-witness to this incident was the sixtcen-year-old daughter, Kong Lai Thai, who made the report. Owing to the tapping holiday, the Government offices at Sibu were crowded during the early part, of the month with Chinese and Dayaks applying for cartridges and rubber stencils. On November 11th, Armistice Day, a contingent of the Sarawak Constabulary, under the command of Senior Inspector Abang Adeng, paraded at the main flagstaff. A gun fired from the Fort battery signalled the start of the 'Silence' at the end of which buglers sounded the ‘last post' and ‘revill '. All European and Native Officers attended the ceremony. Mr. F. L. Mansel arrived at Sibu on the 4th to act as Divisional Treasurer during the absence of Mr. A. L. McLaine in Kuching. Mr. McLaine returned later in the month, and after handing over Treasury affairs to Mr. C. E. Gascoigne, who has been appointed Divisional Treasurer, returned to Kuching with Mr. Mansel on the 26th. Dr. R. Gotte, who has been conducting an inspection of the forests of the Upper Rejang on behalf of the Borneo Company, Ltd., returned to Sibu on the 9th. It max be of interest to record the case of a complaint by Dayaks in the Durin against one of their women, named Ular, whom they suspected of possessing a charm which they called batu smut batu angkut. It was alleged that this charm had magical powers whereby rice stored in the individual rice bins could be invisibly transferred to Ular's own bin. So strong was the belief in this women’s powers, through her claim, that the people of the house were eager for her to remove to some other locality, and they agreed that she should he allowed to remove without paying the usual fine of enslan. It was announced that if Oar continued to live in the house they would break up and go and live elsewhere. The Dusuns at Kanowit spent the month super vising the planting out of the young padi, and are returning home early in December. The people of Empam's house have done real hard work in bunding and levelling their communal farm; the buffaloes are well handled, responding to Dayak words of command. This padi farm looks good, though bengas has made its unwelcome appearance. The privately-owned sawah farms, which are planted closer together, are reported to he more affected. The Ngemah and Poi Dayaks are reported to be suffering from a shortage of rice already These Dayaks, always the most difficult in the district, did not generally respond to Government’s suggestion that substitute crops for padi should be planted, and those who are without rubber gardens,—and here again there is less rubber than in other rivers.—will probably have to face a famine again this year. Supplies of coffee seedlings were received from the Agricultural Department and handed to Penghulu Endu, to whom His Highness the Rajah had promised them. Supplies of seed have been asked for. and the Senior Agricultural Officer has promised to send large quantities. Enquiries for these arc constantly received. The District Officer, Meluan, reports that during November Communal Reserves were mapped for the Lower Kanowit, Tuah, Bawan and Pidai Dayaks, and also for the Kanowits. All these people are either experimenting in catcall farming, or contemplating doing so, and it is felt that this parcelling out of land among the villages concerned is of primary importance in the work of settling these, people on their land. It is anticipated that individual alienation by general consent will be the next step, and one house at least has announced a determination to apply for individual titles for this farming land as soon as unanimity is achieved, those who already own pesaka being prepared to pay quit rent. This is a great step forward, but it is suspected that should the present conditions of prosperity not continue, requests for relief from these lightly- undertaken responsibilities will again be received, and. as in the past, many titles will be handed back to Government. Dayaks are paying heavy assessment on shops owned by them in bazaars without a word of complaint, and it is felt that a land tax on land of appreciable uncultivated sales value would be paid equally willingly. It is this reluctance to pay rent which is holding back the Dayaks from acquiring title to the land they occupy and are now commenc ing permanently to cultivate, and it is this lack of secure ownership which retards their progress and encourages them to continue shifting cultivation with consequent migration. Unless land is held individually, the custom of sharing farming laud equally is so strong that it in itself negatives any desire to improve a piece of land to individual advantage. Cantonese carpenters commenced shaping the timber delivered at Meluan for the Police Barracks, and the levelling of the site by Police is nearly completed. Additions to N. Julau Blockhouse to allow for the accommodation of a European Officer, a Native Officer and a Village Constable have been made. At Sarikei three Cantonese tappers were fined $50 each for tapping rubber on the last day of the tapping holiday, and several dealers were fined for over stocking. Apart from the above, and two Dayak property disputes on appeal, no cases are deserving of mention. An inquest was held at Sarikei on the body of an elderly Dayak who was drowned when his boat capsized in the Rejang River. A verdict of death by misadventure was returned. Kampar Dayak in the Wak attacked with a parang a local Dayak alleged to have been surprised in the act of adultery with the former’s wife, but fortunately the suspected adulterer was nimble enough to avoid injury and ran away. The wife was slightly injured in trying to hold back her husband. The Kampar surrendered himself and was dealt with by the District Officer. The Travelling Dresser visited Binatang and Selalang during the month and also accompanied the District Officer to the Julau and Sugai. A large number of suspected lepers was found in the Sugai, and arrangements are being made to send these people to Kuching for treatment. The District Officer, Lower Rejang, records with regret the death at an advanced age of Haji Karim bin Haji Matjapar. He was Native Officer of Sarikei from 1918 to 1929, when he retired on pension, and until his death served as Tua Kampong of Sarikei. He took part in the second Gat expedition in 1919. Unfortunately one new crack appeared in the underwater piling of Sarikei wharf during November, and three of the old cracks re-opened. The contractor’s respresentative arrived from Singapore towards the end of the month to repair the Binatang godown. A temporary palm-leaf building to accommodate cargoes during the repairs is now being put up in the Customs enclosure. The following are extracts from a report by Mr. F. L. G. Crossley, Acting District Officer. Lower Rejang — On November 2nd, accompanied by Native Officer Abang Openg, I left for a tour of the middle Julau and Sugai, recently brought under this district. The route taken was via the Nyelong and Pakan rivers, and Penghulu Umpor’s house at Nanga Sugai was reached after two days' walking, on well-kept Dayak paths. After three nights in the Julau and Sugai we set off from Nanga Nasau just below the Pakan, to walk across-country to Meluan Port in the Kanowit river. The objects of this journey were to examine the possibilities of this route for a line of communication between Sarikei and Meluan, and to discuss Julau affairs with the District Officer, Meluan who has until recently administered this area. “The first day's walk, on a well-used Dayak hunting-path, to the headwaters of the Meluan, a Kanowit tributary, was quite simple, and camp was made in the middle of the afternoon. It was not considered advisable to push on any further, as the next water was reputed to be over three hours’ walk further on. This stream, no longer inhabited by Dayaks, is full of game, and is a well-known hunting ground for both Julau and Kanowit Dayaks. The second day’s walk was long and very exhausting, and although we started early, the majority of the party failed to reach Meluan. The route is along the hilltops and ridges, through old hill jungle, and water is only seen twice in the whole journey. Dayak hunting-paths were used for short distances, but for the most part we followed the now somewhat overgrown trace cut from Meluan. With eight followers I reached Meluan at 7 p.m., and at once sent out a search party who brought in four stragglers who were benighted on the ridge. The remainder of the party, with the Native Officer. camped at the second stream and arrived the following day. “Unfortunately I was unable to meet the District Officer, Meluan. who had been called down to Kanowit. “The return journey was made by boat down the Kanowit and up the Julau to N. Lahab and then overland to the Pakan, Nyelong, and back to Sarikei on the 12th.” The opening of St. Anthony's School at Sarikei was celebrated on November 18th when many guests were entertained by the Rector, the Rev. Father Quaddekker. who was also celebrating the completion of 25 years’ work in Sarawak. The District Officer, Kapit, states that with the assistance of the Dutch authorities Akam Lah and his followers have at last been traced to Mahakam. N.E.I. Akam Lah, a Kayan with 17 followers from the Balui, proceeded to Dutch territory in 1931 on a pass for one year and then disappeared, all efforts to trace him and his party being in successful. Various rumours as to their fate have been current, including one to the effect that they had all been murdered by Dayaks. They have at last been traced, however, and the Dutch authorities are ordering the party home after the harvest. As many of them are married men and have apparently married again over the border, there should be some lively matrimonial cases on their return. The demonstration garden at Kapit flourishes, and the various species of beans are doing very well; already a considerable quantity of seed has been accumulated. On November 5th Dr. Gotte, the Borneo Com pany, Ltd., timber expert, returned to Kapit having completed his exploration of timber in the Merit and either streams. His results show that the timber resources of that part of the country have not yet been fully realised, and his plan of the Merit is a wonderful piece of work which, even if the Borneo Company proceed no further, should be of consider able value to Government, to whom, it is understood, a copy will be presented. Reports from the Ulu Mukah show that the Dayak padi situation may become serious most of the Dayaks are eating wild sago, and their new crops have been flooded and partially destroyed. A prison demonstration fruit garden has been started at Mukah with four dozen citrus plants from Kuching.- The demonstration vegetabe gardens continue to produce vegetables for the prison. Tn one of these some citronella grass cuttings have been planted and on maturity an attempt will be made to extract the oil, as there appear to be possibilities of small-holders growing this as a remunerative crop. The price of sago at Mukah rose to 75 cents per passu during the month and averaged 70 cents, but remained well below the price obtaining at Dalat and the Kut. Seventy-five cents is the highest price this year, or for some time, at Mukah. The Rector of the R.C. Mission at Mukah has applied to open a school among the Foochow colonv at Skoyan. Messrs. The Sarawak Oilfields, Ltd., have made rapid progress with their access works to Matedeng. Their wharf, store and office at Kuala Mukah are nearing completion, and the road trace is progressing along the coast. It is understood that the Company hope to start exploration drilling at Matedeng in the spring of 1937. Penghulu Dagang came down from the Ulu Oya during the month and reported all well in his district. Dayaks have been quiet, but are still feeling the effect; of their last had harvest and consequently are badly off for rice. Melanau fishing at Oya was at a standstill during the month owing to very rough seas. The price of raw sago dropped a few cents over the figures for last month, the price at Dalat being 72 cents per passu and at the Kut 86 cents. The amount of raw sago exported from the district showed a decrease when competed with the figures for last month, the amount being By sea 94 koyans. By Kut 70 Total 164 koyans. Total decrease 85 koyans. One motor schooner, three sailing schooners and five bandongs cleared Oya during the month, the total tonnage being 208 tons, a decrease of 408 tons from the figures for last month. Fourth Division News. NOVEMBER. The inquiry into the deaths of Mat Nor and Jaas (f.) in a lodging-house in Miri bazaar on the night of October 30th- 31st was held on November 2nd and 3rd. A verdict was returned stating that Jaae was murdered by Mat Nor, who then com mitted suicide. There was no other serious crime at Miri during the month. Penghulu Jalen visited Niah from Bintulu, and Penghulu Manggoi came down from ulu Niah during November. The latter reported that all was well up river. Many natives are now working in the Niah birds’-nest caves from which about 18 pikuls have been collected so far. The quality is rather poorer than usual. No crimes of unusual importance were reported at Limbang during the month, and Court work has been light. Penghulu Sisal (Bisayah) came down to Limbang and several hours were spent over the correction and translation of the Bisayah undang-undang, the compilation of which is too rough and inaccurate; it appears, inter alia, that a certain proportion of. fines was the recognized perquisite of the old Bisayah Data in former years for certain offences, but a check of the fines book shows that none of these offences appear to have been committed since his death ! At least, there are few if any reports of them since the institution of the fixed salary system. All upriver folk in the Limbang district have been warned that gun licence forms of the new pattern will be necessary next year, with a pluvio graph affixed. A special cheap rate has been arranged in advance with a new local photographer in the bazaar. This arrangement lias been; applied regarding local criminal records also. Various details of information were compiled for the benefit of Major Bridges, D.S.O., who visited the District on the 11th in connect ion with Rubber Restriction. His proposed itinerary, however, was curtailed, therefore the original programme could not be adhered to. Visits of inspection were made to all of the group of typical gardens from which satistics are being compiled for the Rubber Restriction Committee. It seems that the appear ance of rubber trees here, especially as regards their girth, is no criterion as to the potential production of latex, at least over a given short period. Major Bridges proceeded overland via Brunei to Baram District on the 18th after having visited Lawas and Trusan. During the three weeks tapping holiday this month opportunity was taken to utilize the services of the Rubber Restriction Inspector to check the stocks of every dealer and exporter in the Limbang District, and but for an odd picul or so there was no smoked rubber in the District on the 23rd, when the holiday terminated. On November 16th a party of 18 Boy Scouts arrived at Limbang on a sightseeing visit in the charge of Mr. G. P. Bowring, of Brunei. Other visitors during the month included Mr. Snelus, Officer-in-Charge, Lawas, Major Bridges, D.S.O., Messrs. Young and Tolley of the Borneo Evangelical Mission, and Mr. and Mrs. Southwell, who have just returned from a year's absence in Australia. The District Officer, Baram, rejects that a Brunei Malay woman was accidentally shot by her stepson whilst on their farm near the outlet to Logan Tujoh. Returning to the house about four o’clock in the afternoon, the stepson saw a monkey in the branches of a tree near a patch of Indian corn but some distance from the house. He ran to the house, fetched a gun, and then saw the monkey run down the trunk of the tree, as he thought, into the corn. Tie crept loser, saw movements in the corn and what he took to be the monkey, and carefully shot his stepmother who had been ill for many months and bad for the first time since her illness left the house. She was wounded in the arms, chest, side and stomach, but -fortunately the cartridge contained No. 4 bellets and the wounds were only superficial. Unfortunately for the stepson, he was using some- one else's gun. On November 22nd, a Bra wan from Long Miri killed in the jungle by a deer-trap. The sharpened bamboo was driven into his back just below the left shoulder, and he died instantaneously. The trap must have been set with great exactitude, since the deer are generally only wounded, and it is very rare for the spear to find the heart. The owner of the trap has been brought, down to Baram and is awaiting trial. The epidemic of whooping cough, which has died out in Marudi has spread to the native villages up river and nearly all the children in the nearby villages have become infected. Very little relief was given to natives during November, and it is now certain that with the help already given, and with the substitutes planted, the natives will be able to last until the harvest. The sudden purchase of all logs afloat in the Tinjar, Tutoh and Apoh rivers by the Vamco Timber Com pany has been of immense assistance. They have paid out over four thousand dollars this month to owners of timber rafts, enabling these people to buy rice, and in some cases to pay back part of the debt they owe to Government. Several villages which would have required assistance have been able to sell timber and obtain their own rice without coming to Government; others, more especially in the Tinjar, where many are natural sago-eaters, have been persuaded by the Curator, Sarawak Museum, to hold out until the harvest. Without his persuasion they would have applied for relief, not really needing it, probably merely because others had had it. The Curator came back from the Baram on the 3rd, having been held up by high water below Long Keliman. He left again, accompanied by Tuanku Mohamad, on the 5th, for the Tutoh and Apoh and returned to Marudi on the 10th. Two days later, accompanied by Tuanku Taha, he started for the Tinjar and the headwaters of the Baram. From Long Lobang he crossed to the Baram by way of the Pawan and so to Long Akah with upriver Agent Sulimin. Tuanku Taha came back down the Tinjar attending to his ordinary duties and arrived in Marudi on the 22nd; the Curator returned on the 25th. His rapid travelling is surely proof of the value of an outboard motor to a district the size of Baram. During the time he has been here he has used his motor for over five hundred miles. Mr. H. Hughes-Hallett, M.C.S.. Assistant Resi dent at Kuala Belait, accompanied by Miss Hughes- Hallett, paid a short visit to Marudi on November 5th, and returned again to Kuala Belait on the 7th. Fortunately there were a number of Kenyahs and Kayane down bringing timber for the Bakong saw mill, and in addition to visiting a Dayak house, the visitors were able to witness a display of Kayan dancing and bear some drinking songs. A young Malay girl of Sundar was drowned while bathing alone in the Batang Trusan. As she was able to swim, it was surmised that she was sucked under and carried away by the very strong current running at the time. A verdict of accidental death was returned. During the month one violent crime was com mitted on Lawas Estate, when a labourer was struck over the head with an axe by another in whose house the former was at the time. It appeared in evidence that accused’s defence of “grave and sudden provocation” was valid, and he was there fore only lightly punished under section 334, Complainant, who throughout this case stoutly denied that he had at the time been misbehaving with accused's wife, was later tried for perjury before the Resdient’s Court, Limbang, when be admitted his guilt and was sentenced to one year's R.T All was quiet throughout the Lawas district during the month. Natives were busy tending their farms, which are evidently going to be ravaged as badly as usual by pigs and rats, and few were seen in the office. However, T.R. Baran Sakai, head man of the Bah country, came down with a few followers to pay tax and reported all well. The Lawas (Sarawak) Estates Lid. exported 11.784 lbs. of dry rubber during the month. Records of the first stage in the experiments to obtain normal yields per acre from Native and Chinese rubber gardens at Lawas were compiled and forwarded to the Rubber Restriction Committee. They indicate only too clearly the intensive tapping that takes place during the periods it is allowed. An inch of bark is being taken off in as short a time as 10 days. The following are extracts from a report by Mr. A. R. Snelus, Officer-in-Charge, Lawas and Trusan — “I made two abortive attempts to reach Sundar on the 9th and 10th; the Rubberneck could not withstand the sea, and, having been nearly swamped, there was nothing for it but to turn hack. However, I fitted in my routine monthly trip to Trusan, Sundar and Awat-Awat at a later date. 1 also visited Merapok and the border during the month. At Sundar complaints had been received that trade amongst the kampongs was being taken away from the local people by a number of Brunei boat-hawkers, who take advan tage of the Local Order allowing them to pass freely between Brunei and Sarawak to spend about a fortnight in every month hawking up and down the Trusan River. They bring all their wares from Brunei and then return there to replenish their stocks, taking their profits out of the country with them. Thus they spend half their lives in Sarawak territory and obtain all their livelihood from Sarawak, and yet pay no exemption tax nor hold any passes. “Free trade is doubtless sound in principle, but this is a state of affairs too advantageous to the Brunei hawkers. The matter has been referred to the Resident.” Baram Rice Famine. We print below extracts from a report by Mr. E. Banks, Curator, Sarawak Museum, on the padi situation in the Baram district, where the natives are suffering from an acute shortage of rice. Mr. Banks recently visited this district on special duty in order to investigate the position and make recommen dations for the future. 'The Baram rice shortage recently necessitating Government relief was due to heavy floods destroy ing the 1934 and 1935 crops, and rats destroying those for 1936 thereby diminishing or depriving ninny people of food supplies for three successive years during which reserves were used up until outside aid became necessary. To parts, floods rose 75 to 100 feet, removing houses, granaries, live-stock, personal belongings and farms; such people rightly received relief. “Rats were uncontrollable in some places, leaving not a potato or a grain of rice, but they were not everywhere so bad, and may have been made scapegoats for relief by the natives. The giving of relief by the District Officer was fully justified, for though natives can forage like Punans, they cannot do so daily and at the neces- sary distance when clearing, planting and tending their farms, at which they remain for some months. It is unfair criticism to say the native should fend for himself at this period, for in cases of real want unsupported by relief farming operations would have to have been suspended, and the shortage would have continued into the following year. “Besides justifiable relief, a few houses which perhaps lacked rice but not other foodstuffs received aid ; many more had proposed or already asked for it, but the remainder declined to ask for assistance. “No further relief should be needed between now and the harvest. “No deaths from lack of food were recorded, thanks to Government relief; poor food and less of it left people prone to illness, but subsequent deaths are inconclusive. “The small Rattus concolor and the medium size field rat R. Jalorensis did most damage, the large R. Sabanus and Gymnura (aji bulan) being sources of astonishment rather than concern. The num bers in Tutoh and Apoh were uncontrollable, but I am not convinced that they were so everywhere. Poison is of moderate use at present; to be effective it needs mixing in one part to twenty of foodstuffs, which hungry people cannot afford. Traps, made as a snare in a bamboo, known here as petin and tedik, are effectively used by Land Dayaks. They cost nothing to make, are very simple to use, being set and tended by women and children, and last for years. I have asked for at least 100 per door in each house, the idea being variously received with enthusiasm, apathy or scorn. Properly used they are the best remedy, rats checked early not increasing later as they would if undeterred. Driving by a circle of people walking inwards proved impossible, tree trunks and stumps break ing up the circle and offering rats a refuge. “Pigs and deer damaging rice and potatoes must be kept out by fences,—it is lamentable that many people have inadequate fences or no fence at all. Small fenced farms are better than huge unfenced ones. Kra and brok do much harm, but are checked, by fruit and other food to which rat poison is added. “Great damage has been done by grubs boring into the rice stems, myriads of grasshoppers (Discottettix sp.) hatching out, so far harmless. They may increase the number of grubs next year, in which case a remedy should be sought. “In stalk the rice is fair, and although it is not a bumper year most people should have enough to eat if the luck continues. Tua Rumahs should declare after each harvest whether they have enough food until the next; if not, they should be ordered then and there to plant and care for potatoes and other things against the coming shortage. “Borrowers are expecting Government to claim repayment of relief money, and should not be disappointed. Birds’nests, logs and rubber are all available, also timber, attaps, goats and pigs can be realized if the District Officer makes the neces sary arrangements with Towkays in Baram and Miri and with Departments in Kuching; the native cannot realize these assets unaided. Repay ment in rice is not recommended—hungry people should first build up a reserve and be fined for selling padi Chinese. Repayment in bras is inconceivable, the labour of hand-pounding enough padi for say 50 bags is enormous, and the natives may perhaps never have enough to eat and so many bags to spare. “House to house rice distribution is summarized below — “Kenyahs live far up-river, save at Long Ikang and Long Temala, which are not in need of relief. Kalamantans, natural sago-eaters in the Tinjar and Tutoh, needed little relief though some but not all of their sago was washed away. They have worked logs for Bakong, and this institution has thereby rendered timely assistance. “Kayans were the hungry people, partly due to their pantangs. Both when their early rice (padi agit and later rice (padi teng gang) ripen they almost universally retire to the house for ten nights and days before harvesting, leaving the ripe rice at the mercy of the birds and beasts they have been industriously driving away for months. Kenyahs and Kalamantans during pantang retire to the house at night but continue to work on the farm during the day. Some, but not all, Kayan men would consider altering the custom were it not for their wives influence to the contrary; if they persist in these two deleterious pantangs I have said that Govern ment may well refuse relief next time they are hungry—they must choose whether they will rely on their pantangs or their Government. An outboard motor is urgently needed in the Baram district for short and frequent trips of inspection, which would foretell and forestall famines and other calamities, amply repaying any increased travelling expenses. “These motors are now more reliable—in a month I have covered some 500 miles, where a motor can go, and the saving in time over paddling is inestimable. ‘ Up-river Agents can assist if so instructed to report on planting, fencing, pantangs, rat traps, foodstuffs and the need or otherwise for relief, as well Collecting repayment. “Baram is suffering from under-administration through no fault of the District Officer, and the natives are taking increasing advantage of this future administration needs to be very critical, less credulous and less indulgent. “I am indebted to Mr. Hudden for his assistance and Tuanku Mohamad and Tuanku Taha for their advice and company up-river. CORRESPONDENCE. [The Editor is not responsible for the opinions of correspondents.] MUKAH, 26th November, 1936. The Editor. SIR,, I must, confess to a slight error in my letter about Panau in your November 1st issue, brought to light by your edifying reply to it. I find on questioning my informants more closely that divers arc used (as you say) in Mukah when catching Duai only, but not for Jamah, or other fish caught by Panau. I must confess I have never seen Duai caught, only Jamah. The point of my letter, however, was to emphasize— (a) That Panau is not a unique method of fishing. (b) That the conical net mentioned by the District Officer. Kuching is not an idus, so I am told. Yours faithfully, J. G. ANDERSON. [The contentions in our correspondent’s last -paragraph were never in dispute.—ED.] 