Engagement. FISHER—WALKER.—The engagement is announced between John Cartwright Braddon, Sarawak Civil Service, younger son of the Fate Mr. Arthur higher, and Mrs. Fisher, of the Mazry, Tiverton. and Ruth Margaret Colyear, younger daughter of Capt. and Mrs. A. C. Welker, of Tara, Tiverton. Social and Personal. OCTOBER. His Highness the Rajah arrived at Kuching by s.s. Vyner Brooke on October 11th. As the ship passed Fort Margherita at about 7.45 a.m. a salute of twenty-one guns was fired from the Fort Battery. When the ship anchored opposite Astana Mr. Parnell, Chief Secretary, in the Siamese State Barge went out to greet His Highness and escorted him to Astana. His Highness inspected the Constabulary Guard of Honour, which was under the command of the Adjutant, and then entered Astana where Heads of Government Depart ments and representatives of the various communities were gathered. After a short speech of welcome from the Chief Secretary the health of His Highness was drunk. His Highness replied and expressed his pleasure at being back in Sarawak. We welcome His Highness back to Sarawak. Accompanying His Highness was Mr. H. B. Crocker whom we are all glad to see back in Sarawak. Mr. Crocker has taken over the duties of Private Secretary to His Highness. We welcome to Sarawak Mr. H. F. Morford who arrived on October 18th, to take over the agency of the Chartered Bank from Mr. B. McNiven who left Kuching on October 30th. Mr. McNiven has been transferred to Bangkok and we take this opportunity of wishing him and Mrs. McNiven every success in the future. On October 6th Mr. N. E. Hughes left Kuching for Bintulu where he has been appointed District Officer. We take this opportunity of complimenting Mr. Hughes on the great success with which he edited this journal. Messrs. J. O. Gilbert and W. J. Chater left Kuching on October 19th They sailed in the P.&O. s.s. Naldera on October 22nd, as did Mr. D. R. Lascelles who proceeded to Singapore direct from Sibu. Accompanying Mr. Gilbert from Bintulu was Mr. “Bill” Avery whom we are glad to see in Kuching again On October 20th Mr. W. F. Dick returned from a fortnight’s visit to Dutch Borneo. Elsewhere in this issue Mr. Dick gives a description of his trip. We welcome back from leave Mr. G. F. Dare who arrived on October 1 11th. also Mrs. Kidd and Mrs. Middlemas who arrived on the 11th and 25th respectively. On October 18th at Astana His Highness the Rajah presented fourteen Long Service Decorations, three bars to such Decorations and one Constabulary Long Service Medal. The Datu Patinggi received a third bar to his decoration on completing fifty years service—indeed an admirable record. Other recipients included Dr. Tan Sim Poh and Mr. C. S. Were. For the first time in the history of the Hindu Temple, Kuching, special worship was made on the occasion of the birthday of His Highness the Rajah. In future special worship will be made on the birthdays of Their Highnesses the Rajah, the Ranee and the Tuan Muda. We congratulate the Rt. Rev. Noel Baring Hudson, Bishop of Labuan and Sarawak, who has been appointed Secretary of the Society for the Propogation of the Gospel in Foreign Parts. In the last issue of the Sarawak Gazette report was made of a phenomenon on September 16th when the sun was surrounded by a dark halo edged with a rainbow. Note was also made of the fact that local Malays hold the opinion that such a phenomenon denotes the death of some great man but, we added, “so far no news has been received of t he death of any celebrity”. Later we learnt that on that day died President Masaryk, the founder of Czecho-Slovakia, perhaps the greatest man of post-war Europe. We congratulate Mr. J. A. Holloway of s.s. Circe who on October 17th did the eighth hole in one. This is in contrast to the member who decided to take up golf and who proudly informed the secretary that he had gone round in 40. The secretary withdrew his congratulations when the novice added that he hoped to do the second hole next day. We have also been asked to congratulate a member who threw five aces in one. As we sometimes shake the dice with him, we do not think that such throws are to be encouraged —unless, of course, we. throw them. Obituary. We regret to announce the death of Leading Seaman F. T. Tregidgo of H.M.S. Herald which occurred on October 22nd at Pending. He was buried with full naval honours at the S.P.G. cemetery on the same day. The Government of Sarawak was represented by Mr. F. H. Pollard, District Officer, Kuching, and Mr. R. W. Large, Assistant Commissioner of Constabulary. Leading Seaman Tregidgo will be remembered by residents of Kuching as an accomplished per former in the ship’s concert party. He was a most popular man with his shipmates and his loss is keenly felt We take this opportunity of tendering our sympathy to his relatives. Notice. ARMISTICE DAY. All ex-Service men are invited to attend the Residency, Kuching, at 10.45 a.m. on Armistice Day where the two minutes' silence will be observed. A dinner will be held at the Sarawak Club at 7.30 p.m. All ex-Service men who served in the Great War and who desire to attend the dinner are asked to notify the Editor immediately. Dress.—Black and white and decorations. The dinner will be followed by a dance at 9.30.. the Constabulary Military Band, by kind permission of the Commissioner, providing the music. All members of the Sarawak Club are invited to the dance. Indian Association of Sarawak. With reference to the inaugural luncheon of the newly-formed Indian Association of Sarawak on September 19th, and reported in our last issue, we print below a letter received by the President of the Association from the Agent of the Government of India in Kuala Lumpur. TOST BOX, NO. 59, Kuala Lumpur, 18th October, 1937. DEAR DR. KRISHNA, I read an account of the Sarawak Indian Association in the Malayan papers some time ago. I am obliged to you for sending me a copy of the Sarawak Gazette dated October 1st, 1937, giving an account of the inauguration of the Association which I have read with much interest. Though you are living outside the jurisdiction of the Agency, yon can always count, upon any help from us with regard to the welfare of our country men over there. From what I could gather from proceedings, you all appear to be a happy family in Sarawak. I wish the Association many years of usefulness under your presidentship. Will you also be good enough to convey to the members of your Association and to the Indian Community in Sarawak my personal good wishes for their con tinued welfare? If at any time it is possible for me to pay an unofficial visit to Kuching, I shall be delighted to do so. I am keeping this object in view. With regards, Yours sincerely, C. S. VENEATACHAR, I.C.S., Agent of Government of India. Triumphant Pilgrimage. BY OWEN RUTTER. David Chain (an assumed name), ex-district officer in Sarawak, over lunch at Quaglino’s, asked Mr. Rutter to write for him the story of his pilgrimage to Mecca. He explained, with a "strange exalted look in his eyes”—“glittering blue eyes, strangely compelling’' of course (see carefully posed studio portrait)—that he hoped to unite Islam and make it into a great force for world peace. 'His lobster forgotten.” he told his conversion and of his marriage to a Malayan, and of the struggle he had had reach Mecca. Exhausted by Chale’s intensity, and convinced that it was not another shameful journalistic stunt, Mr. Rutter agreed. Triumphant Pilgrimage (Harrap, 10s. Cd.) is as sickly with sincerity, as exhaustingly tense as its hero. Presumably Mr. Chale approves of his portrait, but if he possessed any of the judgment, modesty and sense of humour with which Mr. Rutter endows him. he would have refused to pass this account of his physical and spiritual adventures which nauseates by its smugness, its exaggeration of difficulties and its lack of any sign of real under standing of the Islamic world. After reading this book one sees the wisdom of Ibn Saud's law (which Chale evaded) forbidding converts of less than six years' standing to go on the pilgrimage. —(The Spectator.) . Extract from The Geographical Journal. VOL. XC No. 4. OCTOBER, 1937. TRIUMPHANT PILGRIMAGE : An English Muslim’s journey from Sarawak to Mecca. By OWEN RUTTER. London ; George G. Harrap & Co., 1937. 9x5 1/2 inches; 278 pages; route-map and portraits. 10s. 6d. Eldon Rutter published ten years ago one of the best books written about the Mecca pilgrimage and life in the Holy Cities of Islam. His namesake is the author of one which is far from being in the same class. It is stated to be “a true account of one of the most remarkable journeys in recent years. It tells of an Englishman who became a Muslim from profound conviction and whose dream it is to restore the ancient faith to its pristine simplicity and to unite the sects of Islam into a single body which shall be a tremendous power for peace in the world.” It should, in fairness to the author, be said at once that the prophet proclaimed in these words is not himself. He did not perform the pilgrimage, but has written this book as proxy for one who did, “David Chale’ a name which is itself only a pseudonym But why such mystery? The “veiled prophet” is a favourite device in Islam, and veiled prophets can come from Kuching as well as from Khurasan, Half the book is taken up with the thrilling account of David Chafe’s journey from Sarawak to London, including a visit to a Parisian coiffeur to modernize a Malayan wife whom. as is con fessed, he only married to further his scheme of getting to Mecca. He could not get a visa for Mecca anywhere nearer than London. “It's as hard as all that.” Mr. Zada, of the Arabian Legation, would perhaps not recognize the account of his interview with David Chale. To the course of time the hero of the story reached Jidda, his wits duly “sharpened by vicissitude, while some of his fellow-passengers on s.s. Talodi had landed at Yanbu to pit their wits against the ' bears and tigers” on the road to Madina. At Jidda David Chale endured the torments of hell while the Arabian bureaucracy, not unlike bureaucracies in other parts of the world, dealt with his application to proceed to Mecca. He spent part of the interval negotiating the purchase of a famale slave, guaranteed to be a paragon of bounty, in order to have the merit of freeing her on the field of Arafat. He had however refused to complete the bargain on finding the lady to be aged and hideous by the time that, after the usual interviews with Amir Faisal and the King, formal permission was accorded him to proceed to Mecca. Another European, an Austrian, had previously received similar permission, but it had however been refused to an American lady. So Chale proceeded to the pilgrimage. At ‘Arafat “there came a stir in the camp as the King’s bodyguard, mounted on camels, preceded the royal car, which halted at the foot of Mount 'Arafat. The King, accompanied by an Imam, climbed to the summit. His tall form was silhouetted against the sky as he stood there by the granite pillar, but the. words of the Imam, as he preached the sermon . . . could not reach the great multitude below.” For sheer imagination it would be hard to beat this eye-witness's account of what happened at 'Arafat. In fact the King did not—he never does—arrive in ‘Arafat in a car, but in the traditional way by camel. Neither the King nor the Imam ascended to the summit. And no sermon was preached on the mount. Perhaps all these things would happen if the new prophet had his reforming way. But they do not happen now, and the hero of “one of the most remarkable journeys of recent times” seems to have been singularly ill-equipped for such a task.—H. St. J. B. P. A Visit to Dutch Borneo. Mr. Cutfield and I left Simanggang on 8th for Sintang via Lubok Antu to attend the installation of the Penembahan of Sintang on the 14th. The Resident of Westen Borneo, Mr. J. Obermans, who attended the last Council Negri, had invited several officers from Sarawak to attend this function but, unfortunately, owing to various causes, Mr. Cutfield and I were the only two able to take advantage of this kind invitation. We left Lubok Antu on 10th overland to Peng- kalan Pinang. We had anticipated a wet journey owing to constant rain for days previously, but the weather cleared up and the precautions we had taken to protect our barang from rain and high water proved unnecessary. The walk from Lubok Antu to Pengkalan Pinang took about 4 hours including stops and we estimated the distance to be 10 miles. Soon after crossing the border we got on to a well-made earth road about 5 feet wide which went all the way to Pengkalan Pinang. the last half mile being mostly under water and very slippery. About 2 miles before reaching the peng kalan we were met by the District Officer, Simitau, Mr. F. J. Hips, who took us into his charge, and thereafter looked after all our wants; being our guide, philosopher and friend throughout the trip. We spent the first night on board a houseboat at Pulo Madjang. This was our first experience of living on a houseboat and we were much struck with the comfort of this mode of travel aud regretted that owing to the swiftness of the rivers in Sarawak, it would be quite impossible to introduce this mode of travel here Pulo Madjang is a small island on one of the lower lakes which dries up during the dry season. There is a small kampong on the island and everyone catches and salts fish for a living. Having seen the day’s catch brought in in the form of a raft, it was easy to believe that in spite of the low price of fish on the island, this form of earning a livelihood was very practical. Throughout our trip we were struck by the quantities of fish in the rivers and enquiries elicited the information that the popular Sarawak custom of tuba fishing had been prohibited for main years past. While the prohibition of tuba fishing is no doubt a contributing factor, it must be admitted’ that the sluggish current of the Kapuas and tributaries and the size of the rivers are mainly responsible for this abundance of fish everywhere. We left Pulo Madjang at daylight on the 11th and followed the Sungei Tawang until it joined the Kapuas; then down die Kapuas to Semitau which we reached at 11 a.m. where we were met by Mrs. Hips who had cold beers ready for ns. We were then taken round the Station by Mr. Hips. The kampong is about a mile long, every house is surrounded by a fence and the fences form an unbroken line along the roadside. The road was about 12 feet wide and clean weeded, all the houses were very neat, tidy and well kept. After an excellent lunch we left at 2 p.m. for Sintang, stopping the night at Nanga Silat and leaving again the next morning at daylight. We arrived at Sintang at 12.15 where we were met by the Assistant Resident. Mr. B. J. Kuik, the District Officer. Mr. Waiszvis. Capt. Blokland, Lieutenant Abbink and Surgeon-Capt. Oldenstramm. Sintang has developed in what must be an unfortunate manner, the kampong being across river (Kapuas) from the Government area. The river must be nearly half a mile wide here, while the bazaar is across river (Melawi) which flows into the Kapuas, the mouth of the Melawi being quite half mile wide. The following morning the Assistant Resident took us to see the end of the road which will eventually connect with Pontianak, 400 kilometres away. It is an earth road 5 1/2 metres wide and will be gravelled for 3 metres down the centre when completed. Most of the road has been built, but there are several big bridges yet to be built and it will probably be another year before communication by road is established We were next shown the hospital which consists of a main building with a covered passage-way at the back giving access to different wards built at intervals on each side of the covered way. We then went to the military area and were shown over the barracks, kitchen, recreation rooms, etc., which were very well laid out and occupied a minimum of space for the number of people housed. We then inspected the Canteen which is right on the point formed by the junction of the Kapuas and Melawi rivers where we sat and enjoyed the view and the beer. The Resident of Pontianak. Mr. J. Obermans, accompanied by the Assistant Resident of Ponti anak, Mr. H. A. Haak, and Mrs. Haak. Lt.-Colonel and Mrs. Gronewald, Capt. Tieland and the District Officer, Pontianak. Mr. Rie-kerk, arrived at 5.45 p.m. and were met by the whole European com munity on the wharf. In the evening everyone came to the Residency for a "pahit musical” which lasted well into the night, and during which the engagement of Mr. B. J. Kuik was announced and suitably celebrated. The next day was the raison d' tre, for the gathering, being the installation of the Penembahan of Sintang. The ceremony took place at the Penembahan’s house across river which had been enlarged for the occasion by the erection of extra temporary buildings. Natives from all over the district had been coming down for days past and it was estimated that 5,000 people had come into Sintang for the celebrations. The river bank along the kampong was crowded with boats three and four deep, and the kampong must be over two miles long. The ceremony took place in a big, temporary building erected for the occasion in front of Penembahan’s house. The interior was decorated in red, white aud blue and royal yellow and seats for the spectators were arranged in the shape of a horseshoe, the Penembahan’s and Ratan's chairs being in the middle of the horseshoe and facing the steps leading into the building. All guests were in their places at 8.45 a.m. The higher Dutch officials and the Penembahan wore a black unform with gold facings. At 9 a.m. the Resident of Pontianak accom panied by the Assistant Resident of Sintang and the District Officer of Pontianak arrived and when they reached the top of the stairs the band struck up the Dutch National Anthem. The Resident of Pontianak and his staff then took up their positions facing the Penembahan and the District Officer of Pontianak read out the oath of allegiance in Dutch and then in Malay, the Imam then swearing in the Penembahan in accordance with Mohammedan Custom. The oath was then signed by the Penembahan and by the Resident as representative of Her Majesty the Queen of Holland and when this was done, a salute of 11 guns was fired outside. The Resident of Pontianak then made his speech, in both Dutch and Malay, this being followed by a speech from the Assistant Resident of Sintang, a suitable reply by the Penembaban concluding the ceremony. Champagne was then served and the health of the Queen of Holland drunk, followed by the health of the Penembaban and Ratu of Sintang after which the guests returned home. The Assistant Resident of Sintang gave a rijsttafel at midday to which the whole European community were invited, also the Sultan and Ratu of Sambas and the Penembahan and Ratu of Sintang. Tn the evening the Penembahan and Ratu gave a party and the guests were entertained with Malay and Dayak dancing. The following day the Penembahan gave a riisttafel at his house and the Dayaks again did some dancing for the benefit of those who wanted to take cinema and other photographs. Before this visit to Western Borneo I had never tasted rijsttafel and having now done so I can strongly recommend it. It consists of a plateful of rice covered with vegetable curries and soups and large numbers of sambals. It is not nearly so hot as the ordinary curry and there are many more varieties of cooked vegetable. Shortly after 2 p.m. the Resident of Pontianak and the Assistant Resident of Sintang left by motor houseboat Hertha for Pontianak. The following morning the rest of the party from Pontianak left, and we left in the opposite direction to return home by the same route as that by which we came. We were very sorry that our visit had come to an end. This bald recital of our experiences can give no indication of the hospitality and kindness with which we were received everywhere. Within a short time of our arrival we felt completely at home and everyone treated us as one of the family. Our very real enjoyment of the visit was due to the natural kindness of everyone we met and I hope that we may soon have an opportunity of returning some of the hospitality shown us. W.F.D. From City Office to Mecca. AN ENGLISH MOSLEMS PILGRIMAGE. TRIUMPHANT PILORLMAGE. An English Muslim’s Journey from Sarawak to Mecca. By OWEN RUTTER. Harrap. 10s. 6d. This is a strange book. Since author and publisher vouch for the authenticity of Chafe's adventures we must take it at its face value. David Chale was a boy of strong character, iron determi nation. taut nerves, a minimum of common sense and a rebellious spirit At Osborne and as a mid shipman in the Navy he found that he had to obey orders. This was intolerable. He quitted the Navy in order to preserve his individuality. Next he tried life in a shipping office in the City. Again he found men in authority over him. It was a “degradation” that as the junior of the staff he was expected to carry a cup of afternoon tea to the chief. He did not like the man. who wore a watchchain over a tense waistcoat. Obviously Chale’s individuality was again in danger. "Every day he became more incensed. That cup of tea with two Marie biscuits propped in the saucer . became the symbol of his abasement.” Without ' knocking, he walked into the manager’s room one afternoon and “without a word flung the tea splosh into Mudford's face.” I had to,” he explained, 1 "there was simply nothing else to do.” It was then his fortune to meet a retired gentle- ' man who had served under the first Rajah Brooke in Sarawak, and who painted in glowing colours the freedom of a district officer's life. Chale sought and obtained a nomination, and by a heroic exercise of will submitted to the degradation of being taught his job by senior men, until he was entrusted with a district of his own. Here he came to know and love the Malays, and to marvel at the calm, the dignity and poise with which they accepted what Asquith calls “the inscrutable vicissitudes of life.” His own turmoil of mind and soul was in glaring contrast. He had long since revolted against the dogmas with which the Christian Churches have overlaid the teachings of their Master. "I needed peace of mind. Terribly. Islam offered me that." Chafe’s neurotic tempera- ment had refused man-imposed discipline; he found himself craving for the detailed and exacting ritual of the devout Moslem. He accepted Islam in heart, but felt that he could not fully enter its peace until he had performed the pilgrimage to Mecca. He resigned the Sarawak service and betook him- self to London to make money enough to finance the trip and I he leisure necessary to perform it, mean- while studying Arabic and the Qur'an and preparing himself for a formal conversion. His first object was the salvation of his storm-tossed soul, but he also had a vision of future, work in Sarawak to protect the Malay Moslem against the insidious European contacts that threatened to undermine his lively, simple faith. Five years on the Stock Exchange provided ample funds; he returned to Sarawak to make there his public profession of faith and to start from there on the Pilgrimage. Once convinced of his sincerity, his Malay friends accepted him warmly, but warned him of difficulties ahead ; these could be more easily overcome if lie had with him a Moslem wife. He was prepared for any measure that would help him to reach his goal, and his mind reverted to a pretty little Malayan girl whom lie laid seen long ago working as a child in the Rajah's rubber plantation. Munirah had mean time been married to an elderly suitor with whom she was unhappy Negotiation could secure a divorce, and after some natural hesitation Munirah decided to trust the Tuan whom as a child she had admired. Like all true Moslems she longed to perform the Haj. Chale would marry her—pro forma, but only so- they would accomplish the Pilgrimage together: and he would restore her to her people when their purpose was fulfilled. On the Ttalian vessel that took them to Marseilles. Chale was able tactfully to accustom her to English table manners, In Bombay he bought her costly semi-oriental gar ments and bundles of cr pe de Chine underclothing. Ho induced her to grow her short-cut nails, and in Paris had her hands manicured,and her hair cut and shingled by the premier coiffeur of France. The loss of her lovely hair cost her a few tears, but she was frankly delighted by the apparition of a beautiful and stylish woman. They flew to London and she found herself dining at the Berkeley, attending cinemas, operas, variety shows as if born to the life of a wealthy society lady. Everywhere her appearance evoked an admiration which gratified Chafe's selfish pride. As had been foreseen, the existence of a Moslem wife procured for Chale a visa, for Jeddah, which otherwise the Sa'udi Legation would have refused ; but Chafe was stunned to learn that Ibn Sa'ud had decreed that no Moslem convert of less than six years' standing was allowed to proceed on the Pilgrimage. His standing was a bare six weeks. How his determination, sincerity and obstinacy prevailed is told at length, and how on the very last possible morning the triumphant pair jolted off in a motor-lorry. The culmination of the tale is the mystic ecstasy of their sevenfold tour of the Ka'aba, and their joining the concourse of 300,000 other white-clad pilgrims in the Plain of Arafat. After a three-day lorry-ride to Medinah, the homage to the Prophet’s tomb and the visitation of a graveyard—which tried his over-wrought nerves almost to breaking-point —Chafe felt he had entered into his full heritage of Islamic peace and could now devote himself to his mission. This is hut nebulously set forth. It seems to fall into three parts : the salvation of the Sarawak Malays, to be attained by Chafe's presence among them ; the recall of Islam to the power latent in the brotherhood of all Moslems of whatever race or colour, rank or speech—this to be accomplished with the co-operation of Ibn Sa'nd and the establishment of a propaganda wireless station at Mecca; and, lastly, the foundation of a world peace by a blend of Islam with British democratic imperialism. The methods by which this last is to be achieved are unexplained. —Time* Literary Supplement. We are informed that as a certain officer has returned to Sarawak clocks have now been replaced on public buildings in London. “Sarawak might be as pleasant as Bali says Crux Australia in the Straits Budget. But isn it? Films of the Month. As You Like It. This film was an answer to those people who stubbornly held that Shakespeare could never film and who refused to see the possibilities held out to the screen by the greatest of all dramatists. (Two other good answers were Borneo and Juliet and Midsummer Night's Dream.) The cast, for the most part, were experienced English Shakespearean actors, with the result that the diction and delivery of the speechless were excellent. Special mention must be made of Henry Ainley as the Duke, his well-known opening speech , being admirably spoken. The famous 'Seven ages of Man” speech of Leon Quartermaine as Jacques was a delight, as was his acting throughout the play. The acting of Elizabeth Bergner was superior to her speaking. Shakespeare is, we know, inter national, but her German accent grated on many ears. However, taking her performance all in all. she was a most attractive Rosalind. Laurence Oliver gave a good performance as Orlando, if somewhat lacking in virility. Altogether a delight ful production but. and this in no carping spirit, was it necessary for Portia’s song from The Merchant of Venice to be included'? The Good Earth. That the soul of a great nation is created by its humble people is an axiom that, in many cases, has lost much of its truth. (Unhappily, some nations have no longer any soul at all, but whether this is due to their humble people is a question that cannot be answered here.) It is to the shame of Hollywood that for so long the lives of humble people have been ignored but credit can now be given to producers of The Good Darth who realised the appeal contained in a story of mere diggers of the soil. 'This is one of the few films that deserve the adjective "epic”. The story, taken from Pearl Buck’s book, is of a family of farmers in Northern China which, after many vicissitudes, including the visitations of bandits and locusts. achieves happiness, even though the ultimate happiness of O Lan, the farmer's wife is found in death. The courage, the fortitude and the refusal to admit defeat of a section of a great and ancient nation were admirably portrayed. The strength which a man can achieve and the weakness which is inherent in him were forcibly shown. The film was frankly sentimental but never melodrama. Paul Muni as Wang and Luise Hainer as O Lan, his wife, gave sincere and restrained performances hut it would be invidious to single out any single number of the cast lor special praise. May Time. The long-suffering film public must surely ho sated with stories of the nonentity who becomes an opera star (or musical comedy, revue, film or any other sort of star) and who loves (or does not love as the case may be) the man who is responsible for her success. But this is churlish. for,though the plot of Maytime was of this genus (with a seapeon of Bittersweet thrown in) the charm of this film was undeniable. No one could cavil at the singing of Jeanette MacDonald and Nelson Eddy, whether in excerpt from grand opera or in lighter numbers such as “Carry Me Back to Old Virginny”. At times, ndeed, Jeanette MacDonald reached the pitch of a prima. Doubtlesss. a slight chill travelled down the spines of some when they realised that n movement from the Tchaikowsky Fifth Symphony was to be sung is a duet, but all fears were dispelled for it was exquisite. Incidentally, the producer or musical director, whichever it may be. is to be congratulated Ion resisting the temptation of making the same composer’s famous Adante Cantible into an over- recurrent theme. Altogether, a charming film. String Time Here were Fred Astaire and Ginger Rogers again: both dancing; both falling in love; she nearly marrying the wrong man and he saving her in the nick of time from such a fate; he with his personality and she with her—well—she was very nice. The dancing was. as usual, perfect and the tunes as maddening as ever. Fighting Stack. The famous Aldwych Theatre trio were still funny. Ralph Lynn depended on his monocle and his imbecility for humour; Robert- you Hare on his uncanny facility for finding trouble; while Tom Walls vainly tried to look like a gentleman but did not attempt to behave like one. It seems a pity that the latter should seek to raise a snigger and not a laugh. Sing Me A Love Song. A most entertaining film with some good singing by Jerry Haines, the film, as a film, will soon he forgotten but not the delightful absurdity of Hugh Herbert as the Kleptomaniac Siegfried Hammershlag. Sunshine Susie. An amusing film which some how seemed to feck the verve of the previous Jack Hulbert films. Jack Hulbert was funny as the conductor of a glee chib. Owen Nares as the Bank Director behaved like a perfect gentleman and so won Renate Muller, one of his typists, as his bride. Maybe it would be more correct io say that she won him. Charge of the Light Brigade. C'est magnifique, mais ce n'est pas la guerre. A Star Is Born. Why? First Division News. SEPTEMBER. The Resident, First Division, inspected a new shop at the 15th mile on the 8th. Many of the timbers used were under size and the owner was ordered to remedy the matter. As a further result it was arranged with the Assistant Superin tendent of Lands and Surveys that on plans of type B shophouses the main timber sizes should be written m Chinese. On the 10th the Resident visited Serian in company with Mr. T. A. Reid of the P.W.D. The earth filling behind the Bazaar, now completed, is reported as being a very great improvement. On the 19th the Resident continued his journey to Simunjan where the trial commenced of Jalil, charged with murder The case was adjourned for medical report on the prisoner's state of mind. On the 21st an appeal from the District Court in connection with the planting of rubber was dismissed. On the 21st the Resident and District Officer visited the ulu Simunjan (right-hand bank) where Yap Ah Bok acted as host. A great number of Penghulu Ringkai's people, including the Penghulu himself, had arrived and many matters, mostly concerning rubber restriction, were dealt with. A commencement has been made to improve the sanitary conditions of the bazaar at 7th mile. the Officer Superintending Kuching Sector having supplied a gang of prisoners to clean up the area. The Committee of the Sarawak Chinese Chamber of Commerce have kindly allowed half the Chamber of Commerce Building to be used for the issue of rubber coupons and the necessary alterations will be commenced in November. The District Officer visited Telok Karang on the 9th which he reported to be a hive of industry. About forty boats, chiefly from Bako and Buntal, are engaged in rantau fishing, together with three, panau boats from Bintulu. A number of Chinese are engaged in cooking the fish and a regular service of motor launches runs to Kuching. Native Officer Abang Zamhari returned from convalescent leave on the 16th. Probationary Native Officer Abang Mohd. Taopek was transferred on the 18th from Lundu for temporary duty in Kuching. The District Officer, Bau. regrets to announce the death of Vun Kon Siong, who for many years had been the Chief Clerk of the Borneo Company at Bau. He was a member of the Bau Municipal Board, of Prison Visiting Board, and took a prominent part in local affaire. As regards rubber regulation September was one of the busiest and most trying months Bau has experienced, the District Officer reporting that between the 7th and 24th. seventy hours of official rime mid twenty-five hours overtime were spent on rubber work. The following table gives the individual output of gold from the various mines for August, 1937. The Officer-in-Charge, Sadong and Samarahan, visited Entingan on the 30th and found that a Chinese had collected $16 from Dayak boys under the pretence that he would teach them to read and write and had then disappeared. The Dayaks urged that the Government should give their children facilities for education. The manager of the Nissa Sliokai Estate, Siniawan, Reported that his telephone line was cut four times in two months. On the occasion of His Highness the Rajah s birthday a regatta and sports were held at Lundu. Concerts in aid of Jubilee Recreation Ground. Two very successful concerts were given at the Lilian Theatre on the 15th and 16th October in aid of the Jubilee Recreation Ground Fund. All the performers were students of local Malay and Chinese Schools and it was evident chat the schoolchildren and their teachers had worked hard to prepare the entertainment. On both nights the theatre was practically full, and constant rounds of applause showed the audience's appreciation of the show. All the turns may not have been up to the high standard set by the more talented of the young artistes, but even the mediocre ones showed none of that flatness one associates with juvenile per formances and one or two unrehearsed effects set the audience off in delighted laughter. The printed programme veiled the performers in a modest anonymity which it is not proposed to destroy, but tribute must be paid to the diminutive little lady whose song and dance act showed her determination to outshine Jessie Matthews and to the Prince of Denmark whose confidence was in no way shaken by the massive and towering presence of his mother the Queen. The second night was devoted chiefly to choral numbers and group dances, and such was the enthusiasm of the house that many additional numbers were added to the programme; We. understand the gross receipts were about $1,400 and that the Fund now stands at approxi mately $16,000. In his speech on Friday evening. Mr. K. N. Black, on belialf of the Jubilee Recreation Ground Committee, tendered this thanks to the performers and helpers for this admirable result. He also thanks those members of the public who purchased tickets for the concerts arid con- gratulated those present on not missing such good entertainment. Mr. Black further tendered his committee’s thanks to the proprietors of the Lilian Theatre for lending their building and to Chop Chong Kim Eng for providing a plentiful supply of aerated waters in the wings. Mr. Tan Sum Guan and Abang Haji Mustapha made similar speeches in Chinese and Malay respectively. H.M.S. “Herald.” The visit of H.M.S. Herald on October 21st was her last as she is returning to England in the near future. It is to be regretted that her last stay in Sarawak waters should have been marred by the death of one of the ship's company to which we refer in another column. H.M.S. Herald was constructed in Sunderland and commissioned in 1918 as H.M.S. Merry Hampton, being one of a class of twenty-four ships, named after Derby winners, built for minesweeping and submarine chasing. In 1923 she was renamed Herald and recommissioned for surveying duties on the Australia station. She was transferred to the China station in 1927 and since that time has been almost entirely employed in the South China Sea. From 1929 to 1931 the ship was commanded by Commander P. S. E. Maxwell, now assistant curator of the new Nautical Museum at Greenwich. Commander N. A. C. Hardy was in command from 1931 to 1933 and again from 1935 when he relieved Commander E. F. B. Law. The visits of the "Packetvaarl” were always welcome to the residents of Kuching. The ship fielded very good association and rugby teams. The concert party was excellent and was always sure of an enthusiastic audience. Though we may not see the Herald again we hope that we shall be able to welcome back to Sarawak many of her officers and men. We wish them bon voyage and the best of luck. Cricket. A friendly match was played on Sunday, the 17th, between an XI from H.M.8. Herald and a team of the Nondescripts, the latter winning by 28 runs St. Michael's Club. On September 29th St. Michael’s Club celebrated the day of its Patron Saint with a Chinese dinner. The diners, representing all races and creeds, sat down to a succession of courses of lucullan quality and gargantuan quantity. After dinner Mr. William Tan requested the Bight Reverend Monseigneur Hopfgartner to present the prizes to the winners of the billiards and ping-pong tourna ments. Mr. Tan in a eulogistic speech thanked Mon seigneur Hopfgartner and welcomed the guests. The popular Monseigneur was reluctant to reply but he yielded to the insistence of the company and delighted every one with a witty speech. Messrs. If. P. Lansdale-Ruthven and Chakraverty thanked the Club on behalf of the guests. Dance music was provided by Mr. Gregory Solosa’s orchestra. Below is a list of the prize winners. BILLIARDS TOURNAMENT. Second Division News. SEPTEMBER. On September 15th the Resident visited Spaoh. A site was selected for the pengkalan and the building of the new Court House inspected. A meeting of shopowners was held at which it was decided to rebuild the bazaar. The new building is to take the form of four blocks of eight, forming three sides of a square, with an open space where the present bazaar is now situated, and should be ready for ocupation by the end of 1939. On the following day the Resident arrived at Debak. Here also a meeting of shopowners was held and it was decided to build a bazaar on the hill immediately behind the present bazaar. The Resident reported very highly on the condition of this station generally and on the state of the kampong in particular. On the 18th a short call was made at Pusa which was found to be greatly improved, the Chinese having built a new road behind the bazaar. The death is reported of Abang Boyong bin Abang Haji Abdullah who was been Tua Kampong of Lonchong since 1929. He is succeeded by Haji Nibong. Work has begun on the building of a rubber coupon issue office in the old Fort at Simanggang. Visitors to Simanggang and district were Mr. & MIT. Seiotling. Mr A. G. Taylor, Government Auditor, and Messrs. F. A. Moore and C. 8. Sergei. On the birthday of His Highness the Rajah the Resident, together with European and Native Officers and members of the Junior Service, attended a parade outside the new offices at Simanggang. A salute of seven guns was fired and the flagstaff dressed, after which the health of His Highness was drunk. The next day was observed as a public holiday and land sports were held on the new padang. The finals of Malay and Dayak football competitions were played off. The bungalow of the Supervising Surveyor, Simanggang. was broken into and $118 of the Rubber Fund petty cash stolen. Luckily the thief overlooked $65 which was in the same drawer as the other money. The death is announced of Haji Bujang bin Moha, Tua Imam of Kabong, who died on September 18th. He was over eighty years of age and had been Tua Imam for fifty-five years. On His Highness the Rajah’s birthday sports and football competitions were held at Saratok and Kabong. The final of the Dayak football compe tition at Saratok between Temudok Krian and Slambong resulted in no score. Two further replays have produced the same result and the next replay will be held after nugal. The Reverend Father Angking has relieved the Reverend Father Senang who has been the S.P.G. priest at Saratok for thirteen years. The death occurred at Lubok Antu on August 5th of Pudin bin Samat. well known to officers who have done duty in Ulu Ai. At 2 p.m. on September 26th a fire broke out at rumah Bara. Lubok Antu, a house of fourteen doors. The constabulary did admirable work in saving the lives of three children and in salvage work. Despite their efforts, the house was completely destroyed and one child was burnt to death. Third Division News. SEPTEMBER Three inquests were held at Sibu during the month. The first, on a Foochow woman named Wong Sung Tieh, aged 27, resulted in a verdict of suicide. The woman had drunk acetic acid but there was no evidence to show the state of her mind A verdict of suicide whilst temporarily insane was returned in the case of Ting Aug Chui, a Foochow man aged fifty who had drunk some corrosive acid Lu Siong Hui, a Hengua boy of five years of age, was drowned by falling into a flooded ditch. His Highness the Rajah's birthday was observed in Sibu on the 27th as a public holiday, a salute of twenty-one guns being fired from the station battery. A number of officers took advantage of the holiday to be present at the Dalat regatta. Visitors to Sibu included Mr. N. A. Middleman, Director of Rubber Assessment, and Mr Crawford, Chief Assessor. The death occurred on the 1st of penghulu Ajah of the ulu Binatang. a reliable and trustworthv Chief. Prosperity appears to be returning to the Melanau country. Thirty-five people from Kampong Sa'ai are making the pilgrimage to Mecca this year Few Dayaks were to be seen in the towns during the tapping holiday. It is thought that the influenza epidemic was of such severity that they were prevented from tapping and thus they considered the small amount of rubber obtained not worth bringing in for sale. The Officer-in-Charge. Main and Dnro visited the Tanjong Sirik lighthouse on the 7th to inquire into the failure of the light on the night of August 27th. It was found that the accident was due to a mechanical defect and not to any fault of the keepers. A coolie reported that he had been held up by two Dayaks on a lonely part of the coast while he was carrying money from Mukah. He escaped on his bicycle. On the 2nd two enormous waterspouts rushed past the Kuala Mukah, missing m.l. Leonora by only a hundred yards. The District Officer, Oya and Dalat, reports the death of Sergeant Awang Lai which occurred on the 22nd. The Sergeant joined the police in 1915 and retired in 1933. A bail storm on the 2nd caused irreparable damage to the bamboo clumps and avenue at Oya. Another heavy rainstorm at the end of the month further denuded the clumps and avenue and caused considerable damage to the Bakong Road. a section 24 feet by 18 feet being washed away. Fourth Division News. SEPTEMBER. Work was begun in connection with the improve ment of the roads between Miri and Suai via Sibuti and Niah The object is to make the roads more suitable for light vehicular traffic and to facilitate rubber coupon issue. Three young Malay girls were accidentally drowned in Sungei Miri Kechil on the 21st. As a result ol the Sino-Japanese conflict, the few Japanese in Miri are experiencing difficulty in bringing their merchandise ashore. Chinese long- kangs have refused to load and unload such cargoes. Messrs. Shaw Brothers, the owners of the Grand Theatre, Miri, have taken over the Ranee’s Theatre on a four years' lease. The death is announced of ex-Native Officer Bijak who died in Miri on the 16th. Mr. Hugh-Hallett, Assistant President of Kuala Belait attended the celebrations in Miri of His Highness the Rajah's birthday. On Saturday, the 25th, the Miri Amateur Dramatic Society provided a cabaret and supper, followed by a dance at the Club. On Sunday there was a swimming gala at the Gymkhana Club swimming pool which was attractively illuminated for the occasion. The sports on the Monday are reported in another column. Mr. C. P. Lowe, Director of Public Works, and Mr. Bailey. Inspector of Landing Grounds, visited Miri during the month. During the last two months there were dis turbances involving Foochows and Khehs in the Foochow concession at Poyut and in the vicinity of Lubok Nibong bazaar but all is now quiet. The influenza epidemic is abating around Marudi and the lower reaches of the Baram but infection is spreading in the headwaters, especially among the Kelabits. Penans returning from their travels in the Balui and over the border report that many parties of Dayaks arc still living in the Peliran Bahan and near to the borders of N.E.I. territory. Several of the parties claim to be friends of Kendawang and his companions in his former raids. They are, apparently, peaceably inclined and there is no evidence that they have disturbed Kenyah farms but their continued presence is a source of some anxiety, placed as they are among Penans and between the Kenyahs and Kayane of the Baram and Bahri. On the 19th July, the District Officer, Baram, Mr. A. W. D. Brooke, and others left Marudi on a journey to the Kelabit country. At Long Laput one of the party was taken ill and was sent to Miri. Long Akah was reached on the 29th hut many people who should have met the party wore absent through influenza. At Long Anap another of the party had to be sent back through illness. When Long Sabuloh was reached ten persons had to be left behind sick. In the headwaters of the Libun, stories of an epidemic and many deaths over the border were current and all paths to N.E.I. had been closed. At Pa Lungan the headman reported that ou several occasions the trans-border Kelabits had attempted to re-Opeu the incident of Sigar Barah who was killed many years ago by Lawai Parnu Tejui of Dalam Bah. This matter has long been settled. The journey was continued and on September 12th Leo Matu was reached. Here the feud between the Long Sabatu and the Long Alai Kenyahs and Kelabits was settled. The fines and forfeitures bad been paid some years ago and the broach was finally healed by the Chiefs eating and drinking together. Mr. Brooke returned to Marudi on September 19th and the District Officer returned on the 26th. Below are extracts from the report of the District Officer, Bintulu :— “During the month natives were busy burning their padi clearings. From what I saw of these burns up river they were far from good. This year we have not experienced the usual drought during August. The Tatau Dayaks, in most cases, had not completed their burning by the end of the month due to the late clearing on account of the recent sickness there. “1 fear that any bad harvests next year will be blamed by Dayaks on to the Government on account of the survey work that has been carried out in this district during the months of July and August. Whenever I asked a Dayak lately how he is getting on with the farm, the reply is always that he has had no time to make a proper farm this year on account of Government kachau as regards rubber garden boundaries. This is of course absurd as the work they were asked to do should not, in most cases, have taken more than a week out of the last four months. The fact of the matter is that, in many cases, having been forced to clear their old gardens they have decided to work them and leave their farmings to the more profitable and easy working of tap ping rubber. It is now a very, common thing to see Dayaks returning from the bazaar with Chinese tinned foodstuffs. “Work on the Landing Ground progressed satisfactorily. Work was commenced in earnest, removing the swampy soil down to sand level and filling with sand from the adjoining hills. By the end of the month the finished levels were obtained from the Director of Public Works and, as filling contracts were completed, the areas are being levelled off to the correct levels. Work could be greatly quickened up if we could have more wagons; as it is we cannot get the swampy soil away quick enough to keep the contractors, who are carting sand for filling, working all day. “Mr. Bailey, Ground Engineer of the Royal Air Force, Singapore, visited the Landing Ground during the month. He appeared to be satisfied with the progress of the work." On 22nd an enquiry was hold at Limbang con cerning the death of an old Dayak, by name Jabu Apai Sangar of Sungei Merayut, Rumah Kedu. The deceased was discovered lying underneath a tree trunk in a clearing which had only a few hours beforehand been burnt off for fanning. There was no suspicion whatever of foul play and a verdict of death by misadventure was duly brought in. On the 14th, a most tragic occurrence took place in the Sungei Berawan. A Malay, accompanied by his young wife. was paddling down the Berawan River in a small boat when they were suddenly upset by a large crocodile. The husband on IT aching the river bank turned round to find that Ids wife was gone. This was at about 8 a.m., and in spite of prolonged searching no trace of his wife could be found. At about 2 p.m., the same after noon. villagers in the kampong just below the Limbang Bazaar were horrified to see a large crocodile floating down mid-stream with the body of the unfortunate woman in its jaws. Attempts were made to intercept the crocodile, which were however unavailing, and although it submerged and reappeared twice further down river, it eventually disappeared altogether. His Highness the Rajah's Birthday. SPORTS AT MIRI. His Highness the Rajah’s Birthday this year fell on a Sunday and Miri honoured the occasion bv holding a Sports Meeting on the Padang on Monday afternoon the 27th September. Entries were plentiful for the various races and the eliminating heats provided great amusement for the Miri folk. Both during the heats and on the sports day itself we were fortunate in having fine weather, this too at a time of notoriously wet days. The covered accommodation provided this year was on a much more generous scale than last year, as were also the refreshments provided for the large number of school children. The Sports were scheduled to start at 2 p.m. but long before that hour the Padang was packed to capacity by a crowd which, in addition to the local folk, included a great number of visitors from the neighbouring hamlets, all dressed in their best holidav attire. The events of the day started at 2.1o p.m. Mainly by the kind offices of the Sarawak Constabulary, the spectators were treated to various kinds of side shows such as clowns, a novelty band, Malay. Dayak and Indian dancing, lathi display and a kronchong party. Open Championship. This was again won by Sim Sek Kui for the second year in succession. The comparative ease with which Sek Kui collected his 15 points deprived us of the thrill of anticipation of the result, but all the same he was a very popular Champion and well deserved the cup kindly presented by Mr. E. 0. Bruce. Hearty congra tulations io Sek Kui. The Runner-up to the Champion resulted in a tie between Sum Hee Yoke and Daniel Yap with 5 points each. School Championship. Here the unusual hap pened, as the Chung Hua School and the St. Columba’s School tied for the Championship with 5 points each. The various events for the school children provided a good deal of entertainment and amuse ment. The competition between the schools was very keen but sporty, and the vociferous cheers that burst forth from the stands ai the conclusion of each event showed how keenly the children were following the fortunes of their schools. It is a pity that a decisive verdict of the championship was not possible on the result of the events provided for them. Although the sports programme was much too long to be gone through comfortably within the time available, the inclusion of a few novel items such as the Uniform Race, V.C. Race, a Six-legged Hop. and a Five-a-Side Football Match, more than justified the venture, as all of these were very much appreciated by the spectators. It speaks volumes for the expert handling and efficient management by the Sports Committee that they were able to finish the last event on the programme a few minutes before twilight. At the conclusion of the sports. Mr. E. O. Bruce called for three cheers for His Highness The Rajah. Mrs. E. O. Bruce graciously presented the prizes, thus rounding off a very happy and memorable afternoon. The Sports Committee are to be congratulated on organizing such a successful Meeting. Their task was made much lighter by the generous support they received from the public in subscriptions, honourable mention being made of the Government and Sarawak Oilfields. Ltd., who each contributed $100 to the Sports Fund. The erection of shelters was only possible through the further generosity of the Company in giving the materials on loan. 