Abang Zermorin and brothers and family beg to tender their thanks to Government Officers, all friends and relatives who sent letters of condolence dnring their recent bereavement and also those who attended their father’s funeral (Abang Haji Morshidi) on 17th July, 1939. JULY. His Highness the Rajah Muda, accom- panied by Mr. A. Macpherson, Secretary for Native Affairs, left Kuching on the 31st for a visit to the Second Division. The following telegram was received by the Secretary for Native Affairs from His High ness the Rajah on the occasion of the death of the Datu Imam: “Please convey my condolences to the family of Datu Imam in their great loss.” We welcome to Sarawak Messrs. H. J. Spencer, B. A. Reeves and Mr. & Mrs. H. Thackwell Lewis, who arrived during the month. Mr. Spencer is appointed Agricul tural Field Officer, Mr. Reeves a Surveyor in the Land and Survey Department, while Mr. Lewis has taken up the duties of Judicial Commissioner. Mr. D. L. Leach left Singapore on furlough on the 19th. Mr. A. F. R. Griffin returned from furlough on the 7th. Mr. and Mrs. K. N. Black left Kuching on furlough on the 31st. Mr. Black’s place as Manager of the Steamship Company is being taken by Mr. A. T. Wedgwood who arrived on the 3rd. Mr. J. P. Mead receives the C.B.E. The following letters were exchanged between the Chief Secretary and Mr. Mead on the occasion of the latter being decorated with the C.B.E "DEAR MEAD, On behalf of Sarawak Civil Service I wish to congratulate yon on the honour which His Majesty the King has bestowed upon you. I have no doubt that your good work in Sarawak, when you in augurated the Forestry Department, was taken into account. As an old friend of yours, too, may I offer you my personal congratulations. With kindest regards to Mrs. Mead and your family. Yours sincerely, J. B. ARCHER." FOREST DEPARTMENT. Kuala Lumpur, F.M.S., 24th June, 1939. DEAR ARCHER, Very many thanks for your letter of 19th con gratulating me on the C.B.E. I much appreciate your personal congratulations and those of the Sarawak Civil Service. It is very nice to know that one is still remembered after so many years. I am hoping to visit Brunei later this year and to call at Kuching on the way back. I hope to sec you and other old friends then. Again very many thanks for your good wishes. Yours sincerely, J. P. MEAD." Obituary. We deeply regret to announce the death of Mr. J. P. Reutens which took place at the residence of his daughter, Mrs. Perry, in Singapore. Seventy years of age, Mr. Reutens joined the service in 1899. retiring as Accountant, Sarawak Treasury. in 1924. He is survived by three daughters, two sons and an adopted daughter and to them we offer our condolences. ABANG HAJI MORSHIDI BIN ABANG HAJI NARUDIN. It is with the deepest regret that we record the death of the Datu Imam of Sarawak, Abang Haji Mohd. Morshidi bin Almerhum Abang Haji Noor din, which occurred on 16th July. 1939, at the age of 62. The late Datu Imam originally joined the Service as Datu Hakim on 23rd February, 1925, and was at the same time appointed a member of the Supreme Council and a member of the Council Negri. On 20th July, 1931, he was appointed an Advisory Member of the Committee of Administra- . tion. He was promoted to the rank of Datu Imam on 1st July, 1932, and gazetted us Fourth Class Magistrate on, 1st August 1933. He also served as a member of the Board of Examiners, for Government Officers. He was awarded the Long Service decoration .on 26th September. Before joining the Service the Datu was for 10 years Registrar of Mohammedan Marriages, an3 was largely responsible for religious teaching of Muslims of all communities. He was highly honoured and respected by all with whom became into contact and throughout his service he never failed to put his duty first, filling his office with marked success. By his death His Highness the Rajah loses a distinguished servant and the Malay Community an honoured representative. The funeral, which took place on 17th July, was attended by a large number of mourners of all races, His Highness the Rajah Muda being represented by the Chief Secretary. We extend our deepest sympathy to the Datu’s relatives in their bereavement. Sarawak’s Food Supply. A certain amount of curiosity has been quite naturally aroused about the reserve supplies of food which have been acquired recently by Government, and although most people who are at all able to keep in touch with current world affairs through the medium of news broadcast systems and news papers, realise the circumstances which made the provision of these reserve supplies essential, very few people are aware as yet of the exact nature of these reserves, how such reserves will be operated or how they themselves, us consumers, will be affected. Before entering into any detailed explanations of these points, it would be well to take this oppor tunity of sketching briefly the historical background leading up to the present position and of outlining broadly the problem of food supply which now has to be faced. The provision of reserve stocks of food, in point of fact, is only one half of the problem and the half which is much the easier to deal with. It is no part of policy to make the matter of the State’s food supply one to be shrouded in mystery ; on the contrary, experience has abundantly shown that the greater the number of people who under stand the position of the State as regards its food supply, the difficulties likely to be met with and the means available for overcoming those difficulties, the easier becomes the task of those charged with the duty of securing the food supply of the Slate against any circumstances which may arise. An economic survey of the resources of the State conducted towards the end of 1988, showed, nonetheless clearly despite the haste with which it was completed, how far the people of this country were dependent on imported foodstuffs, and also showed, more disquietingly if that were possible, how small, relatively speaking, were the stocks of foodstuffs held by traders generally. This should not be interpreted as meaning that some particular class of people was responsible for the state of affairs which the economic survey illustrated by its facts and figures, or that blame was to be laid on any such class of people. That could not be so, for those conditions did not suddenly arise; they were the result of years of past effort which in their times were accepted by common consent as sound economy. People cultivate their land now in much the same way as they have done for years past with the ideal of self-interest their only guide as to the best means of securing a livelihood from their land. For years also traders have been able by virtue of increased and more dependable communications, to reduce the total amount of stocks needed for ordinary trade purposes. Had world conditions remained unchanged, there fore, the results of the economic survey would not necessarily have been interpreted as disquieting. Indeed the prosperity of some forms of agriculture and the improvement of communications might, under appropriate circumstances, have been inter preted as being indicative of satisfactory progress. But unfortunately world conditions have changed and events have occurred tending to undermine the confidence of Governments the world over and to raise doubts whether their respective countries could continue to develop uninterruptedly along the lines of policies adopted in happier circumstances. It is clear from the results of the economic survey that this country, as an exporter of valuable raw materials in exchange for which imports of foodstuffs and manufactured goods are obtained, has trade routes which are veritable life-lines and that the slightest possibility of interference with trade cannot, be viewed with equanimity. If, therefore, there is the slightest possibility of such interference, the State must review the position in in the light of the new conditions which have been created and must decide how far those conditions justify the marshalling of the State’s economic resources and the lessening of the State’s depen dence on outside sources of supply. Thus, accepting the possibility that interference with trade may arise, the problem facing this country is one of— fa) increasing the visible fcod stocks of the State temporarily as an assurance against the possibility occurring—before (b) stimulation of internal food production to a point compatible with a satisfactory degree of self-sufficiency,—has been achieved. As implied previously, (b) is by far the most difficult half of the problem. Given the fullest degree of co-operation, and no doubt is entertained that it will be forthcoming, this half of the problem will be solved in due course. One menus of increasing the visible food stocks of the State would be by encouraging individual purchase and storage, but this method has the great disadvantage that only the wealthier members of society would be able to purchase adequate sup plies. Reliance cannot, therefore, be wholly placed on this method but it has not been neglected or completely discarded. Circulars have, been widely distributed urging all who can possibly afford to do so, to lay in stocks of food. Another means of increasing the visible food Stocks of the State would be by encouraging whole- sale and retail dealers throughout the State to carry . larger stocks. Tn this case the question of storage space immediately arises, and, as will be easy to realise, traders who for years have based their storage space requirements on the volume of normal trade, cannot conjure up double or treble that space by a stroke of the pen. Then, again, there would arise difficulties of raising the extra capital required for the purchase of the additional stocks and in the case of the small traders, this might he quite impossible. This method, again, though involving all the difficulties mentioned, ba- not been completely neglected or discarded. There has been a very spontaneous and gratifying response to the appeals made to traders generally to increase as far as possible the stocks of food- stuffs carried by them. There remains to be noted the method of imple menting the results obtainable by partial reliance on individual purchase and storage and on increased traders' stocks, by a scheme of reserve stocks of food to be purchased and stored by Government itself. This scheme has in fact been embarked upon and the reserve stocks are now almost complete. The stocks of food which have been purchased comprise salt, sugar, flour, milk and fats. Reserve stocks of padi have also been obtained so that both people and Government are now able to contem plate the future with greatly lessened apprehension, should any interference with trade eventuate. The reserve stocks carried by Government will provide only a bare subsistence diet and. furthermore, the stock of milk will be for issue only to children and invalids. This diet can be implemented by the judicious consumption of individual stocks in the first place and controlled purchase from traders' stocks in the second place. Hence in all the circulars issued and the announcements made by Government urging the laying in of stocks of food, repeated emphasis has been laid on the guarantee that private stocks of food will not be commandeered in times of emergency. Should au emergency occur and food supplies at any time become difficult to obtain from overseas, assuming that this country is not by that time self- supporting, a system of food rationing will be introduced. The system of rationing adopted is a very simple one and does not involve the use of coupons. Food supply cards (or what are called Identity Cards) will be issued to all householders. The holder of an Identity Card will go to the Food Supply office nearest his home and inform the Supply Officer of the items and quantity of food he wants to buy. The issue of food will be based on a scale of diets for men, women and children and supplies of food will be obtainable up to the quantity constituting a normal week’s requirements based on the scale of diets. Supplies constituting less than a week's requirements will be obtainable of course, for people of limited means cannot usually afford to buy a whole week's supply of food at once. The Supply Officer will give the holder of the Identity Card a form (or what is called a Requisi tion) authorising any shopkeeper to sell the amount of food stated on the form. Without such a form no shopkeeper will will any food from his stock. Thus, apart from getting a requisition form before going shopping, people will carry on just as in normal times, able to shop at their favourite storks and make their purchases to the best advantage. One final word about the stimulation of internal food production is perhaps called for. It should not be supposed that this stimulation is to serve purely the needs of the moment and that it is in effect the self-sufficiency economic theory about which so much is heard these days. This is not the case by any means. This country is essentially an agricultural country but we import great quanti ties of foodstuffs which could so easily be produced in the country itself. There are classes of people in the country whose normal diet is not nearly rich enough and whose diet could be materially improved if cheap and more varied foods, all of which could be produced in this country, were available. Poultry, pigs and cattle are all too scarce in this country and eggs and milk are imported on a large scale. Consideration of these factors makes it abun dantly clear that the self-sufficiency aimed at, menus not a lowering of the standard of living and increased use of substitute foodstuffs, but balanced farming, cheaper living and a fuller life for the people of this country. Sarawak To-day. Much gossip and simulation, and a certain amount of misleading publicity, have been aroused lately by the resignation of five of the most senior members of the Sarawak Civil Service, following shortly upon the appointment of Mr. A. W. D. Brooke as Rajah Muda. This public interest in circles far outside Sarawak could not have been avoided, for Malaya takes a friendly interest in Sarawak, as one of the group of British territories and protectorates in Malaysia. The wider world is interested too. for romance still surrounds the name of Sarawak, the country of the White Rajahs. Moreover, the youthfulness of the new Rajah Muda, who is administering the country (in the absence of the Rajah) at the age of 26, and the distinctive policy and traditions of Sarawak, are. additional reasons why the recent rumours brought this small country into the limelight of publicity. The position in Sarawak is now entirely normal and satisfactory, but it may be useful to explain the true meaning of the recent upheaval and its consequences. Before this can be done, however, it is necessary to point out that the system by which Sarawak is adminis tered is entirely different from that of the Straits Settlements and also different (although there arc similar features) from that of the Malay protectorates. The Rajah of Sarawak is the supreme authority but in practice he rules with the advice and assist ance of two bodies, namely the Supreme Council and the Committee of Administration. The former which is composed of four Malay Batus and the Chief Secretary, is concerned chiefly with native affairs; the latter, which consists of a selection of the more senior European officers of the service and three Asiatic advisory members, deals with all major problems of government, and makes recom mendations to the Rajah on matters of policy. This committee has no executive powers, and acts in a purely advisory capacity, but it is only natural that the Rajah, who is a ruler of decidedly liberal ideas, should largely accept its advice. Indeed, for him to do otherwise would imply lack of confidence in his own officers, and would render the work of the committee of little practical value. During the simultaneous absence from Sarawak of the Rajah and the Tuan Muda the Committee of Adminis tration becomes the supreme authority in the State, the officer appointed to administer the Govern ment being bound by its decisions. Alt hough the Rajah, even while away from Sarawak, keeps in close touch with the committee, he inevitably has to leave many decisions to its discretion, and the importance of the committee is therefore consider ably enhanced. When the Committee of Administration was re-constituted in its present form some five years ago, the four Residents of Divisions, who are senior administrative officers in the State, were appointed ex-officio members. This was excellent in theory but not so good in practice, 'since three of these Residents did not live in the capital and so were unable to attend meetings or give opinions on matters discussed. The committee was therefore controlled by a strong departmental majority, and when two of the Residents retired on pension they were not replaced. Finally, when in August last year the last active administrative member was transferred to an outstation, the State began to he governed by a committee no single member of which had had any personal experience of the day-to-day job of running the country outside the capital. The results of this were inevitable, and soon became apparent. Authority was concentrated more and more, in the capital, the outstations were neglected, and the men on the spot—namely. the District Officers,—began to feel that they did not possess the confidence of headquarters. Expenditure, tort, seemed to them to be unfairly distributed, since although the most stringent economy was enforced on the outstations—often al the expense of social services there appeared to he no lack of money in the capital. As time went on. it became plain that the Committee of Administration-which was controlled to a great extent by an "inner cabinet" of two officers—was putting into force a policy which, in the view of the administrative officers in the district, had little in common with the traditional policy of the Brooke family. Although the Govern ment under this regime reached a high pitch of efficiency, this was too often only "paper efficiency.'’ and in some eases it was gained at the expense of human values While the service, as an adminis trative organisation, was functioning with clockwork efficiency, the true interests of the people were suffering. It may be said that the Rajah should have seen tins, and checked it. but it must be remembered that there are two sides to every question, and there was for some time no proof that the critics of the policy of the Committee of Administration were right. Moreover, as has already been pointed out, it would have been a serious matter for the Rajah to refuse to endorse the policy framed after careful consideration by a group of his most senior officers. Matters came to a head, however, late in March, when the Rajah Muda (or Mr. A. W. D. Brooke, as he then was), presided at a meeting of the Committee of Adminis tration and pointed out the divergence between the policy then being pursued and the traditional policy of bis family. Since several of the European members of the committee (and it should be noted that no Asiatic members had attended meetings or had any say on the committee for a long time) were unable to agree that their polity was the wrong one, their resignations were inevitable and they retired from the service on generous terms. Their personal friendship with the Rajah remains unimpaired, and their relations with their brother officers have never been anything but cordial. Sarawak has now reverted to its traditional policy of "the country for the natives." and her critics may rest assured that at no time in her history has her administration been on a sounder basis. The personal loyalty of both the officers of the service and the people to the Rajah and to all members of his family is unbounded, since they know that, whatever happens, rhe Brooke family have their wel fare at heart, and will work for them unceasingly. If anyone doubts this statement, the record of the Brooke family over the past hundred years should convince him that it is true. —Straits Times. Kuching Rotary Club. The Kuching Rotary Club hold two Meetings during the month of July. 1939. The first one was in the form of a luncheon at the Lilian Theatre. held on Wednesday. 12th inst., when Rn Tan Sum Guan took the Chair for the first time as the new President for 1939/40. After the President had welcomed the only guest present and thanked the Proprietors of the Lilian Theatre for the loan of their hall, the Hon. Secretary read out Governor Samuel's last Monthly letter in which he wound up his activities for his term of office and gave certain advice and suggestions to the Clubs in the 80th District for future guidance. The Hon Secretary also read out the suggestions and recom- mendatious of the Community Service Committee of winch Rn H. O. Baker is the Chairman. They included Educational facilities to the South Indian Coolie class Blood transfusion. Boy Scout move ment. Road Sense and Behaviour. Social Hygiene. oners Aid, etc. This programme had been submitted to the Board of Directors for approval and action. The other Meeting was a dinner one held at the residence of the President. Rn Tan Sum Guan on Saturday, 29th inst. After dinner the whole party repaired to the Lilian Theatre to see the World Renowned Magician (Wan Wan San) who is also known as (he Cigarette King. Rotarians were Heated to some very good singing and dancing by a troupe of girls. The feats of strength, cycling runts and trapeze acts by the other members of the troups were of a high standard and finally Wan Wan San showed some very clever tricks. His other conjuring acts were also very much appreciated. ATTENDANCE RETURN for the two Meet ings is as follows : — China Relief Fund. In aid of the China Relief Fund a Charity Bazaar was held at the Steamship Godowns in Kuching, together with a tea garden at the Customs Exa mination Shed, on 1st and 2nd July. The bazaar was opened by the head of the Chinese community. Mr. Ong Tiang Swee, G.S.S.. who in a short speech wished the organising com mittee all success. . The spaciousness of the Steamship Godowns enabled thousands of visitors to attend, while those who visited the tea garden were provided with very comfortable accommodation owing to the roominess of the place. Selections of music were rendered by the Kam pong Tanking Malay Band and the Sarawak Union Club Minstrel Party, and in addition two Chinese Orchestras performed. The Side Show Section, which comprised Lucky Dip, Houpla and Cigarette Shies, was very popular with all classes and was much enjoyed by those who patronised it. Individual stalls were set up by the various schools of Kuching, who very kindly contributed gifts of all kinds, and sales were conducted in a very able manner by the pupils. A special stall was put up by the Agricultural Department whose contributions included poultry, fruits, vegetables and seeds for planting purposes. In addition models of padi store, copra kiln and rubber smoke-house were exhibited to the public, together with several forms of sprayers at present used by that Department. The exhibition proved most interesting. The bazaar was a great success having produced a nett receipt of over $7,500. The Committee of the Fund desires to thank the Sarawak Steamship Co., Ltd., and the Commis sioner of Trade and Customs for permission to use their promises, and all those ladies and gentlemen who made contributions to the fund and who helped to make the bazaar such a success. In aid of the China Relief Fund a variety entertainment was provided by the Wan Wan San Magic and Acrobatic Show at the Lilian Theatre on the night of 31st July. The various items presented were much appreciated by those who patronised the show. The takings for that night, which amounted to about $600, were contributed to the Fund jointly by Mr. Wan Wan San and the proprietors of the Lilian Theatre. The Committee of the Fund take tins oppor tunity of thanking all those who gave their kind support to the Fund. A batch of fifty-seven motor-car drivers and mechanics left for Singapore on 31st July en route for China, where they propose to offer their services to the Chinese Government.. They were given a hearty send-off by the Chinese community who gathered at the Steamship Wharf in great numbers Chinese National Songs were sung by the school children and crackers were fired to mark the event. We wish these volunteers a safe and speedy return. Round and About, or A Little Bird Whispers. July has been a hectic month in this little town- hip of ours, set on the banks of the mighty Sungei Sarawak. Queer things have been happening, and strange people have been seen comings—and going. At the beginning of the month a mammoth bazaar, jumble sale, tea-palace, coconut-shie and general stampede was held in the Steamship Co.'s godown in aid of the China Red Cross Fund, I understand the Fund was richer to the tune of over $8,000 as a result of it. Congratulations to the organizers for making it such a success. Numerous bargains were obtainable, from vests to valises, and orchids to oats. One commercial gentleman was seen leaving with a toucan, and is thinking of buying another, to see what toucan do (Shades of My Guinness!) I hear on good authority, however, hat he does not intend starting a rival air-mail service in competition with Mr. Gallstone’s pigeons. Ou Sunday, July 9th, about midnight, melodious strains were heard issuing from the interior of the Sarawak Club, and after harnessing Whortleberry, ny famous and intelligent poodle-fakir, and slip ping my stethoscope in one pocket and the remains of yesterday’s breakfast in the other, I traced it to a gent, wot was singing in a deeply stirring brass- jaritone (or was it just a small Bass, please, Dearie?). The words of the song appeared to be a bit muddled, but I gathered it was something about a lady (sic), named Poor Liza, alias Mrs. Awkings, who was skinning a rabbit down a long, frail that went awinding until it came to the Men of Harlech. What Poor Liza did then I don’t know, because it seems that the men of Harlech took one look at her and went onward marching lown to the Old Kent Road. Cheer up, Lizzy, letter luck next time. You will be sorry to hear hat the remains of my yesterday's breakfast were spilt before I arrived at the Club, as I forgot to put the crown cork back on the bottle. In the June issue of the Sarawak Gazette was a oem called “Sunset on Saribas,” and Whortle- jerry, who although he is only a dog is an extremely well-educated one, traced out with his tail in the hist on the bungalow floor the following reply CAT CALLS ON CUCHING. The dark moon sinks, A low-hung ceiling fan Waves it good-bye— Quicker and quicker it waves until the boy Turns off the switch. Through a wavering mist the twinkling glasses grow Until with Cassius They bestride the world like a Colossus. You blink—and once again They sit upon the table meek and mild, But what! they're empty. Ah ill-cursed fate of man !! What is more The boys have gone to bed, And will not minister with their sweet service. So with a sigh that racks your breast. You hiccup—and slowly leave the Club On that long trudge home to bed. Overheard in the Sarawak Club, or Malay as she is spoke :— Gentleman trying to get Boy to put on a certain gramphone record: "Lu Tahu Seven Dwop?" Shipping and Marine Intelligence. (Voice from the background:— "There’s no such thing.") At 3.30 ack emma on Sunday, July 2nd, a hoarse cry went up from the lookout on the Kubu tower, and the Guard turned out with a rush. In au incoherent voice, the lookout explained that he had seen a submarine stealthily stealing up the river, containing a thousand Eskimos with the snow still on their boots. A general alarm was sounded, and the Police, the Rangers, the Customs, and the Police Band (the most formidable weapon of attack in the State) raided the bazaar shops for all avail able supplies of mosquito netting, which they promptly strung across the river from Pengkalan Batu to the Astana steps, in the hope that the submarine would become embroiled in its meshes. The Tuan Komishner himself turned up, and donning a diving helmet, gloves and a sword-stick, he bravely walked forward to what might have been his certain doom. Tense silence reigned on the river bank, as lie shot a line (sorry, swung the lead) to discover his depth. Suddenly a muffled oath and a reference to a--------------------toe told us that he had found the vile monster of the deep that had raided our sacred shores. It was the work of a trice to pass a four-ton cable round this despoiler, and quickly to return to the comparative safety of the bank (unchartered). Then with a "Yo-beave- ho" half Kuching pulled on the cable, and slowly the monster was hauled onto dry land. Every body looked al it with curiosity, but nobody was brave enough to touch it until the Curator had pronounced judgment. He soon arrived, and quickly- put our fears at rest by telling us that it was a quite common specimen of the mechanical con traption known as "Morrissus Lapanus,’’ and which normally lives on land. On this occasion it must have been badly frightened, and losing control of its motive powers, have plunged headlong into the river. It did not seem any the worse for its immersion, and after shaking itself slightly, it dis appeared very rapidly up Rock Road back to its native element. I understand that it lives on roast fowl, when it can get them. Which is extremely daring of it, don’t you think? Whortleberry has just read the above graphic- description of the Saving of Sarawak, but wants to know :—"What is a trice?" Can anybody inform him, please? (Keep the correspondence pure.) THE CROAKING RAVEN. Sarawak Rubber Estates, Limited. Report of the Proceedings at the Twenty-seventh Annual Ordinary General Meeting held at the Office of the Company, 143-149, Fenchurch Street, London, E.C. 3, on 13th July, 1939, Mr. JOHN KENNETH HENDERSON (the Chairman of the Com pany) presiding. Mr. G. A WIGNEY, F.C.I.S., the Representative of the Secretaries (The Borneo Company, Limited), having read the notice convening the meeting and the Report of the Auditors, the CHAIRMAN said : The Directors' Report and Accounts having been in your hands for the prescribed period. I will, with your permission, take them as read. The year’s operations, after providing £1,000 for depreciation, resulted in a profit of £2,060. 13s. 3d. as compared with £6,526. 8s. 3d. last year. The main factors which have affected the profits in the year under review have been the reduced output permitted under the Restriction Scheme with its consequent increase in costs, coupled with a somewhat lower selling price. In order to remain in economic production throughout the year, it was necessary to incur fairly heavy expenditure in the purchase of export rights, and this materially affected the results now before you. I will refer to this again in a moment. Taking all things into consideration, we must consider ourselves fortunate in being able to achieve results such as are shown in die accounts before you. A transfer of £1,500 has been made from the Reserve for Equalisation of Dividend which was created to assist in tiding over this period, and this, together with the amount of £2,307. 19s. 8d. brought forward, gives a total of £5.868. 12s. fid. at credit of Profit and Loss Account. Ont of this sum it is proposed to pay a dividend of 4 per cent., less tax, which will absorb £3,480. ft is also proposed to place £200 to Reserve for Taxation, leaving £2,188. 12S. 6d. to be carried forward. There is little to be said concerning the Balance Sheet, except to point out that the Company remains in a strong and liquid financial position. You will doubtless remember that last year I referred at some length to the difficulties which were before us in regard to the allocations of export allowances, and I may say that but for the large purchases of export rights during the year it would have been impossible to remain in economic production. As stated in the Report, the crop harvested during the year amounted to 619,388 lbs. compared with an exportable allowance of 356,530 lbs. granted to us by the Sarawak Government, but a further 242,286 lbs. were purchased to bring the export up to 598,816 lbs Costs have been carefully watched, and crop regulated to keep these as low as possible, and with the help of the Reserve for Equalisation of Dividends, it is possible to recommend to you the payment of a modest dividend. With the renewal of the Rubber Regulation Scheme for a further five years as from 1st January last, bringing with it an increase in Sarawak's basic quota from 32,000 to 43,000 tons, our position has to that extent improved. Our Visiting Agent, who recently inspected the Estate, has reported that the property is in excel lent order throughout. The drainage system has functioned well, and an efficient programme of cultivation has been carried out . With regard to the questions of chemical manur ing and replanting I referred last year to programmes which your Board had in mind. Since then data of manuring experiments have become available, and the results are such that extensive manuring over certain areas which we are satisfied will benefit by this treatment is being carried out. As to replanting, the results so far obtained from the experimental plots are very satisfactory, and your Board have decided to proceed with a larger programme and a commencement has been made on a suitable area of 100 acres. 1 an glad to say that our Manager has been able to maintain a labour force sufficient for our require ments. By re-arrangement of the tapping pro gramme to produce the comparatively low crop allowed under the present international release, he should be able to carry out this additional planting and cultivation work with our existing labour force. The health of the force remains at a high standard. We are at the moment obtaining a slightly better price for our commodity, and with a continuance of present conditions, results for this current financial year should show some slight improvement. In view of the state of world affairs, the imme- diste outlook for our industry remains uncertain, while an added difficulty producers will have to be prepared to face is the problem of the barter arrangements come to between H.M. Government and the U.S.A. What the ulitmate repercussions are likely to be it is impossible to predict from the information at present available. I cannot close my remarks without expressing our appreciation of the efficient service rendered by our Estate Staff and Agents at home and abroad during another year. 1 will now propose:—"That the Report and Accounts as submitted be approved and adopted,” and 1 will ask Mr. Malcolm to second the resolution. After that I shall be pleased to deal with any questions you may care to ask. Mr. A. R. Malcolm seconded the resolution which was carried unanimously. The Chairman then moved :—"That a Dividend be declared for the year ended 31st March, 1939. of 1 per cent., less tax at 5s. 6d. in the £, payable on the 22nd July, 1939, to Shareholders on the Register on 10th July, 1939.” This was seconded by Lieut.-Colonel J. Harvey D.8.O., and carried unanimously. Mr. A. R. Malcolm was re-elected a Director and Messrs. Turquand, Youngs, McAuliffe & Co. were re-appointed Auditors. The proceedings then terminated. PERBELANJA-AN ORANG ORANG NAIK HAJI. The B.C.L.’s House-warming. Mr. Martine and the stuff of the Borneo Company Limited were at home to- a large ga thering of friends on the morning of 17th June. The occasion was the house-warming of the Company's new premises. The hospitality was what we would associate with our old friend, the B.C.L.—need more be said? While we may regret the passing of one of Kuching’s moat famous buildings, we congratulate our old friend on building such spacious, pleasant and imposing premises. Mr. William Tan. A letter has been received from Mr. William Tan who is making a world lour. Mr. Tan at the time of writing was in Dodge City, Kansas, which be describes as the "Cowboy City." He has now left for Sydney, Australia, via Honolulu, Samoa, Fiji and New Zealand, and hopes to be back in Sarawak early in September. Mr . Tan spent some time in Massachusetts where he took a course of architecture. He also took a course in dying and secured bis wings. To the first Sarawak subject to become a pilot we offer our heartiest congratulations. Notice. The Communities of the Sarawak Turf Club desires to announce that with the approval of the Authorities, the next race meeting will take place on Saturday and Monday. October 7th and 9th next. Unlimited Sweepstake Tickets will be on sale shortly. Sixty-Five Years Ago. EXTRACTS FROM THE SARAWAK GAZETTE,— AUGUST, 1874. The question of labour in a young country is one Of vital importance. There is little doubt in our minds that the future development of Borneo can only be accomplished by Chinese; or a hybrid race between Chinese and the aborigines; and any private enterprise for open ing up the resources of Sarawak by agriculture, or . mining, must doubtless depend on imported labour, which, from our proximity to China, can be procured without difficulty. At the same time we must not shut our eyes to the gradual advancement of our Dyak population. nor to the importance of the value of their labour. We speak more especially of the Sea Dyaks, who have shown themselves to be enterprising and so eager to acquire wealth, that they willingly undertake any kind of work to secure this end. The Malays are too proud and too lazy to work, to use the changkul is deemed by them ignominious and degrading. The Land Dyaks are a quiet, docile people, con tent with agricultural pursuits sufficient to supply their daily wants: but the piratical and head taking Sea Dyaks now that their 'occupation is gone’ must give vent to their energies in the more legitimate channel of acquiring wealth. The Saribas, one of the most piratical tribes Sir James Brooke first had to deal with, now wear the Malay dress and trade in large prahus. not only on our own coast, but to Singapore and Brunei : they are found working antimony at Jambusan, and cinnabar at Tegora, and their employers speak in the highest terms of their labour. The Batang Lupars are also very wealthy, owing to their perseverance in collecting jungle produce: they have also lately shown their willingness to work by offering their services to the Engineer engaged in opening out the Lingga coal field. The labour of road making, clearing and carrying the sample of 300 tons of coal through the jungle has been performed by them in a manner most satis factory, and at contract prices considerably under that asked by either Chinese, Boyans, or Malays. The great drawback to their labour is its uncertainty, as they invariably leave all work to assist their families at harvest time : in spite of this, however, the value of such labour, close at hand, cannot be over-rated in the development and working of the Lingga coal-mines. The arrival of a good fire-engine by the Sri Sarawak must be a matter of congratulation amongst the owners of house property in Kuching, more specially as we are given to understand that it is to be kept in the Fort, and a section of the Rangers drilled so as to be always ready for au emergency. The advantage of building Malay houses apart was made apparent a few nights ago, when the house of a Malay, named Bakar, in Kampong Grisik was burned to the ground in about an hour; but the fire burnt itself out without doing further mischief. DIAMOND DIGGINGS. The accounts relative to the searching for Diamonds in Sarawak, had always appeared to me so contradictory, that I found it impossible to form any conclusive opening respecting them. Several weeks stay nt Suntah, which I am inclined to regard as the head quarters of Diamond digging in Sarawak, (although aware that digging is still carried on from time to time in various parts of the left hand branch of the Sarawak river,) has, however, enabled me to form an approximate estimate of the value of these diggings. In searching for the layer of the grave), called by the Malays ‘‘karangan’’ which chiefly consists of a sandy loam full of water-worn pebbles, and in which the experience of years has proved that the Diamonds lie embedded, the Malays employ an iron rod, about half an inch thick, and eighteen or twenty feet in length. Two men are sufficient to push down tins rod by degrees, through the loamy soil which lies above the gravel, but to reach which usually requires the entire length of the rod. The sound created by the rod. when striking the gravel, is familiar to the ears of every digger, as is that likewise caused by it when coming in contact with a log of wood or a stone. Several places adjoining each other, having satisfactory undergone this test, the diggers retire until the shades of evening, when they patiently wait for the arrival of the evening sonsgters. Strangely enough that Mahomedans have a keen eye to omens, which nature’s own pets are supposed to reveal to them, by some peculiarity in their war bling and hopping, near to the ground selected by the diggers. The signs being found propitious all parties retire to roost. My anxiety to save time, led me to commit the sacrilege of not waiting until the Suntah oracles had spoken, though strongly advised to do so by the Malays. This is quite sufficient to account for all my bad luck, as it very few grains of gold was all the reward I received, after a month's hard labour. Two of three Malays generally dig in company together. A small hole about four feet square is sunk, until the gravel is reached—To get this out next is no easy task as I soon discovered, as even before the gravel is exposed to view the water rushes in upon all sides— Obtain something less than two feet of gravel, over a surface of eight square feet , and a depth of only fifteen, required the services of two experienced Malay diggers and four Chinamen during three entire days. The water was irrepressible and pumping alone was not sufficient to keep it down— Yet these difficulties would have been forgiven, if the gravel when found, anything like paid itself— I ought to mention that some experience in the African Diamond Fields had enabled me to provide myself with every possible appliances that might prove of use in Borneo. Pumps, wire bound tubings: a combined Gold and Diamond washing machine, which has proved a great success; in fact everything which European ingenuity could devise I had brought with me. hut how could all this avail me anything in a place where the finding of a 2 1/2 carat Diamond is big enough to remind my fellow diggers that "God is Great and Mahomed is His Prophet.'’ That a two and a half carat was found during my stay at Suntah I am willing to certify, and also, that the welcome paid to the little stranger, was greater than we cold blooded northerners were in the habit of inflicting upon apparitions of fifty carat Diamonds on the Colesberg Kopje. My own individual bad hick, though fur from edifying was by no means startling, as every digger must expect a run of bad luck some time or another. Yet a greater discovery than that of even a two and a half curat lay in store for me, viz., that 1 had positively reached a place, where that well known animal the ‘‘lucky digger” did not exist, and for all I know, never did exist. A Malay’s definition of a lucky digger means a man who can find sufficient to enable him to take a return ticket from Mecca. This means one hundred dollars or thereabouts. No mighty ambi tion for a Diamond digger to have as a perfect five carat Diamond alone would have bring that amount. But where do the five carat Diamonds lie? My brother diggers soon let me know, that if they could earn six dollars a month, (and this remember after lots of both dirty and hard work, for the very nature of a digger’s work here compels him to work hard in order to keep down our com mon enemy the water.) they considered themselves fortunate. First Division News. JUNE. His Highness the Rajah Muda visited Bau on the 19th. At Kampong Batu Kitang the inhabi tants entertained His Highness and party with dancing and singing. On the 31st a Japanese fishing motor vessel was seen lying off Telok Gadong. The master and crew were taken to Kuching in custody, the former later being fined for a breach of the Quarantine Rules. On the 12th the owner of the Kim Seng Gold Mine at Jugan was attacked and robbed of $1,900— luckily escaping with slight injuries. A bout containing ten adults and two children was struck by a violent squall off Kampong Sampun and wrecked on the 24th. They kept alloat on a raft for four hours until picked up by S. Maludam Malays. It was found that the two children had died. S. Thomas’s School. The Annual Athletic Sports of S. Thomas’s School were held on the school ground on Saturday July 15th. His Highness the Rajah Muda was present and distributed the prizes at the end of the meeting. Other distinguished guests among a large company of spectators were the Lord Bishop of the Diocese, the Chief Secretary of Sarawak, and the Resident of the Division. A programme of nearly thirty events was despatched in just over three hours the boys were divided into three classes according to size. The House Champion ship Shield was won by Hose House from Chambers by 108 points to 106. Gun Khun Jang of Chambers House was the Champion individual athlete. At the conclusion of the afternoon's sport the the Principal briefly expressed the school’s sense of honour and obligation at His Highness's visit : he thanked the guests for their presence and interest in the school, welcomed old boys and parents of present pupils, and paid a tribute to those gentle men who bad assisted so usefully in the organisa tion of the day's sport. Constabulary Sports. The Annual Athletic Sports contest between the Depot and Kuching Detachments took place on the Badrudin Barracks padang at 2 p.m. on Thursday, the 8th of June, 1939. The day was cool and occasionally showery, fortunately not sufficient to hold up the programme. The ground was in fairly good condition, but rather uneven in places, enough to prevent any records being broken. His Highness the Rajah Muda arrived at about 5 p.m. and very kindly presented the prizes at the conclusion of the meeting. The Challenge Cup. com peled for annually by Depot and Kuching, was again won by Depot with a total of 63 points to 33. The Victor Ludorum was S.C. 389 Purang Singh, Depot, with a total of 9 points, closely followed by No. 396 Sergeant Jack and No. 7 S.C. Deli who each obtained 8 points. Thanks are due to Messrs. R. F. Sinclair, A. R. Snelus, F. R. K. Kitto, and A. J. N. Richards, for kindly officiating as Judges. Mr. Kitto is due for a special word of thanks for devoting a great deal of his time to measuring out the ground. Sarawak Turf Club. SPECIAL MEETING 8th & 10th July, 1939. RESULTS. ---------- FIRST DAY. Saturday, 8th July, 1939. Going Heavy. (Figures in brackets following horses' names denote number of tickets taken on tote.) RACE 1.—2.00 p.m. THE RIMBAS STAKES. 6 furlongs. DIVISION I. Ponies. H'cap. Owners. Jockeys. 1 Diana (199) 8.6 Mr. Ong Hap Leong Usop 2 . Hot-Spur Messrs. Ong Guan Tee (605) 10.10 & Ong Guan Hin Tan Taw En 3. Silver Blaze Messrs. Chan Qui Cho (159) 8.12 & Chan Qui Chong Aug. Damit Also ran: -Chairman 8.12 (90) and Happy Boy 10.13 (343) (Noii-runners :—Kijang 9.13. Sintak Bulan 9.7 and Unggut 8.0.) Diana got well away and established a substantial load but was caught by Hot-Spur at the three furlong post. These two raced together to the road where Diana again went ahead to win easily. The rest of the field gained on the leaders in the straight and Silver Blaze nearly succeeded in catching Hot- Spur on the post. 6 lengths, head. Time :—1 minute 34 seconds. Tote :—$6.30. Cash Sweep;—1st prize $600 Ticket No. 149, 2nd prize $300 Ticket No. 1571, 3rd prize $150 Ticket No. 163, Starters each $30 Tickets Nos. 1175. 197. 660.546 and 1205. RACE 2—2.25 p.m. THE SEKAMA STAKES. 5 furlongs. DIVISION II. Ponies. H'cap. Owners. Jockeys. 1. Mahjong II (125) 8.7 .M r. Phillip Soh Fu Lundu 2. Bintang (119) 9 2 Mr. Wee 3. Diamond (321) 8. 6 The Datu Patinggi Medin Also ran .—Borneo Singa 8.8 (271), Tarzan 9.0 (90) and Chantek Manis 9.3 (10). (Non-runners — Moonshine Jr. 8.12 and Enterprise 8.6.) Mahjong II got a good start and led all the way from Bintang with the rest of the field strung out in a long line behind. 3 lengths, ‘2 lengths. Time:-1 minute 18 2/5 seconds. Tote $6.70. Cash Sweep :—1st prize $600 Ticket No. ‘230, 2nd prize $300 Ticket No. 109, 3rd prize $150 Ticket No. 1193, Starters each $30 Tickets Nos. 1250. 317, 291. 153 and 367. RACE 3.—2.50 p.m. THE JULAU STAKES. 6 furlongs. DIVISION III. Ponies. H'cap. Owners. Jockeys. 1. Rex (418) 0. 3 Messrs. Chan Teck Cheng & Wee Boon Chew Lundu 2. Burong The Datu Bentara & Sultan (191) 9. 3 Mr. Kueh Siak Hong Lohor 3. Kaswa late Zam Zam) (669) ft. 7 The Datu Amar Teo Ek Pa Also ran :—Fed Up 10.2 (53) and Rainbow 10.0 (74). (Non-runner :—Chabi Padi 8.6.) Kaswa was out by himself and led by nearly half a furlong until the three furlong post but he had shot his bolt at the bend into the straight and Rex and Burong Sultan went ahead. 5 lengths, 3 lengths. Time:—1 minute 37 2/5 seconds. Tote $2.30. Cash Sweep : 1st prize $600 Ticket. No. 368, 2nd prize $300 Ticket No. 1036, 3rd prize $150 Ticket No. 1118, Starters each $50 Tickets Nos 900,1151 and 1294. RACE 4. -3.15 p.m. THE ROYALIST STAKES Round the Course (approx 1 miles). HORSES. Horses. H'cap. Owners. Jockeys. 1. Johnnie Messrs. Chan Qui Cho Awg. Damit Walker (267) 9. 0 & Chan Qui Chong 2. La Coloniale (46) 9. 0 Mr. Yong Thau Yin Awg. Bakar Also ran :—Sky Raider 9.0 (127). (Non runners .—Equetta 9.0, Lucky Star 9.0 and The Planter 9.0.) La Colonials set the pace for five furlongs and then the field raced abreast until the straight. Here Sky Raider took the lead but soon appeared to be in distress and fell away again, leaving Johnnie Walker and La Coloniale to fight out the finish. 2 lengths. 4 lengths. Time :—2 minutes 34 1/5 seconds. Tote :—$1.40. Cash Sweep 1st prize $520 Ticket No. 1232, 2nd prize $260 Ticket No. 837, 3rd prize $130 Ticket No. 766, Starters each $43 Tickets Nos. 1150. 1309 and 1214. RACE 5.—3.40 p.m. THE KABAH STAKES. 3 furlongs. DIVISION 1. Ponies. H'cap. Owners. Jockeys. 1 Naga (285) 8 7 Messrs. Chan Qui Cho & Chan Qui Chong Awg. Damit 2. Hot-Spur II. 4 Messrs. Ong Gunn Teo (238)& Ong Guan Hin Tun Taw En 3. Unggut (85) 8. 2 Mr. Yong Thau Yin Usop Also ran :—Sintak Bulan 10.13 (336), Happy Boy 11.6.(48) and Sunshine 8.0 (48.) Naga, Unggut and Sintak Bulan led a closely bunched field. Hot-Spur came up in the straight to gain second place Naga, confidently ridden by Awang Damit, looked a winner all the way. 1/2 length, 1/2 length. Time :—43 1/5 seconds (Record). Tote:- $3.20. Cash Sweep:—1st prize $436 Ticket No. 578, ‘2nd prize $218 Ticket No. 1222, 3rd prize $109 Ticket No. 527, Starters each $36 Tickets Nos. 557, 758 and 1079. RACE 6 4.05 p.m. THE MATANG STAKES. 4 furlongs. DIVISION II. Ponies. H'cap. Owners. Jockeys. 1. Moonshine Jr. 8. 6 Messrs. Wee Kheng (522) Chiang & Ong Hap Leong Asing 2. Borneo Singa 8. 7 The Datu Bentara & (68) Mr. Kueh Siak Hong Tan Taw En 3. Tarzan (89) 8. 9 Mr. Phillip Soh Fu Awg. Damit Also ran:— Manis 8.11 (41), Chantek Manis 9.3 (24), and Mahjong 11 8.12 (161). (Non-runners :— Bintang 8.9 and Enterprise 8.9.) An accident at the starting post put Chantek Manis out of the race and his jockey, Medin. had to receive attention for a kick on the arm from Manis. Moonshine Jr., the favourite, who was reserved for this race, led all the way from a closely bunched field. 1 length, 1 length. Time :—1 minute 1 1/5 seconds. Tote :—$1.50. Cash Sweep :—1st prize $370 Ticket No. 688, 2nd prize $185 Ticket No. 517, 3rd prize $92 Ticket No. 409. Starters each $18 Tickets Nos. 890, 1048, 537, 569 and 588. RACE 7.—4.30 p.m. THE PENDING STAKES. 3 furlongs. DIVISION 111. Ponies H'cap. Owners. Jockeys. 1 Burong 9. 2 The Datu Bentara & Sultan (100) Mr. Kueh Sink Hong Lohor 2. Fed Up (38) 10. 2 Messrs. Phillip Soh, Fu & Lan Ah Yam Puyong 3. Rainbow (15) 10. 2 Mr. J. A. Lim Tan Taw En Also ran :—Rex 9.9 (66). Lucky Star 10.0 (64) and Kaswa (late Zam Zam) 8.7 (107.) A heavy downpour of rain immediately before the ponies left the paddock made the going heavy. Kaswa and Chabi Padi dwelt at the start and Burong Sultan, Fed Up and Rainbow were the only three in the picture. 1/2 length, 1/2 length. Time :—48 3/5 seconds. Tote $4.70. Cash Sweep :—1st prize $283 Ticket No. 195, 2nd prize $141 Ticket No. 635, 3rd prize $70 Ticket No. 165, Starters each $17 Tickets Nos. 480. 588, 637 and 496. RACE 8.—4.55 p.m. THE DIDO STAKES. I mile. OPEN. Ponies. H'cap. Owners. Jockeys. 1. Diana (218) 8. 5 Mr. Ong Hup Leong Usop 2. Jubilee (26) 9.10 The Datu Patinggi Medin 3. Chairman (91) 9. 7 Mr. Wee Kheng Chiang Asing Also ran .—Kijang 10.0 (54) and Silver Blaze 8.12 (172). (Non-runner :—Hot-Spur 9.8.) The heavy going favour of the light- weighted Diana who established nearly half a furlong lead and hung on to it all the way. 20 lengths, 2 lengths. Time :—2 minutes 14 3/5 seconds. Tote:- $2.30. Cash Sweep :—1st prize $245 Ticket No. 207, 2nd prize $123 Ticket No. 822, 3rd prize $61 Ticket No. 117. Starters each $20 Tickets Nos. 811, 154 and 937. RACE 9.—5.20 p.m. THE SUMMER HANDICAP. 5 furlongs. HORSES. Horses. H'cap Owners. Jockeys. 1. The Planter (200) 9. 7 Mr. H. E. Cutfield Lundu 2. Equctta (194) 9. 7 Mr. Ong Hap Leong Lohor Also ran :—Johnnie Walker 10.0 (228) and Lucky Star 9.7 (163). (Non-runner :—La Coloniale 9.7.) The Planter led all the way from Equctta and won without ever being extended. 2 lengths, 4 lengths. Time Tote $3.50. Cash Sweep 1st prize $232 Ticket No. 236, 2nd prize $116 Ticket No. 486, 3rd prize $58 Ticket No. 242. Starters each $29 Tickets Nos. 586 and 113. SECOND DAY. Monday, 10th July, 1939. Going Heavy. RACE 1.—2.00 p.m. THE PHLEGETHON STAKES. 5 furlongs. DIVISION 1. Ponies. H'cap. Owners. Jockeys 1. Unggut (36) 8. 1 Mr. Yong Thau Yin Usop 2. Happy Boy (154) 10. 8 The Datu Patinggi Medin 3. Naga (393) 8.10 Messrs. Chan Qui Cho & Chan Qui Chong Awg. Damit Also ran .—Sunshine 8.1 (93), Diana 10.0 (168), Hot-Spur 10.10 (258) and Sintak Bulan 10.2 (35). (Non-runners:—Kijang 9.7. Chairman 8.7 and Silver Blaze 8.11.) Sintak Bulan led Happy Bay. Naga and Unggut to the straight. Happy Boy and Naga took the lead from here but Unggut came up m the last furlong to win from a closely bunched field. 2 lengths, head. Time :—1 minute 21 2/5 seconds. Tote $28.40. Cash Sweep 1st prize $600 Ticket No. 1167, 2nd prize $300 Ticket No. 382, 3rd prize $150 Ticket No. 651, Starters each $21 Tickets Nos. 1563. 493. 1180, 1011. 429. 1307 and 1082. RACE 2.—2.25 p.m. THE PUTUSAN STAKES 6 furlongs. DIVISION II. Ponies. H'cap. Owners. Jockeys. 1. Chantek Manis (47) 8.10 The Datu Patinggi Samsudin 2. Mahjong II (193) 9. 2 Mr. Phillip Soh Fu Lundu 3. Borneo Singa 8.11 The Datu Bentara & (211) Mr. Kueh Sink Hong Tan Taw En Also ran :—Moonshine Jr. 9.0 (349), Diamond 8.4 (163) and Bintang 9.2 (164). (Non-runners :— Enterprise 8.6 and Tarzan 8.9.) Borneo Singa led Mahjong II and Bintang for three furlongs where Bintang came up with the leader but fell away again in the straight. Chantek Manis was always nicely placed and took the lead a furlong from home. 2 lengths, 1 length. Time :—1 minute 40 3/5 seconds Tote $21.50. Cash Sweep 1st prize $600 Ticket No. 440, 2nd prize $300 Ticket No. 180, 3rd prize $150 Ticket No 477. Starters each $80 Tickets Nos. 124, 1278, 1364, 473 and 1316. RACE 3.—2.50 p.m. THE BERLIDAH STAKES. 5 furlongs. DIVISION III. Ponies. H cap. Owners. Jockey. 1. Burong The Datu Bentara & Sultan (177) 9. 6 Mr. Kueh Sink Hong Lohor 2. Rex (240) 9.12 Messrs. Chan Teck Cheng & Wee Boon Chew Lundu 3. Rainbow (82) 9.10 Mr. J. A. Lim Tan Taw En Also ran :—Fed Up 9.12 (138). Chabi Padi 8.5 (131) and Kaswa 8.7 (173). Fed Up led Burong Sultan and Rainbow to the road with Rex tailed off. Burong Sultan and Rainbow went ahead in the straight and Rex came up so strongly that a few more yards would have given him the race. 1/2 length. 1 length. Time:- 1 minute 23 1/5 seconds. Tote $4.70. Cash Sweep:—1st prize $600 Ticket No. 134, 2nd prize $300 Ticket No. 182, 3rd prize $150 Ticket No. 1541, Starters each $50 Tickets Nos. 610. 894 and 826. RACE 4.—3.15 p.m. THE KEPPEL. STAKES. 1 mile. HORSES. Horses. H'cap. Owners. Jockeys. 1 . The Planter (449) 9.13 Mr. II. E. Cutfield Lundu 2 . La Coloniale (154) 9. 1 Mr. Yong Thau Yin Awg. Bakar Also ran —Johnnie Walker 9.7 (319). (Non- runners :—Equetta 9.7, Sky Raider 8.10 and Lucky Star 9.0.) The Planter was left several lengths. Johnnie Walker led La Coloniale for one furlong and then the order was reversed. The Planter caught the leaders after three furlongs and the field raced abreast to the road. In the straight The Planter took the lead followed by La Coloniale. Johnnie Walker came up strongly at the end but he could not catch the leaders. The Planter again won without being extended. 3 lengths, 1 length. Time :—1 minute 55 4/5 seconds. Tote $1.80. Cash Sweep :—1st prize $600 Ticket No. 1424, 2nd prize $300 Ticket No. 1033, 3rd prize $150 Ticket No. 1589, Starters each $50 Tickets Nos. 1428, 1447 and 180. RACE 5,—3.40 p.m. THE CHERMIN STAKES. 4 furlongs. DIVISION I. Ponies. H'cap. Owners. Jockeys. 1. Naga (160) 9.0 Messrs Chan Qui Cho & Chan Qui Chong Awg. Damit. 2. Unggut (125) 8. 7 Mr. Yong Thau Yin Usop 1 Sintak Merssrs. Wee Kheng Bulan (73) 10. 8 Chiang & Ong Hap Leong Awg. Bakar ran .—Happy Boy 10.12 (285), Hot-Spur 11-4 (56), Diana 10.7 (124) and Sunshine 8.1 (90.) Naga led Sintak Bulan and Hot-Spur to the straight. Here Hot-Spur fell away and Unggut came up into second place. 1 length, 2 lengths. Time :—I minute 2 seconds. Tote $5.10. Cash Sweep: 1st prize $560 Ticket No. 1278. ‘2nd prize $280 Ticket No. 1287. 3rd prize $140 Ticket No. 513. Starters each $35 Tickets Nos. 1037, 1011, 606 and 303. RACE 6. -4.05 p.m. THE SARAWAK STAKES 3 furlongs. DIVISION II. Ponies. H'cap. Owners. Jockeys. 1. Moonshine Messrs. Wee Kheng Jr. (303) 9.2 Chiang & Ong Hap Leong Asmg 2. Tarzan (153) 8. 9 Mr. Phillip Soh Fu Awg. Damit 3. Diamond (148) 8. 5. The Datu Patinggi Medin ran .—Borneo Singa 8.10 (80). Bintang 8.10 (44), Manis 8.1 (29) and Mahjong II 8.10 (111) (Non-runner) :—Enterprise 8.8. ) Moonshine led a closely bunched field all the way 1/2 length 1 length. Time : 46 2/5 seconds. Tote : - $2.50. Cash Sweep:—1st prize $480 Ticket No. 251. 2nd prize $240 Ticket No. 777, 3rd prize $120 Ticket No 794. Starters each $24 Tickets Nos. 369, 1001 .209 , 315 and 219 RACE 7.—4.30 p in. THE TURF CLUB STAKES 4 furlongs. DIVISION Hl. Ponies. Hcap. Owners. Jockeys 1. Rex (348) 9. 8 Messrs. Chan Teck Cheng & Wee Boon Chew Lundu 2. Burong The Datu Bentara & Sultan (174) in. 2 Mr. Kueh Sink Hong Lohor 3. Chabi Padi (62) 8. 7 Mr. Yong Than Yin Asing Also ran :—Rainbow 10.0 (36). Kaswa 8.10 (80) and Lucky Shir 9.10 (84). Non-runner : — Fed Up 10.2.) Burong Sultan got a flying start and led from Lucky Star. Rainbow and Chata Padi Lucky Star took the lead at the bend into the straight but fell away again and Rex once more came up from behind to win. 2 lengths, 1 length. Time :—1 minute 4 seconds Tote :—$2.00. Cash Sweep —1st prize $380 Ticket No. 342, 2nd prize $190 Ticket No. 1123. 3rd prize $95 Ticket No. 680, Starters each $24 Tickets NOS. 269. 1149. 513 and 1052 RACE 8,—4.55 p.m. THE SIOL STAKES 6 furlongs. HORSES. Horses. H'cap. Owners. Jockeys. 1. Equetta (386) 9. 7 Mr. Ong Hap Leong Lohor 2. Johnnie Messrs. Chan Qui Cho Walker (165) 9. 0 & Chan Qui Chong Aug. Daniil Also ran —Lucky Star 9.0 (161) and La Coloniale 9.0 (88). (Non-runners Sky Raider 8.12 and The Planter 10.0 ) Lucky Star led Equetta for three furlongs, the latter taking the lead at the road. Johnnie Walker came up strongly at the post but Equetta just hung on to his lead. 1/3 length, head. Time : — 1 minute 21 4/5 seconds. Tote : --$1.80. Cash Sweep : 1st prize $856 Ticket No. 772, 2nd prize $178 Ticket No. 435, 3rd prize $89 Ticket No. 215, Starters each $29 Tickets Nos. 188. 760 and 844. RACE 9.—5.20 p.m. THE BONGKAP STAKES. Round the Course (approx : I 1/3 miles). OPEN. Ponies. H'cap Owners. Jockeys. 1. Silver Messrs. Chan Qui Cho Blaze (325) 8.10 & Chan Qui Chong Awg. Damit 2. Chairman (307) 9. 5 Mr. Wee Kheng Chiang Asing 3. Kijang (270) 9.12 Messrs. Ong Hap Leong, Ong Eng Hin & Yong Thau Yin Lohor Also ran.—Jubilee 9.10 (99). (Non-runner: — Bintang 8.0.) Silver Blaze led Chairman and Kijang to the five furlong post with Jubilee (lame) some way behind. From here Silver Blaze. Chairman and Kijang raced abreast to the road where Silver Blaze had the advantage of the inside position at the bend into the straight and gained a slender lead which he hung on to till the end with Kijang and Chairman fighting out a c lose finish for second, place. 1 length, head. Time :—2 minutes 59 2/5 seconds. Tote :—$2.70. Cash Sweep — 1st prize $320 Ticket No. 101, 2nd prize $160 Ticket No. 549, -3rd prize $80 Ticket No. 478, Starters each $40 Tickets Nos. 648 and 503. UNLIMITED CASH SWEEP SPECIAL MEETING, 1989 . Club Notes. SARAWAK CLUB. TENNIS. The following are the results of the tennis tourna ment recently completed : — HANDICAP MEN’S SINGLES. First round.—Pim (scr.) beat Gascoigne (scr.) 6—3. 6—3. Bowyer a bye. McGIaddery ( + 30) beat Ward ( + 30 odd games + 15 even games) 7—5. 4—6. 6—4. Snelus a bye. Horn ( + 15) beat Lonsdale-Bryan (scr.) 6—2, 6—1. Kitto a bye. Gardner conceded a walk-over to Field. His Highness the Rajah Muda a bye. Second round. Bowyer (—30) conceded a walk over to Piru (scr.) after one day's play unfinished 7—9, 7—5. 5—5. Snelus (—15) beat McGIaddery ( +301 7—5, 4—6, 6—4. Kitto (—30 odd games— 15 even "games) beat Horn ( + 15) 7—5, 1—6. 6—1. Field (scr.) beat His Highness the Rajah Muda (—15) 7—5. 1—6, 6—4. Semi-final.—Pim (scr.) beat Snelus (—15) 6—0, 6—1. Kitto (—30 odd —15 even) beat Field (scr.) 6—4, 6—1. Final. Pim (scr.) beat Kitto (—30 odd —15 even) 4—6, 6—0, 6—2. HANDICAP MIXED DOUBLES. First round.—Mrs. Gascoigne and Gascoigne ( + 15) beat Mrs. Bowyer and Bowyer (—15) 6—1, 6—8, 6—1. Mrs. Kennedy and Ward a bye. Miss Patterson and Horn ( + 15 odd games +30 even games) beat Mrs. Field and Field (+ 15) 6—4, 6—3. Mrs. Trenchman and Kitto a bye. Semi-final.—Mrs. Kennedy and Ward ( + 15) conceded a walk-over to Mrs. Gascoigne and Gas coigne. Mrs. Trechman and Kitto (—15) beat Miss Patterson and Horn ( + 15 odd +30 even) 6—4. 1—6, 6—4. Final.—Mrs. Trechman and Kitto (—15) beat Mrs. Gascoigne and Gascoigne ( + 15) 6—4. 2—6, 6—4. Kuching Badminton Association. 2ND ANNUAL INTER-PARTY TOURNAMENT FOR H. H. THE RAJAH’S CHALLENGE CUP. RESULTS. 1st Round Constemus 3. Arrow "A’' 2. Chua Teck Hee, scr. beat Simon Hon, scr. 18— 13, (5—0), 15—12. Ong Poh Lim, scr. beat Abang + 1, 15—9, 5—15, 13—13 (5—4). Chan Mah Khiok +4 lust to Mathew Hon, scr. 13—15, 6—15. Teck Hee & Poh Lim, scr. beat S. Hon & P. Chan + 4, 20—20 (3—2), 20—20 (3—0). Mah Khiok & Pin Chee +2 lost to M. Hon & Abang. scr. 17—21 19—19 (5—3), 11—21. Bian Seng 5. Constabulary 0. Seng Swee, scr. beat Hassan +8, 15—8, 15—9. Peng Moh, scr. beat Bujang +8, 15—9, 14—14 (3—1). Khiok Hian, scr. beat Gani +8, 15—8, 15—10. Boo Chiang & Lai Soon, scr. beat Essen & Bujang +6, 21—8, 21—7. Bok Hec & Ah Chew, scr. beat Phillips & S. Harry +6, 21—8, 21—7. Arrow "B" 5. Sarawak Club 0. Salleh, scr. beat Pim+4,15—8, 15—8. William Chew, scr. beat Snelus, scr. 15—4,15—12. Morgan Chai. scr. beat Kitto, +4, 15—5, 13—13 (5—0). Andrew Hon & Salleh, scr. beat Pim & Birt +4, —8, 20—20 (3—0). Halem & Francis Tan, scr. beat Horn & Chater 4-2, 21—17, 19—19 (5—2). 2nd Round: Constemus 3. Bian Seng 2. Teck Hee, scr. beat Khiok Hian, scr, 15—8, 4—15, 15—5. Poh Lim, scr. beat Boo Chiang+ 4, 15—6. 15—4. Hoon Yaw +4 lost to Seng Swee, scr. 13—13 (1—5), 11—15. Teck Hee & Poh Lim, scr. beat Khiok Hian & Lai Soon, scr. 21—6, 21—3. Pin Cb.ee & Mah Khiok +4 lost to Bok Hee & Seng Swee, scr. 21—17, 21—18. Arrow “B" 5. February 0. Morgan Chai +4 beat Lian Teck, scr. 15—8, 14—14 (1—3), 15—6. Salleh, scr. beat Bok Gee, 9—15. 15—-10, 15—5. William Chew, scr. beat Lucas Tan, scr. 15—4, 15—2. Salleh & A. Hon 4-2 beat Bok Gee & Lian Teck, scr. 20—20 (3—0), 17—21, 19—19 (5—1). Morgan Chai & Win. Chew +2 beat Seng Chiang & Foh Ling, scr. 21—13, 21—18. Final. Constemus 4. Arrow "B" 1. Teck Hee, scr. beat Salleh +4, 15—8, 15—7. Poh Lim, scr. beat Morgan Chai +4, 15—4, 15—7. Hoon Yaw, scr. lost to Wm. Chew 4-4, 13—13 (3—5), 11—15. Teck Hee & Poh Lim, scr. beat Win. Chew & M. Chai +6, 21—18, 19—19 (5—0). Mah Khiok & Pin Chee, scr. beat Salleh & A. Hon, scr. 21—7, 21—13. Second Division News. JUNE. On the 21st Sergeant-Major Bait, Corporal Eng- kok and Upriver Agent Matsalleh arrived at Lubok Antu with a party of nineteen rebels, including women and children. The party included Mikai, Unieng, Pong, Nyandang. Anggau, Kana, Jugai and Pungga. Ijau and Ajon escaped but it is hoped to bring them in in the near future. Third Division news. JUNE His Highness the Rajah Muda visited Kanowit on the 15th. He received an address of welcome at the Fort aud visited the Mission and the Convent. The Officer-in-Charge, Kapit, on a visit to Belaga, took with him his wireless set—the first one to he heard there. It greatly interested the inhabitants of (he kampong and bazaar, also the Kayans who had come down to pay tax. Fourth Division News. JUNE. On the 18th a small open sailing boat capsized on the bar at Miri. It was being sailed by two Austra lian gentlemen, Messrs. Corrie and Potter, who are attempting to return to Australia from Singapore via Saigon. 