THURSDAY. JANUARY 2nd, 1941.
Engagement,
PEACH—HOUGHTON.—The engagement has recently been announced between the Rev. S. J. E. Peach, of Uitenhage, C.P. South Africa, and Miss Kathleen Houghton, of St. Mayv's School, Kuching, only daughter of Mr. and Mrs. F. Houghton, of Upminster, Essex, England.
DECEMBER, 1940.
We wish our readers a Happy and Prosperous New Year.
His Excellency the Governor of North Borneo left for Singapore on December 12th and returned to that State at the end of the month During his absence the Hon’ble Mr. C. F. C. Macaskie has been Officer Administering the Government
Our readers will remember that Mr. Ma caskie was appointed Government Secretary, Sarawak, in September, 1932. relinquishing the appointment in November, 1934, on the termination of the period of his secondment from the North Borneo Government Service.
We welcome back to Sarawak Mrs. C. Pitt Hardacre after her recent operation in the Singapore General Hospital. We are glad to see that Mrs. Pitt Hardacre has quite recovered from her illness
Mr. C. F. Birt returned on December 16th from furlough, which he spent in Great Britain.
We congratulate Commander T. E. Halsey, His Highness the Tuan Muda's son-in-law, who has been awarded the D.S.O.
We hear that Sir Percy F. Cunynghame’s home in Onslow Square was badly damaged by a bomb and that he himself has been knocked down by a taxi in the blackout. We are glad to learn, however, that Sir Percy was not seriously injured.
Mrs. W. E. Pepys arrived in Kuching on December 28th on a short visit and is staying with Mr and Mrs. L D Kennedy.
We welcome back to Sarawak Mr. and Mrs. A. W. G. Gibson, who arrived on December 30th. They spent their furlough in Great Britain and returned via Australia.
We hear that Mr. P. M. Adams is under orders for foreign service somewhere in the Middle East.
THE POINT OF SACRIFICE.
His Highness the Rajah, in his Proclamation of the 14th December, has interpreted the desire of officers of his Senior Service to make, at this time, a personal sacrifice, Sarawak s contributions to
funds devoted to the general expenses of the Imperial Government have been striking and have been rightly admired by others. This new decision to help the Imperial Government, by means of a tax on the salaries of British European officers in His Highness’ Service, has been directly conceived by a spontaneous desire of those officers to make their contributions more personal, and so to express, in some small way, their desire to give what they can even to the point of personal sacrifice.
Magnificent though our efforts have so far been, it cannot yet be said that we have, ay of us, reached that point where we can compare ourselves, and our conditions of life, with those of he people of Britain.
A short time ago the Chancellor of the chequer, during a speech at Glasgow, pointed out at it was plain that taxation alone would not be sufficient to pay for the whole cost of the war. There was a gap,” he said, “between income and expenditure which must be filled by means other than thantation.
In the main the gap must be bridged by tie people of Britain saving and lending every pound an every penny that they could spare, not convenienly but to the point of real sacrifice.”
We would do well to bear in mind that statement. Heavy though taxation now is in Britain, its people are still being urged to save and end wh they can spare. Furthermore, those lons must not be
made conveniently but to the point of sacrifice
How many of us in Sarawak can say tat the imposition of the ten per cent, tax on our slaries will take us beyond the stage of personal con venience to the point of real sacrifice? How many of us can say that we have yet reached the print of personal inconvenience in our contributions to war funds? While we continue to five ourselves a they were lived before this war, while we continue to enjoy those comforts and luxuries that we have commenced to regard as necessities of life, far so long must we admit that, far from caching the point of sacrifice, we have not yet evenpasse the stage of convenience.
It is a well-known fact, proved by th war, that the average man or woman is prepared o undergo extreme personal danger if that danger shared by his fellows. Never before has heroism and personal disregard for danger been shown by so mny men, women and children. — heroism. not our in the face of physical danger, but to the point o personal sacrifice. We all know how heavy taxation now is in Britain, and yet we read of the manificent voluntary efforts by individuals, by towns, and by cities to raise further contributions towrd the enormous cost of the war.
To what can we ascribe this extraordi ry and unflagging resolution on the part of our peple at home? Surely the will to win must arise nt only from the sure knowledge of the righteousness of our Cause, but also from the knowledge of the euality of that sacrifice demanded from all for th sole purpose in view—ultimate victory. For, jus as a man can face, more readily, physical danger if he knows that that danger is shared by many, also is he prepared deliberately to calculate, a to undergo, personal sacrifice if he knows that at sacrifice is equally shared.
Wc are fighting not only against that mous us political theory called Naziism and all that it m ns, but we are fighting, too, in the belief that wl is rotten in our own house will be up-rooted. W re fighting for a better world in which each one us can do his part, and in which ‘‘the obsolete but ns on the coat-tails of rule, which serve no purpose nt to be continually coming off” will be fin ly eradicated.
And so, let us not preen ourselves in any rs- directed pride on what we have done yesterday. st us look to to-morrow and say to ourselves, “e must be prepared to give even more until we five reached, and passed, the point of real persoal sacrifice.”
THE PEOPLE’S INHERITANCE. Fifty Years Ago.
(From the Sarawak Gazette of November 1, 1890.)
“Recent large concessions of huge tracts of
country in Sambas, by the native Rajah are rapidly
causing depopulation of that already sparselv inhabited country. The people are coining in large numbers, accompanied by their families, over the frontier and are seeking in Sarawak some land for farming which they may safely settle on without the fear of expulsion by the employes of a company which may have been formed to seek gold or plant tobacco. They are loud in their complaints at having to leave land which they and their ancestors worked and regarded as their own for generations; the fact that these people are leaving in numbers and bringing their all with them proves that their complaints are not groundless.
"It is strange that the Netherlands India Government should allow a native Rajah, the Sultan of Sambas, who is nominally under the control of the Dutch Government, recklessly to sell his territory to foreigners. What will a Malay Rajah not part with for the sake of a few dollars?
“Concessions of land for planting tobacco or working gold, in these regions, and even in British North Borneo with its almost similar climate, have recently been shewn to be profitable speculations only to the original purchasers and the unfortunates who are led, by artfully written prospectuses, to invest their money in companies to work such con cessions have by now learned to their sorrow that the land will scarcely provide them with any dividends though it has unlimited capabilities for swallowing their capital.
“Tobacco planting has been proved to be a very doubtful industry in Sarawak and in British North
Borneo in which latter country numbers of com panies have already failed and those remaining are merely kept going by raising fresh capital or by amalgamating with some other company less badly off than themselves. Concessions worked on these lines cannot do any permanent good to any country; except that a certain amount of money is circulated for a short period amongst the natives, which gives a false impetus to native trade. As we have said above, the only real gainers are those who launch the company in London or Hong Kong.
“The land system in Borneo and the Eastern Archipelago should be worked on the same lines as in Australia and. we believe, Canada, where land is sold for special purposes and all large tracts for cultivation or pasturage instead of being handed over at a nominal price to speculators should be leased at a fair and judicious rental, the State remaining the real owner.
“The concession system, which has been in vogue in the East during the last few years is simply a game of pitch and toss between speculators and the vital interests of native countries governed by native sovereigns, and this should either be stopped or strictly regulated. That a native Rajah should sell to foreigners land belonging to the inhabitants of a country, without providing fair compensation to these inhabitants, is no more right than that the Government of England should sell an English forest and other land to a Frenchman. What would the law and public opinion say of such an act? But this is what is being generally done in the Eastern Archipelago.”
Twenty Five Years Ago. (From the Sarawak Gazette of September 1, 1915.)
Extract from His Highness the Rajah’s speech at the Council Negri meeting held on 17th August, 1915.
To turn to another point and a most important one which the Rajah stated had been occupying his mind for a long time, and he now addressed the assembly hoping they would listen to what he had to say to recollect his words and endeavour to call them to mind when he was no more. He said he
would make what he had in his mind known to his successor or successors, but he felt he could only’ be responsible during the time of his life. He said he had lived in this country now 60 years for the
greater part of the time as Rajah. He felt as they
did in every way regarding the present and future
tor the existence and welfare of the inhabitants. He thought after so tong a period that they would allow him to open his mouth and give his opinion truthfully, and he drew their attention to others that may appear after his time with soft and smiling countenances to deprive them of what solemnly and truly he considered to be their right, and that is The Land. It is their inheritance on which their Daging Darah, flesh and blood exists, the source of their self existence, their herta pesaka which if once lost, no amount of money could ever recover. It is this cultivation-of the land by them selves or by those who live in the country that is so important. Cultivation by those who are strangers who carry the value of the products out of the country to enrich shareholders is undesirable. Such products should be realised by the industry of the inhabitants and for their benefit. Unless this advice is followed the inhabitants will lose their birthright which will be taken from them by strangers and speculators who will become masters and owners while they themselves, the people of the soil, will be thrown aside and become coolies and outcasts, and proofs of what he stated may be produced in countries not far distant. It is this danger that the Rajah warned them against. It was his desire that they and their progeny become the holders and owners of what is or should be their just inheritance and so long as he was their Ruler he would consider it his -solemn duty to defend their rights and interests, but after his life the future would remain with them to be independent and free citizens or be a humbled and inferior class without pride in themselves or in their race. They must choose between the two, the owner or master on one side or the dependent and coolie on the other. It is for them to see that whoever rules this land, that the land is not granted away to strangers,”
And Now.
At a time when the world is once again in the turmoil of war, when individual rights are ignored and whole nations are being enslaved by the mad ambition of a few dictators, when life itself seems insecure and the future hidden in the mist of uncertainty, it is right that we, in whose care have been entrusted the lives and welfare of the people of Sarawak, should bear in mind the sacredness of that trust. Nothing that may happen elsewhere should ever, for one moment, divert us from the course that we have taken from the day that James Brooke arrived in this country.
Twenty-five years ago, in 1915, when England was once again at war with Germany, Rajah Charles Brooke called a meeting of his Council Negri and spoke to them his last words, knowing that he had not many more years to live. As we have seen, he reminded the people that the land is their inheritance, on which their daging darah, their flesh, and their blood existed, and which, if once lost, no amount of money could ever recover.
Fifty years ago, in. 1890. this Gazette emphasised the evil effects resulting from the grants of large ooncessions of land in Sambas by the native Rajah, concessions which rapidly caused depopulation of that country and drove numbers of people over the frontier into Sarawak where they could settle with out the fear of foreign expulsion.
We believe that this question is as vital now as it was then, and we believe that the defence of the rights and interests of the natives of Sarawak remains for us as real and sacred a duty as it was for our forefathers;
For the rights of the natives of Sarawak spring from the soil of their land. And the land is their flesh and blood, their birthright, and their inheritance.
MAKE THIS YOUR NEW YEAR RESOLUTION.
BUY WAR SAVING CERTIFICATES
EVERY DOLLAR YOU LEND TO BRITAIN WILL ADD TO THE VAST INCREASE OF STRENGTH BRITAIN IS STEADILY BUILDING UP TO SMASH HITLER. LEND WHAT YOU SAVE FROM YOUR INCOME OR SALARY TO BRITAIN BY BUYING WAR
SAVINGS CERTIFICATES.
War Savings Certificates are sold in denominations of $15. $75. $150, and $750 each, and they carry 3 per cent, compound interest. Your savings arc growing all the time1. At the end of 10 years, for every $15 invested you will get $20 in return. If, however, you wish to draw the money before 10 years, you can cash your War Savings Certificates at any time. On Certificates cashed after the first year, you will receive the principal in full, plus compound interest at the rate of 3
per cent. War Savings Certificates are guaranteed by the Straits Settlements Government. There is no safer security.
WHAT BETTER GIFT TO YOUR FAMILY—YOUR FRIENDS—FOR THE NEW YEAR THAN WAR SAVINGS CERTIFICATES !
Every dollar counts in this Fight for Your Freedom and Security, and every dollar saved can become part of another Bomber or Fighter, another Gun or Bomb, with which to knock out Hitler.
CALL AT ANY POST OFFICE IN SARAWAK FOR FULL PARTICULARS OF THIS GILT-EDGED INVESTMENT. SAVE REGULARLY AND LEND TO BRITAIN TO WHOM WE OWE THE SECURITY AND PROSPERITY WE ENJOY IN SARAWAK TO-DAY.
The Laughter of Fools.
You all know the unfortunate jester who, when suffering from a distinct hangover, whose wife had gone off with an entire stranger, whose son had been captured by Red Indians and subjected to certain sacrificial rites loo domestic to mention here, and whose daughter—well, perhaps the less said about that the better—(Oh ! 1 think he’d also lost his ticket and somebody had kicked his dog), was taunted by his Royal Master with “Do you know, you’re paid to be funny?"
That, of course, may be called an exaggerated case, but I certainly did feel rather like the jester when the Editor of this paper asked me to write him something bright and sparkling. In these days nothing much sparkles, including the disgust ing soda water in the Club, and brightness is generally left to the sweet young things. Never theless, a certain number of us do see the funny side of things in the short intervals between our efforts to beat the Nazis.
It’s quite all right if you can laugh at yourself.
Quite a lot can, but, believe me, quite a lot can't' it is true, 1 believe, that most of our English
humour consists in laughing at the misfortunes of
others. Very silly, it sounds, but very true. A man
sits on his hat, someone slips up on a banana skin.
There are hundreds of similar examples. One of
the funniest things I ever saw was a most haughty
dame who had lost one of her very high heels. It
was in London, no taxi was in sight, and the rage
and humiliation of the lady were indescribable as
she hobbled along.
In mv own family (I am afraid that we are a ribald lot) we still see the humour of events which happened, oh. I don't know how many years ago !
Wheu the nervous curate swallowed one of my
mothers set of hand-painted d'oyleys with his
strawberries and cream ; when I smacked the arti ficial cheek-pads out of one of my aged grand-aunts'
face; when, during the last War, one of mv aunts
stepped out of the remains of a hansom cab (yes,
really!) which had been shattered by a Jerry bomb,
killing the horse and wounding the driver, and
Calmly asked a horrified police constable to find her
another hansom as she never thought motor vehicles were quite safe !
You may think (if you have read as far as this) that this is sheer waste of paper and, anyhow, what is it all leading to ?
I am assured by the Printers that there is plenty of paper for this article, and all I want to emphasise is the need to keep a laugh or two handy. I sav this with the full knowledge that the amount of misery and disaster which the people of our Country* are enduring now is not in the strict sense of the word “a laughing matter." Yet, oddly enough, it is—and as this article (I hardly like to give it such a grand title) will be published at New Year, whilst we make every effort by work, money and concentration to finish the enemy' once and for all, let us not forget to laugh at things perhaps serious, sometimes trivial, and frequently ridiculous.
O.F.
THERE’S A NAZI AIRFIELD IN ENGLAND.
BY NOEL MONKS.
Daily Mail Air Correspondent.
I have just returned from a visit to a Nazi airfield—in England. At least, it was easy to imagine I was on a Nazi ‘drome, because there were more Nazi aircraft in sight than our own. And they all weren’t in pieces, either.
Apart from more modern types, there were Junker ! 87’s and 88's, and Dornier 17’s, a little the worse for wear after coming up against R.A.F. fighters but mostly whole. Finally, there was a large scrap-heap where Nazi machines of all types were lying about in tangled piles. None of these would ever fly again in its original entity, but undamaged pieces of the ‘planes were being skilfully assembled by R.A.F. mechanics into the less-damaged hulks
of Nazi machines.
This particular aerodrome is a graveyard of
blasted Nazi hopes. Here the “mighty” German Air Force is represented by six of its foremost types of warplanes, but none of them will ever fly for the Reich again. All had met their masters in the R.A.F. Hurricanes and Spitfires that had
shot them down.
With these types of aircraft, Goring was going
to blast a way for Hitler's invasion of Britain. Admittedly, some of them were good—but not g kxl enough for the combination of British work manship and R.A.F. pilots. Some of the gadgets in them were new to us, but they didn't avail the Nazis anything. Down came the machines, gadgets and all, once our eight-gun fighters got them lined up.
In one of the hangars I visited were a number of
Goring's “terror bombers,” the Ju. 87’s and 88’s.
The only terrible thing about (hem now is the
mess our fighters made of them. These machines
—the first a single-engined aircraft and the other
twin-engined—caused havoc in Poland and Holland, and smashed the way for the hordes of Nazi
troops that poured into France. That was before
they met up with the R.A.F. in a big way. As
an R.A.F. official told me the other day, “Kent is
practically knee-deep in them.”
One of the R.A.F. mechanics working on them
said to me : “Aye, they don’t send many of these
over now."
One Ju. 88 in another hangar had a plate on it
showing that it was only delivered from the factory
on September 7. 1940. It was shot down in Kent
on September 15, the day the R.A.F. got 185
enemy machines. It was a. brand-new machine,
well made, of the very best materials, and hardly
damaged.
A number of poor old Messerschmitt 109'S stood,
dejected-looking, in a corner of a hangar. When
the war started these were the cannon-firing
machines that were going to “role the skies on the
Western Front,’ as Uncle Hermann put it.
The Hurricane lighter squadrons attached to the
Advanced Air Striking Force in Franco shot them
down like clay pigeons. They were such a flop
that early this year the Messerschmitt 110
appeared on the scene. Now here was a good
fighter, with its twin engines and increased
armament.
The C ,-in-C. of the R.A.F. in France offered
a dinner to the Hurricane pilot who brought down
the first Me. 110. It was won by Flight Lieut.
Walker, of No. 1 Squadron stationed at Vassincourt, who was leading a patrol with two
sergeant-pilots when the first Hurricane versus
Me. 110 clash took place near Metz. Because of
the team work of his sergeants, Flight Lieut.
Walker was able to get on the tail of one of these
new Nazi fighters and—wham !—down it came.
The gallant young officer refused to accept the
C.-in-C. s dinner unless the two sergeants were
included. They were, and Air Marshal Str A. 8
Barratt sent a special plane to fly them to Paris.
Since then, hundreds of Me. 110’s have fallen
to the R.A.F. Those I saw yesterday were
improved types from the first batch tried out on
the Western Front, and a young R.A.F. pilot who
has been flying them told me that they were
“very, very good machines." But again, I say,
they aren’t good enough for the combination of
British workmanship and R.A.F. pilots.
On one Me. 110 1 saw 11 miniature R.A.F.
distinguishing circles and two French Air Force
circles painted on the rudder. Thirteen had been
an unlucky number for that Nazi! I also saw on
the rudder of an Me. 10!) 16 strokes with the
letter I1
after them (presumably Poles) and eight
strokes with F (French' at the end. The letter
B wasn’t there.
The prize Nazi aircraft at this R.A.F. ‘drome
is a big twin-engined Heinkel III. bomber, intact
to the last rivet—Goring’s new “pride,” I was
told about this : “Quite a decent ship. Made of
the very best materials. Easy to fly, but "with
certain disadvantages that our bombers haven’t
got.” It has more instrument dials than our
bombers, and before it could be flown an interpreter wrote English labels for them. Some very
interesting gadgets indeed were found in the
bomber, particularly in the navigation line.
A further interesting piece of equipment
salvaged from another Heinkel! 111. was a portable
radio set complete with a kite for taking up an
aerial. When operated it flashes an automatic
SOS on certain wavelengths. The set was part
of a portable dinghy equipment, and as it is the
only one of its kind found in any German aircraft
shot down over Britain, the R.A.F. presume that
some “big shot” must have been in the crashed
'plane. As the radio engineer said to me : “Pity
it wasn’t Goring.”
The total value of the Nazi ‘planes 1 saw. not
including the bits and pieces of 'planes on the
scrap-heap. was well over £1,000,000. let they
totalled only one squadron of the 140 Nazi
squadrons shot down over Britain since August II.
This choice exhibition of Nazi aircraft that can
still fly is in the care of the Ministry of Aircraft
Production. It must gladden Lord Beaverbrook’s
heart to see it.—Daily Mail. 3.10.40.
AUXILIARY FIREMAN CROSS
IS CARRYING ON.
Reginald Cross, of the Auxiliary Fire Service,
went out with the brigade yesterday to tackle
incendiary bombs at a south-east town.' No man
in the brigade worked with greater keenness.
The day before, a high explosive bomb fell on
his home. It killed his wife. It killed his twelveyear-old daughter. It seriously injured his son,
aged ten. Auxiliary Fireman Cross was away
from home, on duty. Later he was told what had
happened. Later still, he learned that his son had
died in hospital.
He said to his friends in the fire brigade :
“I’ve just got to carry on.” Yesterday he
reported for duty as usual.—Daily Express, 7.10.40.
A.A. GUNNERS IN TRAINING.
How the crews of anti-aircraft guns are trained
for their exacting work was illustrated on a visit
to a Roval Artillery school in Wales where
instructors are trained and experimental work in this form of defence against air attack is carried
on. Of particular interest was the special work
which women of the A.T.S. are undertaking.
At this school the stall specializes in every type
of anti-aircraft weapon and prediction instrument.
The engagement of aeroplanes by anti-aircraft fire
offers special difficulties, chief of which are the
height of the object and the speed at which it
travels. The predictor helps the gunlayer to overcome the second of these two difficulties, and
provided, that the instrument can be fed with the
correct height, it will tell the men at the gun the
distance ahead of the aeroplane to which the shell
should be fired so that aeroplane and projectile
coincide as nearly as may be necessary to score a
hit.
The weapons seen in action against a target
towed by the R.A.F. were the 40 mm. quick-firer,
better known as the Bofors, whose two-pounder
predicted fire was directed against a target flying
at 1.000 ft. This gun is employed against lowflying aircraft and the dive-bomber in particular.
It Is difficult to provide the gunners in training
with targets to give a realistic dive-bombing effect,
and all practice firing must be lateral. The
Bofors gun was seen to place 12 rounds close to
one target and it was also seen in action against a
towed vessel supposed to represent a tank. but
because conditions made it necessary for this target
to be engaged at a much longer range than that
at which the gun would probably open fire in actual
warfare, it was not easy to assess the probable
damage which would have been inflicted on the
armoured vehicle.
The medium A.A, gun is the mobile 3.7in.,
which operates at a greater height than the Bofors.
This gun has all the details for laying worked out
by a predictor, while the height, of Lire target is
supplied by another instrument. The target
engaged on this occasion was flying at 5,600 ft.
but when towed targets are engaged at the greater
altitude the safety margin for the aeroplane is
sometimes a factor that creates a handicap. The
static 4.5in. Vickers is the heaviest anti-aircraft
gun in British service, and it was obvious that the
larger projectile, with its considerably greater
explosive force when fired at a range of 6,000 ft.,
inflicted proportionately the greatest damage of all
the weapons seen in action.
By means of the Kine theodolite a record is
made of every round fired, its proximity to the
target, and its probable effect. Students are thus
able to analyse the practical side of their work and
discover errors made in prediction and laying
generally.
An interesting feature of this complicated
apparatus, worked in pairs from a central controlling table, is that it is operated entirely by
women of the A.T.S. They worked without male
supervision and they give instruction to the male
student. Both the officer and her warrant officer
wear the white cap hands of the artillery instructor
and the detachment wears the white lanyard of
the Royal Artillery.
Already it is chilly work standing on the exposed
flat behind the gun positions, but the women, none
of whom has had previous experience with surveying instruments, like it and carry out their duties
with exacting thoroughness. Their work does not
end wtih a shoot, for afterwards they must take
home the records they have made and devote the
evening to working out the results for the classes
on the following morning.—The Times, 1.10.40.
DECLINE OF FASCISM.
Perhaps the most striking paradox which this war
has yet produced is the disastrous effect of the down
fall of France upon the fortunes of Italian Fascism.
Given the gangster mentality of Mussolini, it
seemed obvious that France’s emergency would be
taken as Italy’s opportunity. With France defeated
Il Duce would collect the plunder—Corsica, Nice,
Jibuti and possibly a good deal more besides—and
a great Fascist empire, linked together by the
exclusively Italian Mediterranean, would be permanently established.
The initial fallacy in the Italian’s calculation
was that he could secure a rich prize at a bargain
rate when dealing with a fellow gangster who was
stronger and more cunning than himself. Instead
of fighting France when she was still formidable,
he waited around the corner while the decisive blows
were being struck then—running up at the last
moment—expected to be allowed to rifle at least,
one victim's pockets. It was not only contemptible
but also a very risky game, for all depended on
whether the real conqueror of France would find it
convenient to pay an excessive reward fur assistance
which had been of little account.
As things turned out he has not found it convenient and in consequence the prestige of Fascism
upon which the continued existence of the regime
depends is being rapidly undermined by humiliation
after humiliation. There is worse to come.
When France Tav stunned and prostrate after the
military debacle there appeared to be few, if any,
obstacles to hinder Germany from exploiting French
resources, carving up the French Empire and gaining control of the French Navy. Laval was a
willing tool, Petain preferred “co-operation" with
an orderly dictatorship to a return to party-politics
and the nation was sunk in apathy and despair.
Two new factors then began to complicate the
situation. The aged marshal began to demur when
Laval on Hiller's behalf started to press for the
only sort of “cooperation" between the weak and
the strong that the Germans understand, namely,
total surrender and prostitution. That in itself
was serious enough, for Laval is hated in France
while Petain is deeply respected; but a second
factor emerged which transformed the position.
The decisive victory of the British against the German air offensive in August and September,
followed by the German failure to launch their
invasion of Britain, by the steady growth of British
land and sea power in the Eastern Mediterranean
and virtual unanimity in the United States on
giving all possible material help to the allies, gave
rise to the dawning of a hope among the French
that Britain might he able to survive and ultimately
conquer the power which had crushed them. The
accumulation ol reliable evidence indicates that this
hope is now shared by some eighty per cent, of the
population of France and that pro-British sentiment
is growing in direct ratio with this new-found
confidence.
Hitler has a problem of increasing difficulty on
his hands. It behoves him to “go easy" both in
his treatment of Metropolitan France and the
French Colonial Empire. In occupied France German troops have earned the hitter epithet of “les
mangetout" (the eat-alls) and resentment against the
wholesale stripping of the country of raw materials
and foodstuffs may be expected to grow as winter
advances. In dealing with the French Empire
Hitler is obliged to proceed with even greater circumspection. General Weygand is in French
North Africa and is known to be even more opposed
than Petain to a “peace" with Germany which
would sell these territories to the enemy. A false
step here might well provoke an explosion in
France itself which would destroy the Vichy
Government as an instrument of Nazi policy and
imperil German plans in North Africa.
The immediate German reaction has been to
restrain Spanish ambitions with regard to Tangier
and French Morocco (which incidentally weakens
Germany’s efforts to draw Spain into the war) and
also to withdraw German support of Italy’s
territorial claims against France.
Mussolini accordingly found himself in the
position of having dragged an unwilling country
into an unpopular war which is inflicting increasing
privations upon the people for the sake of gains
which have been snatched away in the hour of
victory. What could be more damaging to Fascist
prestige at home and abroad than the humiliating
fact that Germany finds it more valuable to placate
Vichy than Rome?
The cold fact is that Italy has ceased to be an
asset of any considerable importance to the Reich
and is rapidly becoming a liability. As long as
France was fighting the Italians rendered valuable
service by holding down three French army corps
in the south. Alter Germany had defeated France
single-handed Mussolini could still have justified his
existence as an Axis partner by using his navy and
army in Libya to drive the British from the Eastern
Mediterranean. The navy was left in port and
Graziani, after months of careful preparations, has
not only not launched his attack on Egypt, but has
suffered a very serious defeat at the hands of the
British. Finally the attempt to secure cheap compensation by overrunning Greece has produced the
worst humiliation of all, resounding defeat at the
hands of a nation which was regarded as militarily
insignificant. How long will the Italian people
continue to endure a regime which (at the best) can
offer only survival at the price of a Rumanian subservience to the German master?
DUTCH INDIES’ £27,500,000
FOR DEFENCE.
The proposed Budget for 1941 of the Netherlands East Indies provides for expenditure of nearly
£55,000,000, half of which is ear-marked for
strengthening of defences.
The Budget is twice as high as in normal times
but the heavy war expenditure will be covered by
increased taxation on private incomes and an exporttax on raw materials. The soundness of the Indies’
financial system is shown by the fact that it has
not been deemed necessary to economise on the
social and economic services, on salaries, or to float
loans.
A group of American journalists, who recently
visited the Indies, were most impressed by what
they saw of the territory’s ever-increasing defensive
powers. The Government has taken over all
armament production. £10,000,000 is to be spent
on American planes, and a purchasing committee
has been formed in the United States.
More than 200 planes will be delivered in 1940
and 1941, The loyalty and patriotism of the native
population has been made so abundantly clear that
a native militia is to be raised, which will bring
the strength of the army in Java, the most important island, to 100,000 men. Natives are being
trained as pilots, navigators, and observers, and
there is already a corps of native aircraft engineers.
The American journalists saw them assembling
Curtiss P-36 chaser planes, and over-hauling Lockheed and Glenn-Martin bombers. The navy has
ordered 100 Consolidated and Vought-Sikorsky
bombers. Many giant bombers, capable of a
sustained flight of 2,000 miles', fully loaded, are
patrolling the enormous coastline of the East Indies.
They operate from numerous secret bases, and need
return to their main base only once in three months.
The American visitors saw part of the East Indian
Naval Squadron,, consisting of modern cruisers,
destroyers, submarines, minelayers and gun-boats.
They also saw the hundred German-made Dornier
bombers, and their huge workshops, manned by
native engineers and mechanics.—Sunday Times.
OUR FIGHTERS ARE
TOUGH STUFF.
Here is the story of a Spitlire which, after probably destroying a Dornier 215 and a Messerschmitt
109, was in turn attacked by six more Messerschnitt
109's when only a few miles from the French coast.
The pilot had no chance but to cut and run.
"I reached the clouds,” he said, “and started for
the English coast. I was hit about three feet
forward of the tail unit, on the starboard side, which
caused a slit three feet long and cut a ruddercontrol cable. At live miles from my base I
received a shell through the crank case, which broke
the throttle control. The engine caught fire and I
switched off. I again switched on at about 1,000
feet to enable me to reach the coast. The engine
was blazing and flames and coolant liquid were
tilling the cockpit. The engine stopped over the
coast area, and 1 put down the wheels and flaps and
made a safe landing at my aerodrome.”
And this is what a Hurricane did after it had
been hit by cannon and machine-gun fire from a
Messerschmitt 109 and half of its right aileron had
been shot oil. ”1 started for home,” the pilot, said,
“and saw a Junkers 88 being attacked. 1 got in
one burst and then hurried off while three other
Hurricanes attacked it. He caught fire and crashed
to the ground. 1 climbed up again somehow and
saw a Messerschmitt 110. I joined in the attack
and got in three good bursts, one of which caused
smoke to pour out. Another Hurricane also fired.
We were down to about 500 feet. I fired again as
he was coming towards me. He turned and crashed
at a Surrev aerodrome. 1 landed there too. and
left my Hurricane to he repaired.—.Manchester
Guardian.
News From Malaya.
NON-EUROPEAN AIRMEN.
Mention has previously been made of the regular
units, naval and military, open to Malays, with
an abundance of lusty recruits offering. Now
Eurasians are being given the chance to serve as
soldiers in the A.A. arm of the artillery, alongside
and on precisely the same terms and conditions as
British soldiers. The latest development is the
opening of the Air Force to recruits of any race,
with the one condition that they are British
subjects. They must first pass through a Flying
School which has been opened. Far more men
(including some Europeans have submitted applications than can at first be accepted.
R. A. A. F.
Units of the Royal Australian Air Force,
equipped with modern fighters and bombers of outstanding performance, are now stationed in Malaya.
They form, powerful reinforcements, greatly
strengthening the defences. This is the first time
that any Australian forces have been stationed in
Malaya.
TIMBER INDUSTRIES.
Malaya might help Great Britain in her timber
requirements by the establishment of local industries to manufacture wooden articles which have
hitherto been imported, says Mr. J. G. Watson,
Acting Director-Adviser on Forestry, in an article
in the Malayan Forester. Mr. Watson also points
out that the more wood used in the building of
Malayan houses, the less will be the need to import
cement and steel. The Forest Department, he
says, strongly disputes the alleged superiority of socalled “permanent" materials over timber in the
construction of houses, and holds that most of the
claims made in favour of the former are based on
past mismanagement and ignorance of the correct
use of timber.
—(The Crown Colonist).
Notification of Air Raid Casualties.
Arrangements are being made with the Sarawak
Government Agent, London. for Officers of the
Sarawak Civil Service to be notified! if a near
relative in Great Britain becomes a serious
casualty in an air raid.
With a view to relieving the anxiety which must
be felt regarding the safety of relatives in Great
Britain while air raids continue, it has been
decided to extend the arrangement with the
Government Agent, Condon, to include all British
people resident in this country.
Members of the public in Great Britain have
been advised to carry with them their identity
cards and the name and address of some person in
Great Britain they would wish to he notified in
the event of their sustaining serious injury in the
course of an air raid. It is suggested that British
people in this country should ask their relatives in
Great Britain to arrange with the person so named
on their identity cards that in the event of their
becoming a casualty, the Government Agent at the
Sarawak Government Offices, London, should be
notified giving details of the name and appointment of the person in Sarawak who is to be
informed.
When such a. notification is received by the
Government Agent, a telegram will be despatched
to the Chief Secretary, Kuching, for transmission
to the person concerned.
Rubber in War-Time.
The immediate prospects of the rubber industry
are not unfavourable, so long as America, who
normally buys more than one-half of the world's
out put, continues her purchases. Thanks to her
purchases for the accumulation of an emergency
reserve, the industry has so far not suffered from
the loss of European markets, and it will be able
to continue operating at a fairly high level of its
capacity and at a reasonable margin of profit, at
any rate until well into next year. Moreover, the
acquisition of a large reserve of rubber by the
United States may act as a restraint on the production of synthetic rubber from oil, which has
the backing of powerful American interests. The
industry's one serious risk in the near future is the
danger of a military conflict in the Far East.
— (The Economist.
American newshound to his taxi driver : “Want
to take shelter?’’
Taxi-man : “No, thanks. Jerry up there is
doing 300 miles an hour, and we re doing 15. If
he can hit us, he's a belter shot than I think he is.”
A German railway guard, receiving notice of
promotion, invited his friends to celebrate his
success. The company were surprised to find him
downcast.
“Why so glum, Ernst?” they said.
“Well”, he replied, “the appointment has just
come through. I’m to be station-master at
Hamm.”
We read in the New Statesman and Nation
reports of further aid to Britain from the United
States. The Civil Aeronautics Board has, we
understand, decided to make airfields in Florida
and Texas available for training Canadian pilots
during the winter when flying will be curtailed in
the Dominion by weather. This, as the New
Statesman and Nation points out, opens up an
intriguing prospect of American citizens, enrolled
in the Royal Air Force, training in their own
country to fight. Hiller. The New York wits call
this “neutrality—with knobs on’’!
A U.S.A. observer visited a R.A.F. station
somewhere in England on a quiet day and was
invited to try-out a Spitfire. He took the air and
unexpectedly met a Messerschmitt squadron in the
clouds. He shot down one machine and then
landed safely remarking “that his neutrality was
not seriously impaired.”—(The Straits Times
9.12.40.)
"From the North of England I hear that, a man
has been standing at a street corner with a placard :
“Give sixpence to the Spitfire fund and I will listen
to the story of ‘how you were bombed !' ”
(The New Statesman and Nation.)
Letters from Home.
Meanwhile, the bombing continues. But we are
absolutely thrilled with the exploits of our Air
Force. Time and again the reports of our successes have sounded so remarkable, that one has
been tempted to wonder whether the official
bulletins could be relied upon. But 1 have
absolutely no doubt, from what 1 have heard, that
they are entirely accurate, and, if anything, a good
deal too conservative. And, indeed, this is now
proved by the obvious failure of the aerial
‘‘blitzkrieg”—and the abandonment by the
Germans of all their original tactics. They now
concentrate on night-bombing. If it is not
deliberately indiscriminate, well, all I can say is—
they must be damned poor shore ! Of course they
have done widespread damage, but not intensive
damage, that is to say—there are wrecked homes
all over London—but you can still walk through
London for considerable distances without seeing
anything at all of the effects of the raids. But
the behaviour of the people is the most remarkable.
I would never have believed the average man in
the street could adapt himself so rapidly to such
an unprecedented situation. Londoners actually
seem to be so “blast-” that they do not trouble to
take cover even when they hear bombs dropping !
Simply because the odds that the next bomb
will hit you personally seem so remote. The
hospitals have all had a bad time. You will
perhaps have read that Thomas's has had several
hits—and the first block (at the end of Westminster Bridge) has been partly demolished. I
am sure that the people of London will not give
in on grounds of terror ! Actually, more serious
than this is the question of shelter and food and
the prevention of epidemics in the winter. But
these problems are being vigorously tackled now, We have grown used to the syren and the
sound of explosives. Indeed 1 sometimes fancy
we should miss them if they ceased. We sleep
in our clothes and I undress to shave and bath in
the mornings and I think it suits me better than
the old fashioned style .... we cut our weeklybutter ration into seven equal parts. It’s marvellous what one can do with 4/7 of an ounce. I had
no notion it went so far. Won’t we save pounds
after the war! The same with tea. I can make
a full pot with one teaspoonful—the thing is to
let it stand long enough. To-day I was in the
town waiting for a bus. A sailor was also waiting
and asked me if the bus went to Maldon. I said
no, there’s no bus there for at least an hour and
three quarters. He said he was just home from
the China Station and wanted to get to his home at
Heybridge and seemed sad to have to wait. So I
said ‘come home with me and I’ll take you'. He
did and I got out the car and ran him home.
1 asked if he knew the "Herald”. Yes,” he
said. "I served in her awhile.” He also said
he had been to Sarawak and was most interested
when I told him I had a son and daughter-in-law
in that country.
... I was having dinner the other night with
some friends who live in a house down way-. It
is a large block, thank God, because the bombs
that night seemed to be falling like rain about us,
and one caught the fiat, and went right smack into
the shelter, dropped in the garden and then into
a corner of the building. I'm afraid some people
were killed. I was on the fourth floor and, Oh
Boy, when that crash came we were all knocked
onto the floor with the plates, etc,, but apart from
the windows all being broken we were all unhurt.
After that I jump now when a door slams.........................
.... One of my canteens had a basinfull the
other night, and my colleague and I were flung
onto the floor with a blazing hurricane lamp on
top of us and masses of broken glass. My arm is
cut up to the shoulder and her face got a bit
burned before we could put out the lamp, but it
wasn’t too bad and after a couple of stiff whiskies
at the pub we recovered enough to laugh at our
abject terror, The men were no help at all as
they all had to stand-to in case of incendiaries. . . .
9
.... This is a very strange, country in these
days, and in spite of all the unpleasant things that
are happening daily and nightly to so many people.
I do think that the absence of apprehension
amongst those who have so far escaped is quite
extraordinary.
In our ”peaceful country retreat” we get
continual visits from our neighbours across the
Channel, and during the past fortnight the
periods of alerts have far exceeded the times
between the "all-clear” signal and the next alarm.
I am writing from it now. We nearly got
collected about a fortnight ago by a heavy bomb
which made a 40-foot crater forty yards from the
back of the house at 3 in the morning. We were
all wakened by a loud howling noise, immediately
followed by a shock as if the house were a ship
suddenly hit by a heavy sea on the beam. Then,
in my own case, the ceiling crashed on top of me
in bed, so I got the wind knocked out of me, and
thought (in the dark), that the whole roof had
collapsed, and that I was completely pinned down,
as I could hardly breathe. When I had got my
wind again, and extricated myself from the plaster,
I couldn’t find my trousers or electric torch or
anything, as everything was buried under the
ceiling, so after groping about a bit the only thing
to do seemed to be to shut my curtains, which I
had opened before retiring, and get a light on.
One of the chief warnings one has is to refrain
from showing any light, in the excitement of the
moment, in a house that has suffered, as its likely
to invite a return visit.
But nothing happened when I switched on. as
the bomb had cut the cable, and then A---------appeared
with a torch from her room next door, and
I managed to find my trousers, and all was well.
Her ceiling had partly fallen also, but had missed
her bed. Up to this time. 1 had imagined that
most of the house had collapsed, and that I must
probably be the only survivor, but the strange
thing about it was that no one got hurt. I got off
with rather sore ribs, and a rather badly bruised
arm, but 1 can hardly feel it now.
One encouraging feature is the extraordinarily
slight damage that is done considering the amount
they loose off. Thuds indicating that eggs have
been dropped in the vicinity are a nightly
occurrence, but most of them drop in the open
country. The other night there was a line of 17
put down, for some reason, right across open
country. But so far the one here is the biggest
dropped in this neighbourhood. The effect of the
blast was terrific on some of the outbuildings, but
they saved the house from any structural damage.
About half the windows broken, and a lot of tiling
blown off. etc., but happily we managed to get
hold of a builder who was able to make it a
"priority” job. and A-------- and 1 can now go to bed
without seeing the stars through the holes in our
ceilings..............
.... You will have heard that S------------got damaged
by the overturning of his Green Line 'bus in a
tank trap. Its lucky lie didn’t get killed, and in
spite of a very humorous letter be wrote to me
about it, he must have had an awful shock.
Apparently the ‘bus was thrown right over, and
he hurt his month rather badly, and had a very
large man on top of him bleeding all over
him...............
I expect 1 told you in a previous letter that I
was going to be a Wren, Well 1 was all set for
that and due to report at Portsmouth for duty, and
had a railway warrant and all when .... (naval
husband) on the telephone from somewhere on the
coast .... said “Hold everything—Don't be a
Wren”. So 1 wired and put the chaps off
wondering what had bitten him. Next day a
letter from...............explained that a friend of his
in a destroyer just in port after 6 whole months
at sea had been unable to see his wife (who was
a Wren) for five minutes because they didn't
choose to let her have leave then !
On the whole, as our gallant press assures everybody, the spirit of the British people is wonderful.
The real Cockney is magnificent—“Let the
b-------- s come. The more they come, the more
we’ll shoot them down”. And it takes courage to
say that when your little all has gone........................
In this house chaos reigns supreme I Poor old
----- (her mother) has got a mother and 2 kids from
Limehouse, poor devils whose home has been
destroyed AND a family of French people whose
flat in south Kensington is awaiting annihilation
at the hands of a time bomb ! They turned up
here after a soul-sickening day of finding every
hotel, pub, caf and boarding house full up—no
houses left empty—and seemed so utterly beaten
she hadn’t the heart to send them away. They
have the drawing room, a bedroom ami the spare
room that you slept in and we have what little
remains—namely the dining room and my
bedroom ! A--------and B------- sleep oh camp beds in
the hall because they are afraid of bombs and I go
on as if nothing bad happened, because I feel after
all if you are destined for one of Goering’s
bunches of bananas—that is that—so what?
..... 1 expect by now lie (a pilot in the
Ark Royal) is off again to give the Icecream
gents something to go on with. He has a very
poor opinion of the Italian machines. Get them
with one burst and they crumple up. He got a
four-engined bomber with one burst and it broke
up bit by bit, the four engines going down one
after another, and the four occupants, two without a parachute and two on one. The Petty
Officer who always flies with him shouted, “Look
at the b................s going down. Sir.” K . . . says
that his gunner’s language is sometimes priceless.
He gets very exicted and K . . . had to caution
him on one occasion as he nearly shot their rudder
off. He always apologises to K . . . for his
language when they get down !
Sarawak War Effort Fund and
China Relief Fund.
SIBU.
The members of (he Malay Union Club staged
''Old Story of Sarawak” on the 29th and 30th
November at their Club premises in aid of The
Sarawak War Effort Fund and China Relief Fund.
The play was a. great success—thanks to the
ungrudging and spontaneous Support of the members and the Club patrons.
The children of some members played a part in
the success of the show.
Thanks are due to the musicians, and mention
must also be made of the assistance rendered by
Messrs. P, C. Cob bold, Ling Khai Cheng, Nizam
and Khoo Ah Nong.
Total nett proceeds amounted to $324.63. This
amount has been equally divided between the two
funds.
The Sarawak Association, London, has made a
contribution of £100 to the Sarawak War Effort
Fund.
SARAWAK (FIRST) LOTTERY
in aid of
THE WAR EFFORT FUND.
The draw for the Sarawak (First) Lottery
will take place at the Lilian Theatre,
Kuching, at 11 a.m. on January 27th, 1941,
(Chinese New Year).
Malaya Patriotic Fund.
WOMEN'S SECTION.
A further 160 knitted garments have been sent
to Singapore including Jerseys, Pullovers, Scarves,
Socks, Helmets and Gloves. The following letter
from Lady Thomas to Mrs. L. D. Kennedy will
show how much these garments are appreciated at
home.
GOVERNMENT HOUSE,
SINGAPORE,
13th December, 1940.
While we were in England 1 took the opportunity
of visiting the various places to which comforts from
Malaya are sent, and I am sure you will be
encouraged to know how much they are appreciated.
The Depot for the Navy knitted garments spoke
very highly of the things that had ben sent, and
also told me that they want all that can possibly be
sent for the coming winter, especially pullovers with
long sleeves and high necks, gloves and balaclava
helmets.
They send them to Battleships, Cruisers, Minesweepers, Trawlers and auxiliary craft of all sorts;
I must say that when we were coming across the
Pacific the cold was intense, and we kept picturing
what it must be like to have to stand on the bridge
day and night exposed to very much more severe
cold, and of course when ships are torpedoed
although many of the men may be saved, they have
lost all they possess and have to be completely
refitted.
The Depot for the Soldiers', Sailors’ and Airmen's
Families is doing splendid work and is wonderfully
well organised. They have rooms where secondhand clothes are sorted and selected, others where
new garments are made. There is a buying department which buys clothes, blankets, etc., with the
money that is sent, and another where complete sets
of baby clothes are packed ready to be sent to
mothers who otherwise would find it hard to get
anything at all, and the letters of thanks received
have been most touching. They are so delighted
to have attractive pretty things to give their children
which they could not afford themselves, and also it
makes all the difference to the men to feel their
wives are cared for while they are away.
When a large number of cases arrived Mr. Cator
asked me if I thought you would like to give them
to the people in London who had lost their homes
through bombing, and I was sure you would wish
this, so they were sent off and most gratefully
received. As you can realize the things we can
send now are of such varied kinds, and so badly
needed, that we cannot do too much, and it is only
a very small price to pay for the comfort and luxury
we are all able to live in out here.
At home, though people are all as cheerful and
brave and confident as possible, the normal way of
living has to be completely altered. One lives from
day to day, and every one is helping in some way or
other.
If people live in safe areas they fill their houses
with women and children from the more dangerous
places. If they are in the places that are being
bombed, they are all ready to take in people and
look after them, and to drive ambulances, in fact
no one thinks any more of their own comfort, but
of how they can help each other.
As you may imagine the women at home have
not much time to spend in knitting and sewing,
although you see people in shops and buses and
indeed everywhere with a sock or something which
they are knitting in their spare moments.
Out here where we have so much leisure and so
few interruptions it is up to us to work all we can
and send as much home as we possibly can manage,
and I am sure everyone is more than willing to do
this.
It is a great pleasure to come back and find how
hard everyone is working and I am sure it will
encourage them to know how very much everything
that is sent is appreciated.
We cannot do too much to help those wonderful
men who are giving up their lives and everything
to keep us safe. And if we can relieve a little of
their anxiety by helping their wives and children
while they are away, I am sure none of us will
grudge the time and expense in providing all we can
for them.
I am glad to see that another branch of work has
been started out here to make warm pullovers and
gloves for the women who are in the various
services at home. They have very little time
themselves, and I know that last winter a great
many of them were in most exposed positions,
driving ambulances, etc,, and very often sleeping
in cold shelters at night, and they are thankful for
farm knitted pullovers, etc.
I did not actually see the Army Depot which is at
Reading, but I heard that they appreciated our
things very much indeed, and as the Army expands,
more and more things are necessary. As all the
officers and men on service wear battle dress, it does
not matter whether high or low necked pullovers
are made, both will be wanted and for the winter
long sleeves are most welcome.
And now let me end with something about the
Red Cross. My husband and I visited the depot,
and my husband also saw Field Marshal Sir Philip
Chetwode who is at the head of the whole organisation. They told us that the bandages, pyjamas
and all the things we had sent had all been most
useful.
Owing to the great loss of materials in Belgium
and France, they had had very heavy demands for
stores of all kinds, and in addition have been asked
to meet the needs of air raid victims.
They send parcels of food, comforts and various
necessities to our prisoners of war, and are spending
£1 million a year on this alone. They need therefore every penny, and every article of equipment
that they can get.
Sir Philip Chetwode was particularly anxious that
Malaya should help the troops in Egypt and the
Middle East owing to the difficulty of getting
supplies to them from England, and my husband
cabled this to Malaya with a list of requirements
which I am glad to see is being worked to.
Every one at home is helping and I do not think
there is a village in England however small that has
not a working party.
MARGUERITE THOMAS.
Astana Vegetables.
Not so long ago if one succeeded in producing
a few scraggy apologies for lettuce in an old box
it was considered quite an achievement. During
the last four months over two thousand excellent
lettuce have been grown and distributed from
Astana gardens. A brief description of the method
of growing these lettuce may encourage others to
grow them too when it is seen how easily this can
be done and what a great asset they are to one’s
table.
Three varieties of lettuce do very well in
Sarawak; these are:—(i) Mignonette, (ii) Cos,
and (iii) Iceberg, The most popular is Mignonette
but the other two will grow equally well.
Excellent seed is obtainable by post from Po
Gardens, Ipoh, F.M.S. Having. obtained seed,
planting is done in shallow zinc trays. These can
be obtained from any tin-smith in the bazaar at
about 35 cents each. The trays should be filled
with fine burnt earth and the seed sprinkled evenly
over it and then covered with a very thin layer of
more burnt earth. Watering must be done with
a very fine nozzle or a large garden syringe, the
trays should be protected from heavy rain and
placed so that they get the morning sun. Germination should have taken place in 2 or 3 days.
Water carefully with a fine spray in the early
morning and in the evening and see that the
sued lings are not exposed to the sun after 9.30 a.m.
When the seedlings are about half an inch high
they should, be thinned out. A pair of watchmaker’s tweezers (8 cents) will be found most
helpful for this operation. After thinning out the
seedlings should be left in the trays for about ten
davs until they have attained a height of one and
a half inches, they are now ready for planting out
in prepared beds "(bakut), posts, boxes, etc. If
planted out in beds protection must be given
against heavy rain, this is best achieved with a
permanent at tap shelter about 4 to 5 feet above the
beds, as much light as possible should be allowed
while excluding heavy rain. A sprinkling of rock
phosphate (procurable from the Agricultural
Department) round the plants once a week will
stimulate good growth but this is not essential
and if the beds, etc., are carefully prepared results
will be perfectly good. The time taken from
germination until the lettuce are ready lor the
table is 5 to 6 weeks, the plants are quite hardy
and can be grown on a rotation so that lettuce are
always available. First lettuce was picked on
28th June and since then to nearly December
more than 2500 plants have been collected and
distributed.
A final word about Tomatoes and Chillies. Do
not be put off by the superstition prevalent in the
Service that whoever plants tomatoes is immediately transferred to another station. If everyone
plants tomatoes they, will become interchangeable
even if the Secretariat decide on a General Post
every three months which is hardly likely. Try
Ponderosa, a large Australian variety, it is very
fleshy and almost seedless and single fruit
will weight up to 10 ozs. The fruit in the early
stages is rather addicted to "black spot” disease,
but this variety fruits abundantly so there is little
loss from this,
Various kinds of Chillies have been grown for
pickling and of them all Sutton’s Long Bed have
proved (he best. It is a heavy cropper and compares very favourably with the local bazaar ehillie.
Bull-nose Chillies and Capsicums have been tried
also, but proved rather disappointing, the plants
are very prone to a root fungus which causes
"damping off" when the fruit are half formed.
—(Contributed.)
Padi Planting.
The Director of Agriculture mentions in his
report for November, 1940, that expectation of a
padi crop remains good on the whole. Isolated
pest damage has been reported from various centres,
but no locality appears to be likely to suffer serious
failure.
Areas in the Munggu Babi neighbourhood, and
the ulu Sadong region, were reported to be dying
from pest attack, but inspection showed that there
was no pest or disease present, the condition being
due merely to insufficient cultivation and dry
weather after planting, and the incidence of wet
weather resulted in good recovery.
The visit to the Munggu Babi area disclosed that
there is apparently ample good wet padi land
between the Ulu Sungei Bukar and Ulu Sungei
Serin for all Dayak kampongs here, if good cultivation and proper water control can be introduced.
It will be necessary to make a fairly comprehensive survey to ascertain the best method of
utilising the water supply.
A visit to the Bukit Tengkalat area above
Saratok, where bunded farming has made considerable progress this year, showed that, without
exception, this is the best farming effort in the
country. The three "doors” which started operations, following visits about 6 years ago to the
terraced padi land at the 12th Mile Agricultural
Station, and to other countries, have made a most
intelligent use of their experience, and both the
water supply and the terracing of the land at the
head of the valley must have entailed a considerable
amount of hard work.
Now that many more "doors” are joining the
pioneers, and it is desired to bring in all available
land in the valley, some of the water courses are
found to be wrongly sited and cut loo deep, A
method of stopping up the water by stops in the
channel was explained.. This, and a tendency to
cut too many drains and too deep, were the only
points of criticism found, and applied only to the
new area.
Other areas will give results equal to Bukit
Tengkalat, and it is doubted whether the latter can
compete with the Dayak area at Rantau Panjang
for yield; but, considering the terrain and the
absence of technical advice, the effectiveness and
neatness of the work at Bukit Tengkalat is most
striking.
The importance of sowing dates is illustrated by
the conditions at Tanjong Bijat, where early sown
padi is now looking very well. Those farming in
the Tawang-Stumbin area sowed later than the
down-river farmers, and many of these later-sown
nurseries, or fields of young transplanted padi,
have been destroyed by salt water flooding. Some
have made three attempts to plant, and a few have
now abandoned the attempt to farm this year.
Some success has attended meetings held at
Kanowit and Lundu well before the farming season,
when dates were fixed after free discussion, and
the importance of communal agreement and working was emphasized, and it is suggested that such
meetings could, with advantage, be made a regular
feature for all districts.
First Division News.
NOVEMBER. 1940.
The District Officer, Upper Sarawak, reports that
the production of gold for the month of October,
1940, was 1,059 ounces, and the price per fine
ounce $69.65.
The Travelling District Officer, First Division,
reports as follows :—
Probationary Native Officer Michael Sadin and
Up-river Agent Manju (both Land Dayaks) were
called down to Kuching and an elementary course
in simple Agricultural, Health and Hygiene work
was arranged for them with the kind co-operation
of the Chief Health Officer and the Director of
Agriculture in order that they may be better fitted
to give useful advice to the Land Dayaks. Both
these officers were recruited as part of the approved
scheme for re-organising Land Dayak administration.
Serian.—A nasty accident occurred at Kampong
Fichin, near Tebakang, when the Native Officerin-Charge. Abang Zamhari, was giving a lecture
in the village. The ” pancha” or communal hall,
a building with a floor some twenty feet above
ground level, collapsed under the weight of those
who had. crowded in to listen, killing one Dayak and
injuring a number of others, in spite of the efforts
of the Native Officer, who himself suffered minor
injuries, and the village headmen to limit the
numbers. Collapsing of the flooring in Land
Dayak houses is not uncommon, but the ‘‘pancha”
are usually made strong enough to stand the
stresses of the weight of large congregations.
Agriculture.—It is distressing to note the reports
of damage to young padi from Lundu and Serian.
It is understood from the Director of Agriculture
that the pests reported from Lundu are not
serious and largely confined to certain individual
plots which have now received attention from the
agricultural inspector stationed there. This, as
well as the trouble reported from Serian. is wholly
due to an unreasonable spell of dry weather and
will right itself as soon as there is enough water
on the land.
Village Land Councils.—Further progress has
been made. The major activities have been in the
Samarahan where sketch maps of the land
claimed by all the village councils there have been
completed and passed to the Land Office.
The Native Officer-in-Charge, Kuching, reports
that the Master and the Chin-chew of m.v. Kejang
were fined $20.00 each, under Section 3 (a) of
Order C—12 (Prevention of Cruelty to Animals)
1937, for permitting pigs to be loaded on board
ship in two layers so as to cause suffering to those
in the lower layer and for aggravating the
suffering by permitting heavy packages being
thrown from the jetty on top of the pigs.
The Secretary for Native Affairs reports that
Hari Raya was celebrated on Saturday the 2nd,
the usual salute of fourteen guns being fired from
Fort Margherita. His Highness the Rajah paid
the usual Hari Raya calls on the Datus.
The “Sekolnh Igama” (Religious School) was
opened in Kuching In the Trustees of the India
Street Mosque on the 17th, at the expense of this
Mosque out of the Mosque Fund. This is the
first religions school ever introduced in Sarawak.
Several petitions were received from the
Sarawak Mohammedan Club and Indian Muslims
against the opening of this school at the expense
of the Mosque which was, in their opinion,
forbidden according to the Mohammedan Law.
This matter was referred to Datu Haji Mohidin,
His Highness the Rajah's Representative, who
informed the petitioners that it is clearly laid down
in the "Kuran” which stales that it was the wish
of the Holy Prophet Mohamad to teach all Mohammedans the “Igama Islam,” irrespective of
nationality.
Datu Hajj Mohidin added that the Mosque
Fund could be used for this purpose and therefore
he considered that the petitioners created an
unwarranted obstruction towards the opening of
this school.
Kuching Rotary Club.
The monthly Dinner Meeting was held at the
Lilian Restaurant on Saturday, 14th December,
1940. The President, Rtn Khan Ah Chong
presided.
The speaker of the evening was Dr. E. M.
Marjoribanks, the Vice-President of the Club and
Chairmen of the Community Service Committee.
He spoke on the local services that had been undertaken and some that needed to be kept going.
Among the important items he specially mentioned
were :—
1. Education.—The Club was agitating for
higher education up to Senior Cambridge for the
local children so that they could stand a better
chance of being employed locally and elsewhere.
The appeal had been favourably received by the
Director of Education who was hopeful that
Government might assist.
2. Blood Transfusion.—The speaker explained
that this was very much needed not only in time
of war hut also in peace time. Illustrations of
other places were given and an appeal for as many
donors as possible was made. In this connection
of saving lives the speaker mentioned that out of
the first batch of students for First Aid Nursing,
over 80% had passed examinations and their
Certificates had been received from home. An
early opportunity would be taken to hand over the
Certificates to the recipients,
3. Books and Periodicals for the troops in
Singapore.—An appeal was made to the members. One big case from a few Rotarians had
already been sent over by the Sarawak Steamship
Co,. Ltd., free of charge.
4. Road Safety.—A sub-Committee had been
appointed to go into the means of teaching the
public on this matter.
Club News.
A sporting event of some magnitude took place
at the Sarawak Club on Christmas morning when
ten of the, ''regular'' bowlers played for a prize
given by the Hon’ble Mr. J. B. Archer.
A Committee of ladies had kindly consented to
divide the players into two teams labelled “Goodlooking Chaps" and "Uglies.’’ We shall never
understand the female brain, but it must be
recorded with astonishment that Digby and Archer
were in the "Good-looking Chaps’’ whilst Jacques
and Taylor, whose looks nobody will deny, were in
the "Uglies” ! The captains were Jacques and
Archer and in spite of their obvious handicaps
(physically and morally) they turned out to be the
winner and runner-up respectively. At one time
it looked as if Archer would win his own prize, but
he just had the decency to avoid doing such a
deplorable thing. Jacques, bowling with his usual
agile leg-over-arm stroke, just managed to beat
Archer, whose foot-faults and other blatant fouls
were obvious to all. Amidst immense enthusiasm,
the prize, a pseudo-grandfather clock with, apparently, no works, was presented to the winner.
The donor had not forgotten the booby prize
which went to the lowest score, A. W. Anderson.
1 rather gather that he is a bachelor, but any
sweet young unattached thing should know that his
prize is a most useful, and, I believe, very necessary, thing for any young married couple to
possess. So, now girls, don’t say I didn't tell you ! !
O.F.
Second Division News.
NOVEMBER, 1940.
The Hon’ble the Resident, Second Division, who
visited Engkilili and Lubok Antu during the
month, reports as follows:—
Padi crops, in both districts, looked very healthy
and all reports were most promising.
He was particularly struck with the quantity
and excellence of the jagong crop at Lubok Antu,
and does not remember having seen such a quantity
being grown formerly.
The Director of Agriculture, Mr. C. L. Newman,
together with Mr. J. G. McClelland and a large
staff, arrived on the 7th, and a camp was set up
at Bijat and a topographical survey commenced
by the latter, and his staff for information of the
Agricultural Department. The Resident understands that the Bijat scheme promises well for. a
large scale padi area.
The District Officer, Simanggang, reports as
follows :—
With the exception of the Batang Ai Balaus,
the padi prospects throughout the district are
excellent, both in hill areas and in the swamp
areas.
The Agricultural Assistant reports that at
Simanggang final transplanting was completed at
the end of the month. Heavy rain, however,
caused excessive flooding, and patches of the lighter
soil, consisting principally of refuse, floated about
the area carrying the newly planted seedlings with
At Bijat. final transplanting was completed,
though seedlings from Simanggang had to be taken
there to complete the work.
War Savings Certificates to the value of $1,035
were sold during the month.
The District Officer, Belong, reports as follows : —
On the 27th Father Stanton brought over a
football team of schoolboys from Simanggang.
The match was played on the S.P.G. Mission
field and resulted in a well deserved victory. for
Simanggang. It is the first time that Simanggang
have accomplished this feat.
From Spaoh came two reports which might have
been serious. The first, a Malay named Musin
had a narrow escape from being taken by a crocodile; he lost his small toe in the encounter. The
second, a Dayak of Tanjong was gored by a bull;
the animal has been killed.
The District Officer, Kalaka, reports, with regret,
the death of Mr. Kho Ah Liap, ex-Capitan China,
Rohan, on the 4th after a long illness, at the age
of 85 years. He had been awarded the Long
Service Decoration.
The Director of Agriculture arrived at Saratok
on the 14th, and, accompanied by the District
Officer, left for the Dayak wet padi farms at
Tengalat on the 15th. A complete tour of the area
was made. The Director of Agriculture was pleased
to see the progress of the work which was carried
out in such a short time by the Dayaks themselves
under their Tuai Tuai Rumah.
Keen interest has been reported among the other
Dayaks after the return of the Director of Agriculture. It is stated that some have cleared the
main drain preparatory to commencing planting
work early next year. If such is the case, it is
feared that the available land will be insufficient,
since those who own plots intend to increase their
area next year. This, however, is dependent on
the results of the crops. If the results prove to be
good, they will encourage others to adopt this
system of planting.
Third Division News.
NOVEMBER, 1940
The Hon'ble the Resident, Third Division, reports
that the last of the outlaws, Maja, surrendered
himself to the District Officer, Mukah, at Balingian
on the 18th and was brought to trial in Sibu on
the 26th.
He also reports, with regret, the death of Datu
Abang Abdul Gapor bin Abang Tek, better known as
Abang Aboi, on the 12th.
The funeral was held on the 13th and was
attended by the Resident, the District Officer and
rhe Cadet Officer in uniform as well by all the,Native
Officers and many others.
A Constabulary guard of honour under the comma nd of Chief Inspector Abang Adeng was present.
The late Datu was for many years the senior
Native Officer at Kapit, took part in several expeditions and was an authority on Dayaks.
He retired in 1938 and was granted the title of
Datu by His Highness the Rajah in 1939.
He is survived by his widow, four sons and four
daughters.
The District Officer, Mukah, reports that Mr. H.
J. Spencer, Agricultural Field Officer, visited
Mukah and Balingian from the 10th to the 20th,
during which time he inspected land at Skoyan in
the Ulu Mukah which it is proposed to keep as an
emergency padi reserve. He also inspected land at
the Sungei Sah, Balingian, for the same purpose,
and it is understood that he considers both areas
eminently suitable for padi cultivation. Both
these sites are within easy reach of the Government
station and it is hoped that later the Agricultural
Department will be able to open up a demonstration
station at Skoyan. Suitable land for extensive
vegetable planting is difficult to find owing to the
very low-lying nature of the land round both
stations, but, as the district as a whole could be
almost self-supporting owing to its sago, the
District Officer does not think massed vegetable
planting really necessary. It could well be left to
individuals to plant their own vegetables where and
how they wish in the old haphazard fashion as a
complement only to the sago foodstuffs.
At the request of the Director of Agriculture, the
fullest information concerning the preparation of
foodstuffs, of which sago forms the basis, was
obtained from the local Melanaus and samp.es of
preparation were also obtained. As Mr. Spencer
happened to be visiting the district this month, the
whole matter was handed over to him and he will
.report to the Director of Agriculture in due course.
The District Officer. Kapit, reports that news was
received from the Hon'file the Resident in the early
part of the month that the arrival of a large number
of Dayaks in the headwaters of the Mehakam river
in Dutch Borneo had caused considerable consternation amongst the inhabitants of those parts.
It is felt here that the fears of those people were
groundless and the actual disturbances great.y
exaggerated by report. for it is believed that the only
Dayaks to have crossed over from the ulu Balleh
into Dutch territory recently are those travelling on
Certificates of Identity and looking for work with
the European Companies there. A police patrol was.
however, sent up the Balleh with instructions to
turn back all they might meet on their way and to
try and make touch with the military brigade
ordered by the Dutch authorities, it is understood,
to proceed to the area. Those Dayaks who had put
in their pledges and been granted passes but had
not yet left were also prevented from travelling.
The District Officer himself also proceeded to
Penghulu Temonggong Koh’s house in the ulu
Balleh to make enquiries and issue instructions in
this connection.
It is gratifying to be able to record already the
signs of an awakening of financial prosperity
amongst the Belaga natives. This is due entirely
to the bere ts to be derived from working timber
for Tlte Borneo Company, for some 2,000 logs have
been sold bv the natives during the past month or
two in retur for which the Company must have
paid out no less than $6,000. Almost every house
in the Belaga area has an agreement to work
varying quantities of logs for sale to the Company,
and it is understood that the Punan Bah alone have
now undertaken to fulfil a contract for 1.000 logs.
The visible evidence of returning prosperity is provided by the fact that there are now five outboard
motors owned by natives of Belaga.
It now seems clear that harvests of padi will vary
greatly throughout the district next year. for present
reports range between the two extremes of good and
bad. Those Dayaks farming old jungle are heading
for excellent results, but the farms are only
indifferent, some being complete failures.
Rat poison supplied by the Agricultural Department is having a mixed reception It seems without
doubt efficacious, but cases have been heard of the
dead rats being later consumed by dogs which havesubsequently died from eating the poisoned corpses.
And, useless and mangy though many of their dogs
are, the Kayans and Kenyahs do not like losing
them. In this connection, the District Officer has
had an amusing enquiry from a Song Dayak Penghulu as to whether it would be safe to eat any
monkey that might fortunately be killed by consuming poisoned padi, provided the monkey’s stomach
were carefully avoided.
Fourth Division News.
NOVEMBER, 1940.
The Hon’ble the Resident, Fourth Division,
reports that on the 30th a sale of work was held
and resulted in a collection of over $1,800 for the
Patriotic Fund.
The District Officer, Miri. reports as follows : —
The Native Officer-in-Charge, Niah, reports
increased prosperity among the natives of his
district. He finds that far more food crops have
been planted this year than formerly.
Still more Dayaks from Saratok. Balingian and
Kanowit arrived here during the month “to look
for work.” However, the only work they are
willing to do is on jelutong and, since the jelutong
“roads” in this district are now all fully worked,
there is nothing left for the Dayaks but to return
to their own district. It is felt, that such Dayaks,
for their own good, should be deterred from coming
to Miri before, leaving their own district.
The distribution of milk by Government to the
pupils of the vernacular schools at Miri, Niah and
Sibuti was started during the month and is proving
most popular.
Three Mohammedan Chinese, membars of a goodwill mission, visited Miri during the month. They
were accorded a magnificent reception by the
combined Malay and Chinese communities on
arrival, and they held well attended meetings
in the Capitol Theatre and on the Recreation
Ground.
The District Officer, Baram, states that at the
end of the month reports were received from the
Upriver Agents at Lio Matu and Long Akah to
the effect that an epidemic had broken out amongst
the Kelabits in the Kelapan and amongst the
Badangs and that a considerable number of deaths
had occurred. The various chiefs of the vicinity
had asked for assistance to check the spread of the
epidemic and for treatment to those already
affected. Arrangements were made for Native
Officer Tuanku Surer and Sanitary Inspector Mr.
H. Brodie from Miri to go up river as soon as the
latter officer arrived in Marud’.
On their return they reported that the
rumour of epidemic there was unfounded and that
it was the result of exaggerated rumours of sickness
coming from Dutch territory.
The visit of the Native Officer and the Sanitary
Inspector has, however, resulted in all paths being
opened and villages and farms being no longer
pantang.
The prompt assistance rendered by Government
in sending this party up river has created a great
impression amongst the natives of Lio Matu
district.
Fifth Division News.
OCTOBER, 1940.
The Hon’ble the Resident, Fifth Division,
reports that the news of P. Tai Langub’s death in
September was received during the month. It is
particularly unfortunate that he should have died
before the ulu Trusan scheme was started. He
was very keen on the idea and his help would have
been invaluable. Recommendations regarding his
successor will be made after Native Officer Wan
Sadi has visited the ulu Trusan. The Resident
is glad to be able to report that the people of S.
Begkita are really making proper bunds this year.
They have done a great deal of really hard work
and it is to be hoped that as a result they will
reap a much better harvest than usual.
NOVEMBER, 1940.
The Hon’ble the Resident, Fifth Division,
reports that he visited Tegarai on the 7th. The
total area under padi this year must be nearly
100 acres compared with 32 acres last year. The
tali ayer has proved most efficacious and with a
proper water supply work was possible here long
before Penapak and S. Bengkita, which are
dependant on rainfall, could be worked. There is
room for further extensions next year and the
enthusiasm of the Kedayans seems boundless.
The padi looks very well.
A great deal of hard work lias been done at
Tegarai. Penapak and S. Bengkita and there can
be no doubt that others will follow their example.
The survey of streams and taking of levels at
Tanjong Bunut continues. Present indications
are that the area is ideal for a big scheme.
1’adi is everywhere reported to be'doing very
well and it is to be hoped that the harvest will be
even better than last year.
His Highness the Rajah, accompanied by Mr.
G. T. M. MacBryan, arrived at Labuan on the
20th by s.s. Darvel, leaving the same day by
H.H.M.Y. Maimuna for Limbang. On learning
that the Hon’ble the Resident, Fifth Division, was
in bed with influenza, His Highness decided to
visit Brooketon and Lawas first, arriving at
Limbang on the morning of the 25th and leaving
for Labuan on the 27th. Unfortunately, the
majority of the people gathered to meet His
Highness on the 20th were unable to wait, though
a representative gathering of Tua Tua Kampong
was present.
His Highness sat in office on the 26th and later
paid a visit to the bazaar. The British Resident,
Brunei, Mr, E. E, Pengilley, E.D. , M.C.S,, paid
an informal visit to Limbang on the 26th to meet
His Highness. A number of matters were
discussed during His Highness’ visit.