Vol. LXXIII.
No. 1072.
Sarawak Gazette
PRICE KUCHING, Wednesday, July 2nd, 1947. 20 CENTS
Contents.
The Sarawak Gazette.
MONDAY, JULY 2nd, 1947.
Birth.
Whale.—On June 22nd in Kuching, to Ann, wife of K. L. V. Whale, a daughter, Valerie Marion.
Wot, No Cooks!
Two months ago a mischievous and anonymous correspondent of the Sarawak Tribune suggested by innuendo that a passage which had appeared in the leading article of the current number of this journal, and which, from the context, clearly did not refer to any particular race, contemplated special travelling privileges for European wives. These sort of misrepresentations are most unfortunate and can have nothing but a harmful effect on racial relations in the Colony. In order that no one should be under the opposite delusion with regard to the purpose of this article it is desirable to declare at the outset that it is written avowedly and unashamedly from the Euro- pean point of view.
For in the middle of June it appeared that disaster was about to engulf that aristocratic and public-spirited section of the com- munity. First of all a whisper, then a raging rumour, then a sly advertisement appearing in the Sarawak Tribune, all pointed to one conclusion; the oil men of Miri were after our cooks. Chaos reigned in the capital. Although the hard-bitten repeated with forced chuckles “I couldn’t care less if they took mine,” and then tried to look as if they knew where their meals would come from, the realists could not view the future with any such equanamity. Irresponsible bachelors set off on distant travels with the whole of their household staffs in an endeavour to remove them from temptation until the furore had died down; noses, which had never before been inserted into legal tomes, wandered earnestly up and down the pages concerned with the common law action of enticement; and in many a conjugal household the remark. “Well, after all, my dear, you did it at home,” was greeted with a stunned and frozen silence. Fantastic stories circulated concerning the high wages, free rations, and so on that were being offered among the derricks, and a rush was only saved from developing into a stampede by employers gathering their domestics together and chanting the refrain, “But no houses, no shops, no girls, no gambling, and very high prices too.”
Fortunately the scare died down as suddenly as it had arisen. It was said that, during a particularly violent Miri thunder- storm, a flock of oeoks was seen, in a vivid and prolonged flash of lightning, floating down from the skies, waving their saucepans in one hand and their “surats” in the other, having had to abandon their customary employment in the infernal regions owing to the advent of a fuel crisis. The more prosaic, however, explained that the terms and conditions of service in Miri had been greatly exaggerated. On this occasion we have kept our cooks, but it is clear that the situation is fraught with dangerous possib- ilities. Domestic wages have almost doubled since the days before the war but the supply of candidates for vacant posts has considerably diminished. It would be
interesting to know whether Chinese and Malay households, in which servants are employed, are experiencing the same difficulty and whether, for that matter, they were affected by the mid-June panic The answer is probably in the negative because, while to an Asiatic one European looks very much like another, it takes considerably better conditions of service indeed to attract him away from employment under a member of his own race, who eats and thinks like him, follows the same interests and indulges the same tastes.
It would therefore behove the European community to be on its guard. If the level of domestic wages rises any further, and after all a cook is as much entitled as anyone else to get what he lawfully can out of his employer, the immediate answer will be a reduction of staffs. But. in the words of the old song.
“Who shall tend him. fend him, mend him. Air his linen, drv his clothes?”
Fed, above all, we must be, and firm action should be taken to relieve the condition of helpless dependence on volatile, unreliable, enterprising, and ambitious Asiatic male domestics, into which the European com- munity in Sarawak, and over the greater part of the Far East, has allowed itself to drift. No cut-and-dried solution will emanate from this pen. Before the war, in our benighted ignorance, we would have expressed the opinion that the mems would have to take on the job, like their sisters at home. But the regenerate male can see that, however efficient a scrubber of floors and cooker of dinners a European woman may be in a temperate climate, she cannot perhaps regularly undertake the same tasks in the tropics. It is a commonplace to say that the war has produced great changes with regard to the performance of domestic chores. The mem who genuinely knew nothing of this side of life has disappeared; while the mem who used to describe the manner in which at home she exercised her authority over the parlour-maid, when it was obvious to her listeners that she knew little of maids and less of parlours, is too wise to hope that nowadays anybody will believe her. We are all a good deal nearer to earth than we were, but, although a husband may consider that devotion to domestic duties will tend to keep his wife out of mischief, it may be surmised that few women would be prepared to come east of Suez if they were not assured that physical labour would be lighter here. A shortage of professional cooks undoubtedly has a most beneficial effect on a nation’s morals by strengthening the marriage tie, because servants cannot be split in half and still retain their utility. “And. mind you, I want the custody of the cook,” said the fat, red-faced man to his solicitor when giving instructions with regard to the taking of
divorce proceedings. In fact this argument is so forcible that it would be well worth the while of those odd “morality councils,” which flourish especially in Anglo-Saxon communities, to subsidise the payment of domestic wages in Sarawak so that the present position may be maintained indefinitely.
If this monetary assistance is not forthcoming another possible development is the employment of women. The amah is already a well-established figure in married households, but it is rare to find a local woman who understands the intricacies of European food. At least one family in which the experiment has been tried in Kuching has had to report abject failure. Yet women are. before matrimony has gone to their heads, on the whole more docile and less grasping than men. It is probable that any loss in efficiency would be more than off-set by a reduction in the “kira.” There is little doubt that very soon in Sarawak they will he clamouring for ‘emancipation,” and insisting on wearing their hands raw in honest toil instead of having to endure the gross hardship involved in getting married and settling down. It would appear to be a golden opportunity to strike two blows for freedom at once. The emancipation of woman from the bonds of her forebears might well l e accompanied by the emancipation of the employer from the bonds of the male cook. This subject, however, cannot be further pursued as it is dangerously open to potential misapprehensions. On one occasion in 1943 the internees in Lintang Camp proposed to debate the motion. “That woman should be put back in her place.” Permission was sought from the Japanese for a discussion on “the emancipation of women,” but the authorities waxed very wroth and it took considerable time and patience to discover that the reason for their fury was that they understood this to mean that their prisoners were plotting to assault the women’s camp and rescue the inmates.
“Too many cooks,” they say, “spoil the broth,” but it generally only takes one in Sarawak. Nevertheless the disappearance of this traditional character would be much regretted. There are some good cooks, and invitations to the houses in which they are employed are much to be desired, but most are inept, deceitful, prone to embezzlement, and not over-clean. At the same time it must be added that they are cheerful, willing, loyal, and resourceful. The manner in which a bachelor’s cook manages to produce a passable meal at midnight for six unexpected guests at five minutes’ notice is a matter for continual wonder. Most Euro- peans rate their cooks far too highly in public, particularly when, after dismissing them for incompetence, the time for giving
a “surat” has come. Yet the fact that length of service is a matter for pride and boasting, both on the part of the employer and of the cook, redounds to the credit of each. We know that our cooks are little skilled in the culinary art, we know that they cheat us, that they gossip about us, that they wipe their hands on the bread and blow on the butter, but they are our friends and we like them, and to any oil man in Miri, or anybody else who is, or is unjustly alleged to be. attempting to filch them from us, we exclaim, “Hands Off,’’ and cry with Shake- speare’s Duke of Norfolk:
"My cookie is my life; both grow in one;
Take cookie from me and my life is done. "
American Airmen Adrift in the Ulu.
Tom Harrisson.
a “surat” has come. Yet the fact that length of service is a matter for pride and boasting, both on the part of the employer and of the cook, redounds to the credit of each. We know that our cooks are little skilled in the culinary art, we know that they cheat us, that they gossip about us, that they wipe their hands on the bread and blow on the butter, but they are our friends and we like them, and to any oil man in Miri, or anybody else who is, or is unjustly alleged to be. attempting to filch them from us, we exclaim, “Hands Off,’’ and cry with Shake- speare’s Duke of Norfolk:
"My cookie is my life; both grow in one;
Take cookie from me and my life is done. "
The interesting article "Heroism in the Limbang" does not quite give a complete picture of the amazing Borneo careers of those American airmen and of others who were cared for and pro- tected with the same extraordinary loyalty and self-sacrifice by the peoples of the Limbang, Trusan, Padas and Mentarang rivers. Perhaps I can usefully add to Major Dyce’s account, which fades out at the Padas, and is uncertain of the beginning dates. I happen to have been “in the picture’’ from the start, when they crashed, to the end, when we were able to return the living to U.S.A, and the relics of some others to a last resting place.
Their Liberator was shot down by a single Zero (!) near Limbang on January 12th, 1945, as I remember because I took the opportunity of going next day, on another plane of the same U.S. Navy Squadron, to try and locate the loss—on the promise they would come back to Moratai over the mountains so that I might seek some dropping grounds. The crashed crew proceeded to the Padas, as recorded by Major Dyce. The pilot, Lt.-Commander Smith, then heard there were American guerrillas at Kudat (!) and decided to make for that area. Three agreed to follow him; the rest of the crew refused. When Smith’s party- passed out of the Hill-Murut country into the Tagal (Tagau) district of Tomani on the lower Padas, they were quickly betrayed. A Jap unit up from Beaufort via Tenom surprised them in a village at night. In the ensuing melee one Yank was speared by a Tagal, and one shot by a B.N.B. constable: their heads were subsequently divided up and distributed in the local manner, and parts were later recovered as far afield as Pensiangan.
Meanwhile Smith surrendered and the fourth man escaped into the jungle, where he was hunted for a week (during which he shot one Jap) before being forced to give himself up. The two men were then, after severe maltreatment, taken down to Beaufort. Then at the end of July, 1945, Eric
Edmeades while making a reconnaissance of the Sapong Estate on the Padas (then Jap GHQ for Borneo) obtained further news of them, working as coolies around the HQ buildings. We were about to combine an attempt to rescue these fellows and to kidnap General Baba when the war ended and we were ordered to withdraw inland—as the Australian 9th Division intended to take over control up to Tomani. In fact, they did not do so; and in the consequent delay and uncertainty, which was alas unduly pronounced, it seems that the Japs quietly got rid of the two Americans as dangerous witnesses. General Baba has recently been sentenced to death by an Australian Military Tribunal.
The other five men, not Kudat-Krazy, went on up the Padas (thankless country to footslog) and came over into the Kemaloeh river in Dutch Borneo. Here they were looked after in a truly wonderful way by the hill-tribes, who are Potoks, first cousins to the Murut-Kelabits and speaking the same language. They were also fortunate in meeting a remarkably fine native missionary, William Mohgan of Makassar who could speak some English (and a little American). The Japs, of course, knew these men were somewhere in the interior, but as in the Limbang the people did not betray them,—often at grave risk or cost to them- selves. Nevertheless they were forced to hide in jungle shelters and suffered great privation through lack of medical stores, mosquito nets and footwear. By now they had linked up with six other Americans, survivors from an American 13th Army Liberator shot down on the Dutch side. One of this crew wandered alone through the jungle for fourteen days before reaching a lonely mountain village, where he was nursed back to life and became, in a few weeks, quite fluent at Potok— the others never even got beyond the bagus stage of Malay.
In March, 1945, I heard of these men, who were said to be about ten days walk eastward from Bareo. Our only medical man at that time, Sergeant F. Sanderson, D.C.M., made a forced march to them, carrying all the stores we could possibly spare, and all our comforts (at that time all supplies had to be dropped from Moratai, thirteen hours flying; so the life line was slender, with three out of six planes lost in the first weeks). Several of the lads were in a terribly bad way by this time; happily we managed to get special supplies dropped nearer them by Catalina, and another orderly to tend them. When they were fit to walk by easy stages over the mountains—harder going in Dutch Borneo than in Sarawak—we brought them into better country, where we prepared an airfield. Some RAAF pilots came in without maps or radio signals to pick the Americans out. These were only the last of the many who risked their lives—and rightly—for these airmen.
To my mind, the behaviour of the people—other than Tagals—in Sarawak, B.N.B. and Dutch Borneo is a lasting symbol of native morale in these lands. And I hope that if it comes to a question of rewards (of which the helpers had no thought at the time) the B.N.B. and Dutch helpers will not be forgotten. For it is sad to admit, but true, that from that day to this no one of any race has had a word of thank you (let alone a tin of peanuts) from those boys to whom they gave back life, liberty and Nashville, Tennessee.
MESSAGE FROM HIS HIGHNESS THE RAJAH TO THE
PEOPLE OF SARAWAK.
CESSION DAY 1ST JULY, 1947.
On this day July 1st, I send warm greetings to all my friends in Sarawak.
A year has passed since Sarawak was ceded to His Majesty the King.
I gave deep thought to this proposal for cession before making it to the
British Government and placing it before the Councils in Kuching. I knew
that it meant the end of Brooke rule, an event which, I was proud to realise,
would be a matter of sorrow to very many of you. Nevertheless I took the
decision because I knew that it was in the best interests of the people of
Sarawak and that in the turmoil of the modern world they would benefit greatly
from the experience, strength and wisdom of British Rule.
I have followed very closely the events of the last year and I am more than
ever convinced that the decision taken was the right one. The assurances given
at the time of cession that there would be no interference with your ancient
customs are being scrupulously observed. At the same time large schemes for
the welfare and betterment of the people have been worked out and will be put
into force with the aid of funds provided by the King's Government in Britain.
I am glad that all these plans adhere to the main principles of the policy of the
three Rajahs in the past, that the interests of the local population shall be
paramount and that development shall be undertaken by the people and for the
benefit of the people of Sarawak.
I know that there are still some in Sarawak, encouraged by persons living
outside the country, who maintain their opposition to what has been done.
Their cry is that they have lost their “independence” and wish to recover it.
What in fact is the position? You have transferred your loyalty from the Rajah
who was like your father to a greater father, the King, who has for so long
been our Protector. Your feet are firmly set on the road which leads to true
independence. Your local institutions are being developed, your power to
express your views on laws and forms of Government is being increased, and
you will gradually approach that goal, already reached by so many peoples who
have had the privilege of Britain's guidance, where you will be completely
self-governing.
The length of time which must elapse before you arrive at that goal will
depend largely on the willingness with which you grasp the hand of friendship
and support held out to you by His Majesty's Government. This is the greatest
opportunity for progress that Sarawak has ever had. With unaltered devotion
for your interests and well-being I say, “Long Live the people of Sarawak.
Long Live the King.”
SABDA SERI PADUKA DULI YANG MAHA MULIA TUAN
RAJA KAPADA RA'AYAT SARAWAK BAGI
HARI PENYERAHAN.
1 HARIBULAN JULY, 1947.
Pada hari ini ia-itu 1 haribulan July, saya memberi tahnni'ah kapada
sekalian kawan2 saya di-Sarawak. Bahawa genap-lah sa-tahun sudah Negeri
Sarawak ini terserah kapada Seri Baginda King.
Bahawa saya sudah chukup timbangkan dengan halus-nya terhadap
chadangan saya bagi serahan ini tadi, sebelom saya hadapkan ia kapada
Kerajaan British, juga sebelom saya bentangkan ia kapada kedua2 Majlis
Council di-Kuching Saya ketahui bahawa langkahan ini ia-lah berma ana
hapus-nya Pemerintahan Brooke, ia-itu suatu peristewa yang saya telah berbesar
hati mengatahui-nya ada-lah ia menyedehkan hati banyak di-antara kamu.
Sunggoh pun demikian saya juga lansongkan terus kerana saya ketahui adalah
ia untok faedah yang baik ka-atas ra’ayat Sarawak jelata, bahawa dengan
kekusutan dunia di-zaman sekarang, mereka pula akan dapat beberapa faedah
yang baik dari kepandai-an, kekuatan dan kebijaksana-an-nya Keraja an
British.
Saya sudah tatapkan betol2 segala kejadian2 pada tahun yang lalu, dan
saya dapati lebeh dari awal-nya tadi bahawa langkah yang telah di-jalankan
itu ada-lah perkara yang sebaik2-nya. Bahkan saperti yang telah di-janjikan
pada masa awal serahan-nya tadi bahawa segala adat2 lama itu ada-lah maseh
di-jaga dengan chermat-nya. Begitu juga chadangan2 yang mustahak ada diatorkan
dengan perbelanja-an Keraja-an Baginda King dari Negara British
bagi memperbaiki kehidupan dan kemajuan rakyat Sarawak jelata. Saya
bersukachita bahawa segala chadangan2 itu sunggoh bersetuju dengan segala
tujuan muslihat ka-tiga2 Raja yang telah lalu, ya'ni segala keperluan2 bagi
ra’ayat hendak lah di-utamakan, juga segala kemajuan pula mau-lah di-usaha
oleh ra’ayat sendiri untok faedah rakyat Sarawak jua, ada-nya.
Saya juga mengatahui bahawa ada sadikit orang2 dalam Sarawak yang.
suka mengekal bantahan mereka ka-atas apa yang telah di-jalankan, dengan
galakkan orang2 dari luar negeri. Mereka berseru bahawa mereka telah
kehilangan “kemerdeheka-an” mereka, dan bermaksud supaya mendapatkan ia
balek semula. Apa kah sebenar keada-an-nya tentang ini? Kamu sudah
memindahkan ta’at setia kamu terhadap Raja yang sebagai bapa itu kapada
saorang bapa yang lebeh besar lagi tinggi ia-itu Seri Baginda King, siapa yang
telah beberapa lama itu tadi menjadi Penaong kita. Bahkan kaki kamu
sekarang sedang berdiri dengan tegap-nya arah jalan yang menuju kapada
kemerdeheka-an yang sebenar-nya. Bahawa adat lembaga kamu sedang diatorkan,
kebebasan kamu bagi bersuara tentang hal Undang-undang kamu serta
pula tentang chorak perintahan kamu ada-lah di-perlebeh-kan, maka kamu akan
berunsor hampir kapada taraf saperti yang telah di-perolehi oleh beberapa
bangsa yang telah berpeluang mendapat penduan dari Negara British, bahawa
di-sini-lah kamu kelak akan berperintahan sendiri dengan sepenoh-nya.
Bahawa tentang masa yang harus di-gunakan pula, sebelom kamu menchapai
kapada taraf itu, ada-lah bergantong kapada keredza-an bagi kamu sendiri
pada menyambutkan jabatan persehabatan dan sukongan yang di-unjok oleh
Keraja-an Seri Baginda. Ini-lah sabesar2 peluang bagi kemajuan Sarawak
yang belom pernah terbuka. Bahawa dengan hati yang tiada berubah walau
sadikit pun kerana muslihat serta keselamatan kamu sekalian, maka saya berseru
“Berkekalan-lah ra’ayat jelata Sarawak. Berkekalan-lah Seri Baginda King.”
LEKA PESAN TUAN RAJA SOH AMBA
RAYAT DALAM MENOA SARAWAK.
HARI CESSION SARI BULAN JULY, 1947.
Hari tu sari bulan July, aku ngirum tabe ka somoa pangan-pangan aku di
menoa Sarawak. Sa taun udah genap menoa Sarawak di serah ka lya Ke
Mulia Raja King.
Aku udah bepikir enggau pengambis ia apin aku nyerah menoa tu ka
Prentah Britis lalu ngengkah ka pekara nya di moa Konsil Konsil di Kuching.
Aku tau ka reti ia ke pia ngapus ka pegai Raja Brooke, ia ke ni, aku udah tau
mega enggau ati ke sumbong, ngenyinu ka ati kita maioh. Entang aku udah
netap ka ati laban aku nemu ari jalai ke pia tau mri pengelantang ka orang
dalam menoa Sarawak lalu ulih laban penusah dalam dunia ke baru diatu sida
ia tau bulih untong dalam penemu, pengering enggau akal ari pegai Britis.
Aku udah mrati bendar pengawa dalam taun ke udah lalu aku puas amat
ati ulih ke diator aku nya jalai ke betol. Janji-janji ia ke di semaia leboh
beserah (Cession) baka ia ke enda ngachau adat lama udah mega di pegai rat.
Serta pengawa besai udah di adang awak ka ngemansang enggau ngelantang
ka orang somoa udah mega di perunding lalu di pejalai enggau ari tulong wang
ke kluar ari Prentah King dalam menoa Britis (Britain).
Aku andal ati somoa perunding ke pia nitih ka asal adat ke di pegai tiga
Raja ke udah, baka ke nguntong ka amba rayat di pejalai brat lalu pemansang
pengawa di pejalai amba rayat empu lalu mri untong ka sida ia empu di
Sarawak.
Aku nemu agi bisi skeda dalam Sarawak, di pransang orang bukai ari luar
menoa, sapa ke agi ngidup bantah-bantah ka penyadi ke udah. Sida ia besru
ka kuasa-diri empu (independence) nyau lenyau lalu deka ngambi ia pulai baru.
Nama pemendar ia reti ke pia? Kita udah mindah pengelurus ati ari Raja
sapa ke baka apai kita ngagai apai ke besai agi, ia-nya Raja King, ia ke udah
lama nyadi peninding nyaga kitai. Kaki kita trengkah tegot ba jalai ngiring
kita nuju penguasa diri empu ke bendar. Adat-adat kita udah di pansang
manah, kita be-empu kuasa bejako mandang ka pikir ke dikedeka kita dalam
adat kita empu lalu dalam jalai mrentah pun ditambah mega, lalu beserunyut
mansang nyapai ka peneka kita, baka ke udah di japai maioh mensia mana ke
udah betuah di iring ka Prentah Britis (British guidance), ari ni kita legi tau
mrentah kita empu.
Pengelama ia maia ngelebus apin kita nuntong ka adan ke pia bepanggai
bendar ari bepagut ba jari ke di unjor soh kita ari Prentah Raja King. Tu
meh tuah ke pemadu besai nuju pengelantang ia ke baru ditemu menoa Sarawak.
Enggau ati ke enda berubah kaseh sayang aku ngemata ka pengelantang
enggau pemansang kita lalu aku nelah, “Slamat kekal amba rayat di Sarawak.
Slamat kekal Raja King.”
( ) Notes and Comments.
The birthday of His Majesty the King was celebrated on Thursday, June 12th. In Kuching His Excellency the Governor took the salute from a dais outside the Government office. The cere- mony was attended by a large crowd and by formations of Mosquitos and Beaufighters which flew past three times.
His Excellency the Governor left Kuching for Singapore on June 26th and was still away at the end of the month.
The Sarawak Gazette respectfully congratulates the following recipients of awards in the Birthday Honours List :
Mr. C, W. DAWSON, C.M.G.
Mr. ONG TIANG SWEE, O.B.E Temonggong koh, M.B.E
These honours were announced at the ceremony referred to above. It was also announced that His Excellency the Governor had been pleased to bestow the title of Datu on Abang Yan bin Datu Bandar Haji Yusop and Abang Abu Talip bin Datu Abang Bol Hassan. The Gazette Extraordinary which published these promotions contained as well a notification to the effect that in future the title of Temonggong will rank in status and emoluments in respect of persons of non-Moham- medan native race with the Malay title of Datu. This, of course, is a most interesting and significant decision. The first chief to receive the privilege is Temonggong Koh, M.B.E.
Another event of June 12th was the public sports meeting held in St. Thomas' School grounds. The races produced some exciting finishes but most of the prizes appeared to go to pupils of the School. The Europeans, who did not otherwise distinguish themselves, reached the final of the tug-of-war, but were then defeated by the Constabulary with a celerity which, one hears, brought some members of the former team no little relief. Great credit is due to the organisers for such a successful and entertaining afternoon.
Lady Arden Clarke left Kuching by plane on June 1st. It is understood that she will be away from Sarawak for a few months.
Mr. and Mrs. C. W. Dawson left Kuching on furlough on June 21st. Mr. Dawson played a leading part, first as British Representative, and then as Officer Administering the Government and Chief Secretary, in the events both prior and sub- sequent to the cession of Sarawak. The news that he had been awarded the C.M.G. brought real pleasure to his friends and colleagues. His genial personality will be much missed by many people during the next few months. The Sarawak Gazette respectfully wishes him and Mrs. Dawson a happy and successful leave.
H.M.S. Alert, with the Commander-in-Chief of the British Pacific Fleet. Vice-Admiral Sir Denis Boyd, K.C.B., C.B.E, D.S.O., on board, arrived at Kuching on Monday, June 16th, and remained until the following Thursday. Lady Boyd and Miss Boyd, the Admiral's wife and daughter, were among the visitors together with a number of other ladies. We are too ignorant of naval matters to be able
to say whether this kind of mixed party is an ancient custom or a modern innovation. It certainly caused surprise and pleasure in Kuching and contributed no little to the success of the high jinks which occupied Tuesday and Wednesday. These included a dance at the Astana on Tuesday, a cocktail party on the Alert on Wednesday and a tattoo on the Constabulary padang later on the last evening. On the athletic side our visitors were defeated al cricket, but one soccer team beat the Chinese 7—1, while another succumbed to a some- what heterogeneous collection of locals 4—0.
The sudden fall in the price of rubber is com- mented on in practically every monthly report. The effects of such a slump are very far-reaching; the small-holder finds himself impoverished, cash is short throughout the community and trade tends to come to a standstill. It is surprising to find that everyone in the world has enough bicycle tyres, shoes, sponges, water-proofs, hose-pipes, toys, and all the other commodities in which this product plays such a useful or indispensable part, or can it be that it is just the way these things are run?
The new Government Ethnologist and Curator of the Museum—more familiar to Sarawak Gazette readers for his recent Kelabit articles and London letters—has now taken up his duties in Kuching. Tom Harrisson says that he is anxious to make the Museum a real and living part of Sarawak, some- thing every visitor wants to see at once, and even- old hand to visit regularly. After seven years of neglect there is a great deal of lost ground to be caught up. Of course that will take time. But meanwhile it is hoped in the near future to have more informative labels on all exhibits, and to pro- duce a really interesting catalogue. Mr. Harrisson will be glad to show anyone round personally, preferably by appointment. Visitors, of all races, are most welcome. New opening hours are now being tried out—8.30 to 12.00 and 1.30 to 5.30 daily, including Sunday. Few countries of equal size can boast a Museum comparable to Sarawak’s, and it is high time the Colony appreciated its good fortune. In other countries, throughout the world, the Kuching Museum is known and esteemed.
A correspondent writes that he has seen “in the roll of old Worcesters who fell in the late war the name of Benjamin Gordon Baring-Gould. He was porn in Kuching on 14th July, 1918, the son of the late Mr. J. Baring-Gould. Resident, Third Division. He went to sea, so I take it that he was killed in a sea action.” Our correspondent adds that he remembers Benjamin Baring-Gould as an infant.
In June Inspector Abang Othman, brother of the Honourable the Datu Bandar. Abang Haji Mustapha, O.B.E., and Abang Haji Abdul Rahim, returned from the United Kingdom, where ho had spent some weeks under the auspices of the British Council. We have much pleasure in publishing on another page an article by the Inspector on his experiences. Tn two months he saw more of England than many English- men see in a life-time. These trips are of immense importance and value in assisting one half of the world to understand the other and it is to be hoped that many more Sarawakians will in due course obtain the same privilege and opportunity. The Inspector’s interesting report of
his tour lays bare the futility of the stock remark invariably made to persons recently returned from Soviet Russia : “Oh, but you only saw what they wanted you to see.”
It would be interesting to know whether it was carelessness, ignorance or a magnificent contempt, which during June led to the issue by Government of bills bearing virulent Japanese propaganda in jawi on the back. Probably it was just due to the paper shortage. In any case the curious mixture of boasts, promises and threats sounds much too fatuous to have any harmful effect nowadays. It is surprising what rubbish can be talked by pro- pagandists when they are completely out of touch with local opinion.
Members of the Sarawak Association have received a circular from the Committee offering the choice of two alternatives which are (a) the liquidation .of the Association and the formation of a new Club “confined to the existing Members and anyone connected with Sarawak prior to the Cession" and (b) the liquidation of the Association and the donation of the funds to a purpose approved by the members. The Committee also invite other suggestions. Mr. Aplin has followed up this circular with a helpful letter in which he emphasises that the Committee is desirous of obtaining the opinions of members in Sarawak. He says : “ hope all those in Sarawak who have received one of these circular letters will reply and not just put it in the waste-paper basket." This subject may concern only a minority of our readers, but, believing as we do that the individuality of Sarawak is something worthy to be preserved, we consider that the old Association of “Sarawakians” has much to commend it. No doubt those who have retired and those who are still in active service look at the subject from different angles, but the suggestion, that it would be deplorable if any association, which tended to draw a line between officers who served in Sarawak before Cession, and officers who entered subsequently thereto, should be formed, might be considered. Some people think that it is fantastic to propose that those who joined the Government service in June, 1946, should be eligible for membership, while those who joined in July of the same year should not. If the sponsors of the scheme had known what difficulty the Secretariat had had in ascertaining the dates of officers’ appointments they might have thought again. The idea of an Association of swan-song singers, with the average age steadily mounting year by year, and its numbers gradually decreasing, until the last toothless rem- nant of the third Rajah’s regime is left to drink by himself the toast of the “good old days," may have little appeal to those who still have before them many years of work in which they will labour side by side with the excluded goats. Let the Sarawak Association live, and let it be open, as it was in days of yore, to all who have served in this happy and friendly country!
Colonial Development Corporation.
The following is an extract from a tele- gram received from the Secretary of State:
“The British Government have been considering means of developing Colonial resources. They con- sider that there is need for improved machinery for
this purpose. The Colonial Development and Welfare Act provides money for improvement of social and other services for the Colonies and helps to provide basic services for further economic devel- opment in the form of improved communications, better agricultural services, water supplies and the like. This has been and is very useful. But it is not enough. An instrument is also required whereby we can undertake individual production projects likely to increase the wealth of the Colonies themselves and to stimulate supply of products of which this country and the world at large stands in need.
The British Government proposes therefore to establish a Colonial Development Corporation with total borrowing powers of the order of 100 million pounds. It will operate on normal commercial principles. Its object will be to establish or assist any enterprise in the Colonies which is designed to increase their general production capacity. No doubt these enterprises will be mainly agricultural but the Corporation will be able to undertake any enterprise which serves the general object.
We propose that the Corporation should be given power to conduct enterprises itself or to set sub- sidiary organisations to run individual projects or to give assistance to existing enterprises.
The Corporation would operate in any Colonial Territory only with the consent of the Secretary of State and the Colonial Government concerned. The intention is that the Corporation and its sub- sidiaries should act generally in close consultation with Colonial Governments, in order to ensure that their activities are conducted in the way best suited to promote the welfare of Colonial peoples.
There would of course be no question of giving the Corporation any general monopoly in Colonial development. It is not intended to supplant private enterprise but to supplement it. While the British Government will continue its policy of encouraging public utilities and other suitable forms of public enterprise it will also welcome private enterprise and investment in Colonies so long as it is in harmony with the plans of the Colonial Government for social and economic development.
The British Government proposes to introduce legislation to establish the Colonial Development Corporation. It is proposed that the same legislat- ion should provide for the establishment of the Corporation which is to take over the Ground Nuts Project established in East Africa by the Minister of Food. This would be a separate body from the main Colonial Development Corporation and provision would be made for it to undertake enter- prises similar to the Ground Nuts Project over a wide field. The two bodies would work in closest liaison with one another.”
Census.
All governments the world over take some kind of census from time to time, the best known being a population census. In 1939 the Sarawak Govern- ment carried out an enumeration which did not amount to a complete population census because of the intervention of war. Nevertheless the information collected was extremely valuable and among other tilings it enabled the Government to obtain food and distribute it equitably.
2.
A new Census Ordinance came into force on 2nd June, 1947. This Ordinance us very little different from the Census Order published before the war.
3.
Also on 2nd June a notice was published to the effect that a census of the population will be token in Sarawak between 27th October and 11th December, 1947, and that the numbering of houses preliminary thereto will commence in August.
4. In the same Gazette appeared the appoint- ment of a Superintendent, Deputy Superintendent and 21 Assistant Superintendents of Census for the purpose of earn ing out the 1917 Census.
5. This forthcoming census will be a lengthy proceeding spread over the next five months until the middle of December. The numbering of houses will commence in August and will take about a month. House Numberers will affix number plates to the houses, or write numbers on them, at the same time enquiring the name of the principal occupier and the number of people living in each house. It will be seen, therefore, that this opera- tion will not inconvenience the people in any way.
6. The next operation will be what is called the Preliminary Enumeration. It will commence about the end of October, when Enumerators will visit all houses throughout the country, asking a number of questions in respect of each individual. These questions will probably be as follows ;—
Name;
Sex:
Conjugal condition (i.e., single, married, widowed or divorced):
Age:
Country of Birth;
Race;
Religion ;
If a woman, the number of children (a) born, and (b) still alive;
Ability to read and write any language;
Occupation :
Industry.
7. The night of the 26th, 27th November, 947, has been fixed for the final date of the Census. Thus, early on 27th November, all Enumerators will visit the houses once again and chock those particulars which have already been recorded by them. This operation will not take very long, and its main purpose is to strike off the lists any names of persons who died before midnight of the 26th and to add to the lists any babies born.
8. When the Final Enumeration has been completed, the information collected will be sum- marised and published. It can be seen from the questions to be asked just bow valuable the published information will be. They will give us information on housing, sex ratios, age groups, vital statistics, fertility, literacy, immigration, occupations, industries, etc. There is no need to enlarge upon the value of this information. One has only to consider how much an Education or a Health Department can benefit, just to touch on two aspects. No person can fail to realise that the Census must be of benefit to every person of every race.
9. There must be many public-spirited men who can see in this Census an opportunity to give their services freely in the interests of the general community. In the schools, too, there are boys
old enough and with sufficient education to be of great assistance. By volunteering they will be per- forming a public service and improving their own education. Offers of assistance will be gratefully accepted by Assistant Superintendents.—(Con- tributed.)
A Visit to the United Kingdom.
I was one of the five Malayan visitors to the United Kingdom under the auspices of the British Council. The other members of the party were Mr. T. R. Abraham, headmaster of Batu Road English School, Kuala Lumpur, Mr. Abdul Aziz bin Yeop, Malay Administrative Officer, Kuantan, Mr. Ng Keam Nyan, Book-stall Manager, Seremban, and Mr. Lim Yew Hock, General Secretary, Clerical and Administrative Union, Singapore.
We started our journey from Singapore. The three from Malaya left by air a few days before us. Mr. Lim Yew Hock and myself left by York plane on the 26th of March and arrived in England on the 30th of March. It was a very pleasant journey and took only five days from Singapore to England, travelling over 7 hours a day, calling at Negambo (Ceylon), Mauripur (Karachi). Habbaniya (Iraq) and Malta. We landed at Lyneham, Swindon, and went by train to Paddington. It was our first experience of cold weather when we set foot at Lyneham. Though we missed the snow we found the sudden change of climate was rather unbear- able. The warm clothing and thick overcoats which we put on at the time did not keep us from shivering.
A Visit to the United Kingdom.
I was one of the five Malayan visitors to the United Kingdom under the auspices of the British Council. The other members of the party were Mr. T. R. Abraham, headmaster of Batu Road English School, Kuala Lumpur, Mr. Abdul Aziz bin Yeop, Malay Administrative Officer, Kuantan, Mr. Ng Keam Nyan, Book-stall Manager, Seremban, and Mr. Lim Yew Hock, General Secretary, Clerical and Administrative Union, Singapore.
We were well received by the British Council on our arrival in London, and, having met Sir Angus Gillan, we were accommodated in the South Kensington Hotel with the other three Malayan visitors. The programme of our visits was arranged by Mr. D. J. Eales-White, Programme Organiser of the Visitors’ Department. British Council. A temporary fellowship of the Royal Empire Society had been accorded to each of us for the period of our stay in London, and we were provided with a special car and guide on every visit.
The first few days included a tour of London, visits to Eton and Windsor Castle, the National Gallery, the London Regional Headquarters of the Fire Service, the Albert Embankment, the Stipen- diary Magistrate’s Court, Bow Street, the Zoolo- gical Gardens, and Regent's Park, and we spent one evening as guests of Mr. Eales-White at the Sadler's Wells Ballet, Royal Opera House, Covent Garden, and dinner.
As we moved about in London by ourselves we met with a friendly atmosphere everywhere. The people were very good, polite and kind to us. The London policemen are wonderful. They controlled the crowds without the slightest excitement. None of us were afraid of getting lost as everywhere we went in London there was always a policeman to help us find our way.
Our next programme was a visit to Stratford-on- Avon for one week. Here we joined the students from Europe, Turkey, Egypt, Sudan. China, Mexico, Sierra Leone and Cyprus, who were taking a course to study the life of William Shakespeare, under the auspices of the British Council. The programme included a visit to Holy
Trinity Church, where Shakespeare was buried. In the same church is the register containing entries of Shakespeare's baptism and burial, his grave and his monument in the chancel. Shakes- peare’s Birthplace, New Place, where there are many relics of archaelogical, theatrical and Shakespearean interest, and gardens. Other places we saw wore Anne Hathaway’s Cottage at Shottery, the maiden house of Shakespeare’s wife, a thatched house of Elizabethan period furniture: Charlecote Park and Charlecote Mansion, one of the finest specimens of Elizabethan architecture and home of the Lucy family; Mary Arden’s home at Wilmcote, a picturesque Gothic manor-house which was the maiden home of the poet’s mother, with an old ham; St. Mary's Church, Warwick; the Beau- champ Chapel: and Warwick Castle. The pro- gramme also included a lecture on Shakespeare’s Life and Times, and introductory talks on "Romeo and Juliet," "Warwick Castle” and "Dr. Faustus." We attended performances of "Romeo and Juliet" and "Dr. Faustus” at the Shakespeare Memorial Theatre and witnessed a meeting of the Stratford-on-Avon Borough Council.
We returned to London for a few days. For the first time we saw the leaves and flowers begin to make their appearance in the parks. Sometimes we could enjoy bright sunshine for the whole day. Our programme included visits to the Victoria and Albert Museum and the British Museum. We attended a reception at the British Council in our honour, where we had the pleasure of meeting and talking with the Rt. Hon. Mr. Creech-Jones, Secretary of State for the Colonies, and other distinguished guests, and bad photographs taken together with Mr. Creech-Jones and Sir Ronald Adam, Chairman of the British Council.
I visited Bristol on the 24th of April to the 8th of May, the programme of visits being arranged by Mr. A. G. Griffin, Area Officer of the British Council, Bristol. The visit included a tour of Bristol, the Avon Gorge, Clifton Suspension Bridge and eighteenth century houses in Royal York Crescent, Clifton. I had tea at the Royal Empire Society, Whiteladies Road. On a visit to the Bristol Aeroplane Co., Ltd., Filton, an aircraft factory, 1 saw the Bristol 1947 achievement, the "Bristol” Type 167 trans-oceanic air-liner, nearing completion in immense erecting halls. At Long Ashton Research Station I saw the scientific method of planting fruit, especially tomato, with- out bearing seed. At Bristol Constabulary Head- quarters I saw the sytem of fingerprints, identific- ation, information room and radio patrol cars. I visited the Bristol District Federation of Boys’ Clubs and Mixed Clubs. I spent one afternoon visiting W.D. & H.O. Wills’ Cigarette Factory at Bedminster, and was particularly interested to see the manufacture of tobacco in its various forme, roll, twist, pigtail, cutcake, cutplug, mixtures, shags, cigarettes, cigars and snuff, all by means of machinery. I visited Bath and spent the whole morning at the Great Roman Bath, the finest Roman antiquity in Great Britain. I saw the historic 18th Century Pump Room, where radio- active waters are served for drinking, and the Hot Mineral Springs, the only Hot Springs in Britain. I found the Circus and Royal Crescent very interesting, particularly the Georgian architecture, and I was struck to hear that the city has close links with Sarawak as Sir James Brooke used to live at I, Widcombe Crescent. I went to the Bristol Evening Post office and the modern secondary school. I spent one afternoon at the B.B.C. West of England, Home Service, and saw the broadcasting room, recording room, and music and concert rooms. I spent an evening as the guest of the Anglo-Polish Association, Bristol. I attended the May Day demonstration at Queens-square and heard speeches by Sir Stafford Cripps and Mr. W. A. Wilkins M.P. I visited Professor MacInnes, Professor of British Imperial History of Bristol University, and the Bristol Art Gallery. I spent one evening with Mr. Griffin attending the Ballet Rambert at the Theatre Royal, and the last visit was to the Bristol Public Library where I was shown round bv the Bristol City Librarian.
We then split up to carry out our provincial tours individually; Mr. T. R. Abraham to Birmingham and Cambridge, Mr. Abdul Aziz bin. Yeop to Oxford, Exeter and Devonshire, Mr. Lim Yew Hock to Cardiff and South Wales. Mr. Ng Keam Nyan to Oxford and Scotland and myself to South- ampton, Bristol and Manchester.
I left London for Southampton on a ten day visit. The programme was arranged by Mr. R. C. Allan, Area Officer of the British Council. It consisted of tours of Southampton and visits to the Police Headquarters to study the system of finger- prints, identification, and photography, and I saw the river police at work. On that trip also I saw divers working on the "Queen Elizabeth" when she was aground. Visiting Southampton Harbour. I saw some big ocean-going liners including the "America," "Carnarvon Castle," "Almazora" and "Mauretania,” and also the "Queen Mary” in the dry dock. I visited Parkhurst Prison on the Isle of Wight and was shown round the prison personally by the Governor. I also visited Boys’ Clubs, Youth Clubs and Schools. At the Dockland Settlement Club, a mixed club. I gave a talk on Sarawak and answered questions. I saw the English country-side and made trips to Aldershot and Winchester. I visited Hampshire County Farm Institute and saw their course of training and also inspected Winchester nurseries. I spent one day at Thornycroft’s Shipyards where a destroyer was being built and I was specially interested in a "Stern Wheeler," designed for use in the Burmese rivers, which was similar to the old up-river boat "Simpo” of Sarawak. In the afternoon with Inspector Garland I witnessed the football match between Sheffield United and Southampton and spent that evening as the guest of the Southampton Police in their club.
I visited Bristol on the 24th of April to the 8th of May, the programme of visits being arranged by Mr. A. G. Griffin, Area Officer of the British Council, Bristol. The visit included a tour of Bristol, the Avon Gorge, Clifton Suspension Bridge and eighteenth century houses in Royal York Crescent, Clifton. I had tea at the Royal Empire Society, Whiteladies Road. On a visit to the Bristol Aeroplane Co., Ltd., Filton, an aircraft factory, 1 saw the Bristol 1947 achievement, the "Bristol” Type 167 trans-oceanic air-liner, nearing completion in immense erecting halls. At Long Ashton Research Station I saw the scientific method of planting fruit, especially tomato, with- out bearing seed. At Bristol Constabulary Head- quarters I saw the sytem of fingerprints, identific- ation, information room and radio patrol cars. I visited the Bristol District Federation of Boys’ Clubs and Mixed Clubs. I spent one afternoon visiting W.D. & H.O. Wills’ Cigarette Factory at Bedminster, and was particularly interested to see the manufacture of tobacco in its various forme, roll, twist, pigtail, cutcake, cutplug, mixtures, shags, cigarettes, cigars and snuff, all by means of machinery. I visited Bath and spent the whole morning at the Great Roman Bath, the finest Roman antiquity in Great Britain. I saw the historic 18th Century Pump Room, where radio- active waters are served for drinking, and the Hot Mineral Springs, the only Hot Springs in Britain. I found the Circus and Royal Crescent very interesting, particularly the Georgian architecture, and I was struck to hear that the city has close links with Sarawak as Sir James Brooke used to live at I, Widcombe Crescent. I went to the Bristol Evening Post office and the modern secondary school. I spent one afternoon at the B.B.C. West of England, Home Service, and saw the broadcasting room, recording room, and music and concert rooms. I spent an evening as the guest of the Anglo-Polish Association, Bristol. I attended the May Day demonstration at Queens-square and heard speeches by Sir Stafford Cripps and Mr. W. A. Wilkins M.P. I visited Professor MacInnes, Professor of British Imperial History of Bristol University, and the Bristol Art Gallery. I spent one evening with Mr. Griffin attending the Ballet Rambert at the Theatre Royal, and the last visit was to the Bristol Public Library where I was shown round bv the Bristol City Librarian.
I visited Manchester from the 8th to the 15th of May. The programme of the visit was arranged by Mr. H. Phillips, Area Officer, British Council, Manchester. The programme included visits to the Police Headquarters, for the purpose of studying police methods of recording crime, fingerprints, identification and photography. I saw the Lake District and spent one afternoon at Windermere and Bowness. I enjoyed the cruise around the lake and was particularly interested to see the cluster of islands dotted along the 10 1/2 miles lake. I spent one day at Keswick and cruised around Derwent-water and visited the Castle Head and was very much interested to see the beautiful valley and its surroundings. I paid a brief visit to Cockermouth and Maryport. The next visit was to the Public Library, Albert Square, Manchester, and I spent some time in the library. I spent one morning at the Stipendiary Magistrate’s Court at Manchester and saw how the cases were-conducted and dealt with. I visited the Dunlop Cotton Mill at Bolton and was specially interested to see the process of weaving. I visited the Police District Training Centre at Warrington and saw the recruits training, being shown round personally by Chief Constable P. Hawkins. I had lunch with
the officers and staff. The afternoon I spent at Chester to see the city wall which is a relic of Roman architecture.
I returned to London on the 16th of May and attended a tea party with Mr. Ivor Thomas at the Colonial Office, Downing Street, S.W.l. A further programme included a visit to the British Industries Fair. St. Pauls Cathedral, the Tower of London. Tower Bridge, Madame Tussauds, and the Mansion House. I visited the House of Commons, the Boy Scouts Association and Their Highnesses the Rajah and Ranee of Sarawak. I spent an evening with Mr. Eales-White to see “Bless the Bride" at the Adelphi Theatre and supper.
The last day was devoted to a visit to Scotland Yard, where I saw the information room, museum, C.I.D. and crime records, plastic maproom, ultra- voilet light and graph supplement report. I attended the reception in our honour at the Association of British Malaya, Overseas House, St. James, S.W.l, and a farewell dinner by the British Council.
Four of us left London on the morning of May 23rd and embarked in the S/S “Empress of Scotland" at Liverpool, sailing for Singapore. We arrived at Singapore on the 11th of June. 1947, having two brief calls at Port Said and Suez. We had a very pleasant voyage. While on board we were twice entertained to tea by the master of the ship, Captain J. W. Thomas, and given the privilege of touring the bridge and seeing the Radar in operation. Our friend Mr. Ng Keam Nyan had staved behind to go to Oslo where he will represent the Methodist Youth Fellowship at the World’s Youth Conference.
My visit to the United Kingdom as a whole was most interesting and enjoyable. I have with me always the memory of the visit, the experience which I gained, the good impressions of the country and the people whom I had come across. My grateful thanks are due to the British Council as a host and for sponsoring the visit.
Abang Othman.
The Soldier and the Almanac.
The Sarawak Gazette Almanac is one of those excellent and useful institutions that so easily come to be taken for granted. We use it to refer to dates and to calculate the distance of the next holiday, while many of the events noted under various dates remain meaningless and are ignored. For instance : Lang Endang, Bong Kap, Bukit Balong, Wong Adai.
A short time ago it was my good fortune to meet one of those old soldiers, a man with a straight back and a clear eye, illiterate and of few words, sober and full of practical good sense. For all his seventy years he can still handle a rifle and work, unhurried but steady, from dawn to dusk. It is hardly surprising that he complains of occasional rheumatism, for he joined the Rangers in 1893 and has been roughing it through the length and breadth of the country ever since.
He was trained at Kuching and had a hand in the building of the parade ground at the Depot. Empty oil-drums were laid in small valleys and these covered over with earth. Each man had his daily task of earth to carry until the work was
finished. It was there that he learned to handle a brass cannon and saw a man's hand blown off through carelessness. He has accompanied the Second Rajah in the Zahora, has been on countless expeditions and has seen service in every station in the country. He retired after the Kapit Peace- making but had hardly settled down before he was called out against Asun about 1930.
It is from him, and from his point of view, that I have these few tales to tell. He wanned a little to his story after it struck him that "these new folk don't know anything about these things.” He is perhaps right, and perhaps many don't care, but some knowledge of these old wars does help towards understanding and his remark encouraged me to write it all down.
Lang Endang was a Dayak of the Katibas who was dwarfed in the legs. His feet were those of a small child, but his arms were powerful enough for him to rely upon them in his journeys by land or water. For a time he terrorised the middle Rejang by taking the heads of Malays and Chinese. He sickened and died before the expedition of 1879 caught him.
In 1903 the people of Ulu Kanowit were out after heads and kept the surrounding country in fear. They built themselves a boat of great size (bong), which is said to have carried 150 armed men and to have been so wide that a man could lie full length across the middle of it. A Government force went up to deal with them and was able to lay an ambush for the Bong Kap above Julau. On the way down from Meluan there is a sharp leftward bend with bad rocks stretching in from the right and below : this is Wong Adai.
the officers and staff. The afternoon I spent at Chester to see the city wall which is a relic of Roman architecture.
I returned to London on the 16th of May and attended a tea party with Mr. Ivor Thomas at the Colonial Office, Downing Street, S.W.l. A further programme included a visit to the British Industries Fair. St. Pauls Cathedral, the Tower of London. Tower Bridge, Madame Tussauds, and the Mansion House. I visited the House of Commons, the Boy Scouts Association and Their Highnesses the Rajah and Ranee of Sarawak. I spent an evening with Mr. Eales-White to see “Bless the Bride" at the Adelphi Theatre and supper.
In that March, 1904, the river was full and running fast. As the Bong Kap came down to the bend in all the panoply of war it was rudely shaken by volleys of rifle lire from the banks. Control was lost and the great boat was swept upon the rocks. It was smashed between water and rock so that those who escaped the bullets were drowned.
Two years later there was trouble in the Entaih. Head-hunting was carried so far that even people living on the Batang Rejang dared not go abroad after dark. Three forces went up; 900 men under Mr. Gifford from Kanowit, a similar number under Mr. Cunningham from Betong and another large force from Saratok. Some small preliminary’ engage- ments were fought which served to drive the “rebels’ in upon their centre. This was a fortified house, very long, upon the ridge of Bukit Balong and commanded by one, Apai Bakum.
Bukit Balong is not always marked on the maps. It is a long hogsback about sixteen miles to the north of Gunong Sadok and is almost a better land- mark for it is more isolated. Balong is a tree whose bark is a substitute for cloves.
When the three forces closed in on the hill, the besieged rolled down logs and stones upon them. Many casualties were caused among the attackers since they failed to use the protection afforded by standing trees. They were checked until they brought up their meriam priok. With this they bombarded and broke up the house until the assault could be carried with success. Apai Bakum and his principal following were killed and the rest scattered through the countryside as fugitives.
My old soldier dismissed the remainder as minor punitive expeditions of no importance (ngayau anak) against petty nuisances. But there was one
exception and that appears briefly in the Almanac under the second of April—"Nanga Pila, 1916."
Some Kayans had come down to Kapit to make purchases, but feeling between Dayaks and Kayans was still so strong that they were given an escort of fifteen men for the return journey. Just above Nanga Pila the party decided to make a meal and rest, running their boats in at the lower end of a sandbank. One of the Kayans had occasion to climb the little ridge that ran back across a bend of the river there and it was lucky that he did so, for he saw several hundred Dayaks coming down- river in boats, armed and evidently looking for trouble. He at once cried "Ayau! Ayau !" and the party set themselves ready upon the ridge, the Kayans loading for the fifteen riflemen.
The Dayaks rounded the bend, saw the boats and came in to attack over the sandbank. The sand was loose, soft and partly covered with water, so that they were trapped as soon as they left their boats. They were shot as they floundered and none reached the ridge. The old Ranger says the shooting was so furious that his hands were blistered with the work.
"He is a man of no estimation in the world but I did see him do gallant service.” It is a pity that such service is negative and there is nothing positive to prevent it being necessary in the future.—(Contributed.)
The Passing of the "Maymount."
Times change we are told, and even Sibu— that backwash of Kuching as it is called, or metro- polis of the hulu, depending on where you live— has had to bow to the inevitable. It is not often that the Kubu Wharf is constrained to carry such a large portion of the population as it did to-day which is perhaps just as well, for I never did fancy the mud beneath, and perhaps it is just as well too that its size is as it is or still more of the colourful crowd would surely have tested the strength of its construction.
But it was a lovely morning, this 19th of June, with the birds twittering (we expect), the sun shining, the urchins yelling their wares, and the perspiration pouring down as it only knows how- to do in Sibu or did in the internees' chain-gang. The holiday crowd was in the best of spirits for this was a special occasion. To-day is not like other days when we have turned out to watch the Queen of the Rejang River steam slowly to her moorings or leave them with that incredible skill at navigation that makes swinging ships miss stationary ships by less than the length of the jamban. We had once thought in our ignorance that most of the populace turned out to meet the ocean giant. Perhaps it does, and perhaps it is the more colourful gathering that speeds its departure that makes it appear that the latter event is the social heyday of the week.
In any case to-day was exceptional. To-day we watched the "Empire Maymount" steam away to return no more. To-day we did not mind the
clouds of black smoke that belched forth from the monster's funnel and were swept on the breeze as if loath to leave the surface of this world. We hoped perhaps that they might cloak the express- ions of sentiment displayed by those not so well able to conceal them as the gaily-bedecked section of the fairer sex who seem week by week unfail- ingly to attend the sailing of this liner. And what is more we had entertainment too. Our prima donna (or are those only female?) was there and, far from allowing us to forget a notable concert given here by the Constabulary some while ago, he was determined that before his sojourn in India we should be reminded of his famous repertoire "No No Nona."
It was good this effort too, and helped relieve the pangs of parting. And while the waiting mob was being entertained from this end of the ship the other end too (is it the bows or stern—the rudder end?) was not allowing those stalwart Sibuans to sink to assumption of the expression usually acquired by wares on marble slabs. Oh no! here was just what the doctor ordered in the way of exercise for the lungs and practice for Hyde Park. Despite l ck of soap box a veritable torrent of words was pouring on to the benign heads of those who waited. We don’t know what they were all about but it is a free country, and more than one hearty cheer expressed the apparent satis- faction of the audience.
And so we stood, and we watched and we wilted and we waited; but even the “Maymount” it seems was resigned to eventual departure. To “No No Nona” from one end, and a speech that would have delighted an American baseball com- mentator from the other, the “Maymount” decided k. add its voice. And the “Maymount" has a good voice : a very deep and resonant voice : one that, used a mile down the river, sounds the police guard- room bell almost of its own accord. And the "Maymount” spoke. Perhaps it said good-bye. Perhaps it said that with a new name and—who knows—some mail it would return next week. But whatever it said we heard it; and when it had had its say we still heard it until our aural chords had returned to more normal strains. But we missed something: we were rudely interrupted. By the time we had removed fingers from ears “No No Nona” was once more into the chorus and the speaker's story had passed beyond the crucial point. But there we were : we had truly had it. We had had the singer and the orator, and if their audiences had been disturbed by the mechanical age at least they had not.
But there was worse in store. They beat the winches : they even almost held their own against the windlass, but distance came to our aid, and away went the “Empire Maymount" from Sibu with its talent and its smoke and its bags of traditional official complaints. And we went home or back to our offices. And we didn’t fire 21 guns because by the time we had done that (judging by experience) the Queen of the Rejang would be approaching the sea. So we just turned our backs and we wait until next week, and we shall then doubtless greet the “Meluan” in the time-honoured Sibu fashion, and we shall fight for our mail and be sorry when we have it, and we shall go on sweating and working and grousing while times change. Sic transit gloria : once more unto the breach dear friends once more, and did anyone say “Dum Spiro Spero?"—(Contributed.)
My Wireless.
I want to tell you about my wireless. But a few
introductory remarks in general are first called for.
The whole subject, of course, got completely out
of hand with the arrival of a thing called the Valve
which came to my notice in the "twenties."
Before that we built our own Crystal sets out of
shellac, cardboard cylinders, and bits of galena.
We knew that things like
meant "a
variable resistance.” Life was simple among the
circuits in those days.
Nowadays it’s much complicated. Broadcasting
from Australia this evening the announcer suddenly
interrupted the programme to give me or somebody
a personal message. He said "This is Radio
Australia........... chunner..............chunner..............
and now I welcome to our programme all those on
eleven point eight three megacycles.” Well! I
ask you! I wanted to be welcomed for my own
dear, lovable self, and not because of my Megacycles.
And what arc these Megacycles. Mega, comes
from the Greek and means "great” or "large,”
and Cycle.............well, anyone knows what that
is. Why, I ask you, should the gentleman in
Australia suddenly select for special mention all
those who have eleven and an unheard of fraction
of large bicycles? What about those who
anxiously awaiting the Salaries Commission, are
only in a position to support a lesser number of
motor-bikes? Is the A.B.C. going to cold-shoulder
them? If so, I offer Australia a solemn warning.
This sort of thing can easily lead to international
Incidents.
Suppose, for instance, Turkey refuses radio intercourse
with large groups of persons in Azerbaidzjan,
simply because they individually possess, less than
the optimum number of refrigerators, sewing
machines, or egg-beaters. It leads to Dictators or
something. Didn’t psychologists, before the war,
cite Hitler as a Megalocyclomaniac? You see, it
all ties up.
The other day I was trying a wireless set (I
mean not actually worrying it, but testing it with
a view to purchase) when it suddenly occurred to
me that I should get some expert advice on its
suitability. At great expense I was able to procure
some from the right quarter (not the half-pint, but
the other “stengah”). Well he came along and
dismissed the whole contraption with a wave of
his unoccupied hand. He dwelt at considerable
length on the absence of a Pre-amplification
Rectification” (or vice versa) thing. It appears
this thing lets you listen to the B.B.C. at the time
when you should be putting the children to bed.
Otherwise it does no harm. Absolutely soulless
people these experts. He was quite unable to take
into account the beautiful polished cabinet, the
fascinating “Magic eye,” or the droll little switch
at the back marked “Gram.”
You may think I’m being rather silly about these
technical things. Mr. Editor, but I can assure you
that there was a time when I could define a volt, an
ohm and a wattnot (the latter, by the way. has
nothing to do with Watts, really, in the same way
as horses having nothing to with horse-power).
And here we are back on terminology. I want
to make a plea for cutting it all out. In my young
days we didn’t have Megalocycles heterodyne and
Band spread (ger: Bundspradt). Take heed. This
infusion of fascist words is the fore-runner of an
open split in our Democracy.
Then there is that quaint little button at
the back, marked “Earth.” Fighting with their
shirts off 1 have seen grown men maintaining
either that it should or should not be connected by
a wire to the lavatory cistern. I have also watched
the cynical expert standing by in the full knowledge
that the makers of wireless sets simply put these on
the back to pander to tradition, and they are not
connected up to anything inside, anyway.
Static is a subject too wide to deal with in a
short article like this, but I would refer readers
to my book entitled “Static, before the time of
Napoleon.”
Finally, I see the warders coming, but before I
go I just want you to tune in and hum this little
chant with me. It goes to “Land of H and G."
To be D.C.,
Or not to be
Troubleth me
As purchasee
Of set, A.C.
2
At Battersee
It seems to me
It’s all A.C.
(and B.B.C.).
or D.C.
3
But possiblee
As transferee
To Miri
All will be
Extremelee
Batteree.
Terminology is the study of Terminals, and is not confined
to wireless but includes the study of Railway stations.
Other good books by me are :
The Resistance Movement.
Shortwaves and Brainwaves.
Valves, Volta, and Vamps, (very vunny).
A.K.T.
Guides Are Jolly People
Not Like Soldiers.
The following note has been handed to us
as a contribution to the Sarawak Gazette.
If there is, lurking and skulking in the
shadows, an Aunt Sally against whom this
shy appears to be aimed, we trust that it
will set his last lingering doubts at rest.
Few things in this world are either black or
white but he would be blind indeed who did
not see a good deal of value in this great
international movement.
“SARAWAK GUIDES.
The first Brownie pack has been started in
Sarawak and includes Chinese, Malay, Dayak and
English little girls who seem to enjoy playing
games and listening to stories together. On
Saturday, June 7th, fifteen out of thirty of these
Brownies were enrolled at St. Theresa’s School.
On the afternoon of June the 10th the 1st
Sarawak Guide Company met at St. Mary’s
School, Kuching, for the enrolment of twelve
Tenderfoots by their Commissioner. This Company
was started by Doreen Ee, a pupil at St.
Mary's School, and later assisted by Miss Rozario. Unfortunately the latter had to resign owing to ill health, and the Company was left without a Captain. Eventually a new Captain and Lieu- tenant were found and they took over the Company early this year.
For the benefit of those who have not been fortunate enough to learn about Brownies and Guides, and perhaps think that their main object is to wave flags and behave like soldiers, I should like to quote a paragraph from one of our Guide Books:—“Brownies and Guides are jolly people who enjoy themselves, and are a happy sisterhood who do good turns to other people."
I wish that many more people could have been present at our simple enrolment ceremony on the 10th, as I feel sure that they would have been touched by the sincere manner in which the girls made their promises, and, in particular, that which states “My honour means that I can be trusted to be truthful and honest."
Surely an organization that is endeavouring to instil this idea in a world so filled with distrust and fear cannot be at fault.”
Stories of Old Sarawak: 1.
Many, many years ago a certain Resident dwelt in a certain outstation. At that time the counter- parts of the people we nowadays call "District Officers" were all "Residents," unless they were very junior indeed or not gentlemen; a historical fact which still manages to bring a blush to the cheek and a frown to the brow of the young cadet when he thinks that a benighted native is mistaking him for his aging chief. The Resident with whom our story deals was a staunch "disciplinarian." One day he sent his police sergeant to call a suspected malefactor to his office. The sergeant, having received a very reasonable explanation from his quarry, returned alone. "Why haven’t you arrested the man?," demanded the Resident, and as the sergeant stuttered, "Well, sir, I thought -----------his superior fell back on the time- honoured refuge of "disciplinarians" : "You're not paid to think; you’re paid to obey my orders.”
Several months later cholera broke out in the bazaar. Whenever one individual in a shop-house was stricken down his relations forsook him and took refuge with neighbours. After a short time the ancient and respected Kapitan himself con- tracted the disease. His first wife, his second wife, his third wife, his mother, his aunt, and his children all fled from his bedside, leaving no one behind to tend the dying man. After two days his old friends and colleagues in the bazaar began to get restive. It was true that corpses bad been left lying about but it was scarcely fitting that the Kapitan should be treated in this irreverent manner. Besides, being Kapitan. he would pro- bably smell more than most. A little deputation of leading towkays wended its way up the hill to seek the assistance of Government. Sadly they told the story. Two days ago the Kapitan had been laid low with cholera; he had been deserted by all his friends and relations; shortly his corpse would be a nuisance in the bazaar and any way he deserved decent burial. “Certainly," said the Resident. “Sergeant, take six prisoners and carry the old Kapitan across the river and bury him." The sergeant saluted smartly and left.
Two hours later he came back. “Well," asked the Resident, “did you carry out my orders?” “Of course we did. sir,” replied the sergeant, “but he fought like a devil going across the river.”
This Sarawak.
(With apologies to the New Statesman and Nation.)
I am pity to see their misunderstanding, and 1 can't help it, I have to make a report about all these people as they spat in our faces by their rough words...........................We are sent officially
for the matter and not to be spat.—A report.
His Excellency inspected the----------— detach-
ment of the Sarawak Constabulary commenting on their smart appearance, a reflection on the excellent work of Sergeant--------------.—.A monthly report.
LONDON.—It has been announced in Stock- holm that the 1952 meeting of the Olympic Games will be held in Helsinski, the capital of Poland.— Sarawak Tribune.
Their investigation revealed that there was no cholera but found instead some children suffering from diarrhoea which the teacher of the vernacular school at-----------------suspected to be symptoms
of cholera. At the request of the Health Inspector the teacher gave a short lecture on the prevention of diarrhoea to his pupils.—A monthly report.
The procedure followed by the District Officer, -----------------, in connection with Betty was most improper.—A memorandum.
(The Editor is unable to follow the example of our illustrious contemporary and offer a prize for the best entry in this column. Contributions from all parts of “This Sarawak" will, however, be warmly appreciated and the most favoured will be given pride of place.)
Fifty Years Ago.
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, JULY 1st, 1897.
Our Notes :—
In the Police Court on the 10th June, Ngwee Ah Kit alias Ngun Ah See, steward on board the p.s. Adeh, was charged with smuggling opium. Prisoner bought 52 tahils at Brooketon with the intention of smuggling the same into Labuan. The vessel however did not call at Labuan, but came direct to Kuching. Prisoner for his defence said that finding the ship did not go to Labuan he threw the opium over board. Fined $300 or in default three years’ imprisonment.
Limbang Monthly Report:—
On the 11th during my absence at Brooketon a Dyak named Langut reported that Orang Kaya Lawi the Murut chief of the Lubai had beaten a man named Tagal about the head causing his death. On hearing this Mr. Day sent up the Native chief and some Rangers to arrest Orang Kaya Lawi on suspicion; he was brought down and imprisoned to await trial. On the morning of the second day of his detention however, the Orang Kaya was found dead in his cell with a cloth twisted tightly round his neck having strangled himself.
Mr. Day held an inquest on the body and the jury gave a verdict of suicide probably caused by fear of getting a long term of imprisonment.
The matter so far passed off quietly but towards the end of the month it was reported to me that Pateh. a Padas Murut and a relation of the deceased Orang Kaya, who had been living in Lubai for about year past, had been saying that he would bring up a case against Government and get damages for the Orang Kaya’s death, and other things likely to bring the Government into disrepute. I therefore sent for this man, and he was brought up in Court and warned that if any- thing more of a like nature was heard of him. he would get a term of imprisonment and then be banished from the territory.
NOTICE.
Astana Farm Prod ce.
Will be supplied to customers at the following rates :—
Orders, which should be addressed to the under- signed. attended to without delay.
A. E. LANGE. Kuching, 15th April. 1895.
[Mr. Lange was at this time His Highness’s Private Secretary.—Ed.]
News from Far and Near.
FIRST DIVISION.
The Honourable the Resident is pleased to report that the Casino was at last closing down. Several unpleasant incidents have occurred and the business proved a financial failure.
The Honourable the Resident says that he has discussed the future of Simunjan station with the District Officer and the Superintendent of Lands and Surveys, First Division. As it appears that, due to erosion, the present bazaar will be in the river within the next five years there seems little point in re-building bridges or repairing the water- works at the moment. The Honourable the Resident adds that a new bazaar, and possibly station, site will have to be found. Since the whole future of Simunjan depends on the question of the re-opening of the coal-mine there it is impossible to come to any decision as to a suitable site at the present moment.
The following is an extract from the May report of the Native Officer-in-Charge, Kuching : '‘One, Mat, supported by a few Malays of Kampong Sejijak, submitted a petition objecting to a licence to run a shophouse at Sejijak being granted to a Chinese with the approval of T.K. Haji Kamar- rudin, who had not consulted the local anak anak kampong. It was found that Mat was himself a village-shop owner in the kampong and apparently would like a monopoly. The Chinese, however, built his shop in the Borneo Company's land near the kampong and Mat’s petition is therefore groundless.”
The Native Officer-in-Charge, Kuching, reports that on May 28th three motor vessels alongside the wharf at Godown No. 8 caught fire. The fire first broke out on a small launch and spread rapidly on to the other two launches. Several other launches would have been caught if the blazing vessels had not been cut loose and swept off by the current.
Another forty crocodiles, measuring 243' 9'', were destroyed at Muara Tuang police-station during May.
The District Officer, Bau, reports that quantities of goods, mostly tobacco and straw hats, have been found being imported without permit and, of course, without payment of duty where this is required. The District Officer says that the bulk of this trade at the moment seems to be incoming as it is reported that the Sarawak dollar is now at a premium vis-a-vis the currency "on the other side.” Cigarettes, however, still seem to disappear very rapidly from the District.
Although trade in Bau District suffered con- siderably in May as a result of the heavy and continuous fall in the price of rubber, it appeared to be fairly brisk owing to the collection of Head Tax by Government, as Dayaks came down with rice and poultry for sale in order to raise money for the tax.
The following is an extract from the May report of the District Officer, Bau : “Anti-cessionist activities in the District had repercussions during the month when people from two of the kampongs concerned complained of the methods adopted by the Kuching Malay said to have visited them in this connection. The kampongs favoured for such propaganda have been Kampong Grogo (where there is a small Malay community) and the kampongs near Siniawan, which are reached fairly easily by boat from Kuching, and the sale of photographs and paper flags in these kampongs appears to have been conducted in a somewhat doubtful manner."
The District Officer, Bau, reports that an acrobatic party from Kuching, known as the New Star Acrobatic Troupe, was granted permission to stage performances at the local Cinema Hall for four nights. The troupe withdrew its application after the first night owing to poor patronage. The District Officer says that it seems that the standard of the show failed to prove attractive to the public.
The District Officer, Serian, reports that a new and ugly note has crept into the anti-cession propaganda. The persons formerly selling photo- graphs are now calling upon natives to refuse to pay hasil and to disobey Government. The District Officer says that, to the best of his knowledge, the trouble is confined to three Sadong Dayak kampongs and one Malay kampong.
The Sebuyau Dayaks of Serian District claim that they must use tuba in June ‘‘fasal mahu buang kotor dari tanah umah.”
The Native-Officer-in-Charge, Lundu, reports that the number of pupils, combined with the rotteness of the school building, has compelled the Malay school to move into the kitchen of the ‘‘Banglo.”
SECOND DIVISION.
The Honourable the Resident reports that at a meeting of Penghulus a ease of incest between a father and his adopted daughter was discussed. It was unanimously agreed that the correct fine in the Second Division in cases of incest between father and daughter, and mother and son, was two piculs for the man and one picul for the woman, the woman's share to be plasi menoa. Although in the case referred to no consanguinity existed it was stated that the fine should be the same. The Honourable the Resident adds that incest, attended by consanguinity, is very rare in the Second Division.
The District Officer, Simanggang. reports that the Honourable the Chief Justice visited that station in May to hear three appeals from the Resident's Court. The District Officer makes the interesting comment that “it is as far as is known the first time in the history of Sarawak that the Supreme Court has sat in Simanggang." The Sarawak Gazette, suspects that it would be more accurate to say that it is the first time a qualified Chief Justice has summoned up the nerve to dare this venturesome journey. In the days when the second Rajah constituted “the Supreme Court" it was accustomed to sit all over the place.
The District Officer, Simanggang, says : “It is hoped to start, a Hospital laundry—Kuching internees know the model—simple but effective.’’
The Simanggang hospital cook has resigned, owing to inadequate pay, and his place has been taken by a Chinese prisoner, a change that has occasioned no complaints from the patients.
Penghulu Linang, who is due to retire this year, exercises authority over some 57 houses amounting to 958 doors. The District Officer. Simanggang, comments that this is far too large an area and approval is being requested to divide it in two.
The District Officer, Simanggang, reports that in May a number of Ulu Ai and Engkilili Dayaks came down looking for work. Every effort is being made to dissuade these people from proceeding to Kuching. The fare for a passage from Simanggang to Kuching is eight dollars, the return fare being sixteen dollars. The Dayaks think they might get work tapping jelutong. The District Officer adds that it is hoped that some relief work will be avail- able for Dayaks whose padi crop has failed. The re-building of Lubok Antu station, which is scheduled to be done in the 1947 rehabilitation programme, will provide work for many. It may be possible to use some at Bijat working on the bunds but, the District Officer says, “directly rumours start spreading that there is work to be had at Sandakan with a tobacco company, then the offices are besieged by a horde of globe trotters."
The District Officer, Simanggang, reports that the Dayaks continue to clamour for schools. Their enthusiasm cannot be restrained and they are inclined to erect schools without first consulting Government. This is unfortunate as they are disappointed when Government cannot provide a teacher. Such schools are not always sited centrally.
The District Officer, Saribas, reports that the Agricultural Officer. Second Division, in May visited an area near Debak where a Dayak is successfully growing cotton. The District Officer says that considerable interest is being shown in some parts of the District in the possibility of cotton becoming a commercial proposition, and an alternative to rubber. Cotton is reported to be growing satisfactorily in Merunjau (Padeh) where cloth has been made by the Dayaks
A Chinese, who has adopted the Mohammedan faith, has been permitted to open a village shop in Beladin, Saribas.
The District Officer, Saribas, reports that a Dayak from Debak has recently designed a Dayak alphabet consisting of 56 characters. The inventor states that it is a disgrace to the Dayak race that they have no alphabet of their own. The result is rather elementary, says the District Officer, and looks somewhat like Tamil. The inventor circulated a large number of copies in his own hand- writing, but, the District Officer understands, the alphabet met with a very poor response from the Dayaks themselves.
When visiting Debak the District Officer, Saribas, discovered a cement mould for counter- feiting 10 cent Sarawak pieces. On making inquiries he found it was a relic of the Japanese occupation and had been made and used success- fully by a Dayak. This is the same man as the one referred to in the immediately preceding para- graph. His counterfeiting was eventually detected and he was arrested and kept in prison. After two or three months in jail, without trial, he was released and received the official thanks of the Japanese Government for assisting in making Sarawak currency.
The District Officer, Saribas, reports that more than half of the District has been covered in an attempt to purchase surplus padi. Two yards of material per picul of padi have been offered “as an inducement.” The District Officer says that the results, owing to the poor harvest, have been very disappointing.
The Dayaks of the Kalaka District appear to be under the impression that “passes" are still necessary. Many applications have been received and the District Officer says that this restlessness can be attributed to the fall in the price of rubber and the current shortage of rice and padi.
Three Dayaks in the Kalaka District have been fined for “participation in an illegal diving con- test" but it is not stated what law they broke.
THIRD DIVISION.
The Honourable the Acting Resident reports that there is do longer any doubt that the harvest in the Sibu District can only be described as bad.
The District Officer, Sibu, reports that, when the Cadet Officer and Native Officer Abang Yan visited Kampong Igan in April, the opportunity was taken of discussing Native Treasuries with the Melanaus. The general opinion was that they were not capable of running a treasury themselves, but approved of the idea if Government would assist until they were competent to take over.
398 UNRRA repatriates arrived at Rejang by m.v. Hong Keng on April 13th. They were tran- shipped to Sarikei and Sibu by m.v. Empire Maymount.
The following is an extract from the April report of the District Officer, Kanowit : “A Chinese theatrical company played in Kanowit on the 19th and eight nights following. They are said to have netted $3,000. At least one woman in the bazaar has attempted or threatened suicide since her husband was spending so much time at the stage door. Gentlemen bankrupted as a result of the last visit ten years ago have been pointed out.”
The District Officer, Mukah, reports that in April the majority of Melanaus were working busily on the production of sago. There was a feeling amongst the influential members of that race that a greater number of engine-driven sago factories should be established. This was probably due, says the District Officer, to the present high prices offered and the lack of rasping nails. In Dalat, for instance, there is a factory which rasps the sago logs for the native population at the rate of 25 cents per krat. So far both in Mukah and Oya only a few power-driven factories have been allowed and these are all financed and run by Chinese. The District Officer says that if more factories are to instal engines, either for rasping or pressing out the sago, it seems almost certain that they will be under Chinese control. However Tua Kampong Eward points out that the working of sago, so far as the Melanaus are concerned, is largely a family affair and that therefore it would be difficult both to run the sago drying factories and to rasp and press out the raw sago. The District Officer is of the opinion that it would be better not to allow any more engine-driven factories until the possibility of setting up Co-operative Societies amongst the Melanaus for the organisation of their own factories has been fully investigated.
Enta anak Engkong, a Dayak woman living in the Dalat area, apparently committed suicide by drinking water heavily impregnated with tuba root. 'His District Officer, Mukah, says that it seems that Enta, who had been divorced, was paid a visit by her former husband, who attempted to court her again, and such was the disgrace that she killed herself.
The Capitan China of Mukah returned from Singapore in April. He had been attempting to make contracts for the purpose of opening up direct trade between Mukah and Singapore but so far unfortunately he had not succeeded.
The Chinese in Mukah have complained that there is an extreme shortage of small cash partic- ularly one cent pieces and low value notes. It is suggested by them that the small denominations are going to the kampongs and not coming out again. The District Officer is of the opinion that this cannot be the whole answer as it is just these lower denominations that the kampong people prefer to use.
The District Officer, Mukah, reports, with reference to the Divisional Council, that “such is the prestige gained by the Balingian Dayak representative that he has been dubbed by his friends as ‘Big-shot' Radin (Beliau).”
FOURTH DIVISION.
With regard to the death of the Chinese boiler- maker at Lutong, which was reported in the last issue of the Sarawak Gazette, the Honourable the Resident recalls that he pointed out in his report for September, 1946, that, owing to the haste in which industries are being rehabilitated and to the improvisation which is necessary on account of the shortage of materials, normal safety precautions are often overlooked. He considers that a Government Inspector of Machinery should be appointed in the near future in order to enforce such precautions. These remarks arc of a general nature and do not particularly apply to the case of the boiler-man, but the District Officer, Miri, says that the oil company have already issued new notices with regard to safety r gulations.
At a meeting of the Sibu Municipal Board in April one of the items discussed was a proposal to convert the former Residency compound into a public garden.
To minimise chances of an outbreak of fire forty- seven notices were in April issued to various shop- owners in Sibu requiring them to dismantle all leaf attap covering over fire-places on the ground floor.
During April 405 head of pig and 14 head of cattle were slaughtered for sale in Sibu market.
The District Officer, Lower Rejang, reports that a Chinese motor-launch, used for transporting fish, caught fire at 1’aloh on the night of April 19th. The engineer was badly burnt and sent to Sibu hospital.
The District Officer, Kapit, reports that the deputation of Penehengs left Kapit for the Maha- kam on April 10th, quite satisfied that there was no truth in the rumours which they had heard that Sarawak Dayaks were about to attack them. They were given a letter to the Mahakam authorities explaining the situation and it is hoped that this will clear the matter up. The Penehengs strongly requested that the Native Officer and one or two Penghulus should accompany them on the return trip, as they thought that the Mahakam people might only be convinced by direct assurances from the Dayaks themselves. This was not allowed as negotiations were still under way through Kuching.
In contrast to many areas of the Colony where the coincidence of the rice and engkabang harvests has resulted in the latter crop being left to rot. the District Officer, Kapit, says that some Dayaks at Song “in spite of repeated warnings appear to have neglected their rice in order to collect engkabang.” About 6,000 piculs of engkabang have been exported both from Song and Kapit.
The District Officer, Kanowit, reports that four Penghulus were found to be owing some $4,900 to the Supply Department and are paying up, though slowly. He comments that this is a reflection on Dayak ability and general trust- worthiness in matters of trade.
The following is an extract from the April report of the District Officer, Kanowit : “A Chinese theatrical company played in Kanowit on the 19th and eight nights following. They are said to have netted $3,000. At least one woman in the bazaar has attempted or threatened suicide since her husband was spending so much time at the stage door. Gentlemen bankrupted as a result of the last visit ten years ago have been pointed out.”
The District Officer. Mukah. reports that Tua Kampong Eward of Tellian Ulu has asked if it is not possible for the producers of sago to be informed of the market prices ruling in other parts of Sarawak and in Singapore. He feels, the District Officer thinks, that once again the middle-men may be making high profits at the expense of the producers. “In all fairness to the Chinese, how- ever,” the District Officer adds, “good prices are being paid to the local Melanaus, better perhaps than they have received for many years.”
Enta anak Engkong, a Dayak woman living in the Dalat area, apparently committed suicide by drinking water heavily impregnated with tuba root. 'His District Officer, Mukah, says that it seems that Enta, who had been divorced, was paid a visit by her former husband, who attempted to court her again, and such was the disgrace that she killed herself.
The District Officer, Mukah, reports that in April the majority of Melanaus were working busily on the production of sago. There was a feeling amongst the influential members of that race that a greater number of engine-driven sago factories should be established. This was probably due, says the District Officer, to the present high prices offered and the lack of rasping nails. In Dalat, for instance, there is a factory which rasps the sago logs for the native population at the rate of 25 cents per krat. So far both in Mukah and Oya only a few power-driven factories have been allowed and these are all financed and run by Chinese. The District Officer says that if more factories are to instal engines, either for rasping or pressing out the sago, it seems almost certain that they will be under Chinese control. However Tua Kampong Eward points out that the working of sago, so far as the Melanaus are concerned, is largely a family affair and that therefore it would be difficult both to run the sago drying factories and to rasp and press out the raw sago. The District Officer is of the opinion that it would be better not to allow any more engine-driven factories until the possibility of setting up Co-operative Societies amongst the Melanaus for the organisation of their own factories has been fully investigated.
The Capitan China of Mukah returned from Singapore in April. He had been attempting to make contracts for the purpose of opening up direct trade between Mukah and Singapore but so far unfortunately he had not succeeded.
The Chinese in Mukah have complained that there is an extreme shortage of small cash partic- ularly one cent pieces and low value notes. It is suggested by them that the small denominations are going to the kampongs and not coming out again. The District Officer is of the opinion that this cannot be the whole answer as it is just these lower denominations that the kampong people prefer to use.
The District Officer, Mukah, reports, with reference to the Divisional Council, that “such is the prestige gained by the Balingian Dayak representative that he has been dubbed by his friends as ‘Big-shot' Radin (Beliau).”
FOURTH DIVISION.
With regard to the death of the Chinese boiler- maker at Lutong, which was reported in the last issue of the Sarawak Gazette, the Honourable the Resident recalls that he pointed out in his report for September, 1946, that, owing to the haste in which industries are being rehabilitated and to the improvisation which is necessary on account of the shortage of materials, normal safety precautions are often overlooked. He considers that a Government Inspector of Machinery should be appointed in the near future in order to enforce such precautions. These remarks arc of a general nature and do not particularly apply to the case of the boiler-man, but the District Officer, Miri, says that the oil company have already issued new notices with regard to safety r gulations.
The District Officer. Miri, reports that on April 12th Mat Ah Seng, a Chinese who had “masok Islam” after being adopted by Malays at the age of four, went amok in the bazaar area. Using an axe he killed eight persons, men, women, and children, and wounded several others. All the victims were Chinese. He then attempted to swim across the river and was pursued by a large boat- load of police and Chinese. The police attempted to pull him out by means of a rope noose but the infuriated Chinese in the boat beat him under despite police efforts to prevent them. The District Officer adds that Mat was a well-built man, above the average, and it was probably a good things he never did get into the boat. The body was found the next morning having drifted upstream on the tide, medical evidence showing that it had a broken neck. The District Officer adds further that, as is usual after an amok,it took a considerable time for the bazaar and kampong area to quieten down. For days afterwards Sarawak Oilfields limited were inundated with requests for scrap zinc sheeting for making fences, etc. The Chinese community asked the Government to hold the Malay community rsponsible for this amok but needless to say the Government did not accede to this request. A Chinese photographer was restrained from selling photographs of the corpses as it was considered that this would lead to inter- racial troubles.
The District Officer. Miri. reports that malaria seems to be rearing its ugly head again. In this connection the Senior Medical Officer of Sarawak Oilfields Limited and the Health Inspector have visited various schools. At Sungei Krokop it was found that 50% of the children had enlarged spleens.
Dayaks, mainly from the Second Division, were, in April, still arriving in Miri in search of work. Both the Honourable the Resident and the District Officer emphasise that Sarawak Oilfields Limited do not require any Dayak labour and they hope that administrative officers will inform Dayaks to this effect.
A new bazaar plan for Lutong is being drawn up and it is hoped scon to get rid of the jumble of temporary shops which clutter up the Refinery gates.
The District Officer, Miri, reports that the filling-up of the swamp area at Sungei Merbau with municipal rubbish is proceeding satisfactorily. The rubbish is oiled and then covered with a thick layer of sawdust from the adjacent mills. Later sand filling will be used to cover the sawdust.
The new Chinese pauper house at Krokop is in course of erection and the District Officer, Miri, says that great credit is due to local Chinese efforts.
The District Officer, Baram, reports that in April very heavy rainfall was experienced, the river rising and falling at least six times during the period. Most of the local people said that such rainfall in the month of April was almost unprecedented, and, the District Officer adds, it is to be feared that the continued damp will increase the number of lung and chest complaints, already far too numerous, amongst the local population.
During April a really good supply of school books and writing materials arrived for distribution to schools at Long Akah, Long Pila, and Beluru, and the Malay school at Marudi. The school at Pa Mein was not, however, so fortunate.
The District Officer, Baram, reports that after the departure of His Excellency the Governor on April 24th a very successful regatta was held on a rather small scale. The regatta was much appreciated by the business community, who bene- fited greatly by the very considerable trade resulting therefrom; money apparently, says the District Officer, being one of the few commodities which was not in short supply.
The District Officer, Bintulu, reports that “about 100 out of a total of 152 Dayaks” have been prosecuted at Sebauh for tuba fishing without per- mission. Nearly one thousand dollars in fines had already been paid at the end of April, and in no case had the alternative jail sentence been served.
The following is an extract from the April report of the District Officer, Bintulu : “As a result of the milk shortage Ho Hua Leng of Chop Yu Lian was severely warned for persistently refusing to sell his sweetened condensed milk in accordance with instructions from Government. He later approached the Chairman of the Bintulu Chung Hua Association, who, unknown to Government, lodged a protest (by telegram) with Borneo Com- pany, Kuching, against the Government’s action with regard to the rationing of milk. The Association completely misrepresented the Govern- ment's action in their telegraphic message. The alleged stories of “unreasonable action” were unfounded and the Chairman of the Association was asked to submit a written apology, failing which action would be taken against the Association. A letter of apology was handed in on the 26th, which still did not state the true facts, and a further letter was requested. The whole action of the Association, was entirely contrary to the objects of the Association, as stated in their rules, one of which is to “promote public welfare.” That’s Sarawak, that was !
FIFTH DIVISION.
The District Officer, Limbang, regrets to report the death of Mandor Drahman who had worked for the Public Works Department continuously for over forty years and up to one week before his death.
The record padi harvest for Limbang District is the crop of Rumah Kedu, which produced 92,000 gantangs. Up to the end of May 65,000 gantangs of padi had been purchased by Government, “thus putting us," says the District Officer, “well on the way to our objective of 300 tons.”
The following is an extract from the May report of the District Officer, Limbang : "An amicable settlement was reached in the case of Tuai Rumah Gani (Iban) who had built his house on Murut land. Penghulu Badah Wan (Murut) agreed to allow the house to stay as the Muruts have far more land than they can possibly use.” And so it goes on, no doubt the inexorable march of progress. The Sarawak Gazette remembers that some years ago, in the days of Mr. Combe, the Ibans were
new-comers to the Limbang and strict precautions were taken to prevent Gani. Kedu, and the rest from advancing beyond the area allotted to them. It is. however, as impossible to keep a virulent and expanding race within prescribed boundaries as to retain the beer in the bottle once the stopper has been thrown away.
CORRESPONDENCE.
[The Editor is not responsible for the opinions of correspondents.]
Sibu, Sarawak, 21st June, 1947.
The Editor,
Sarawak Gazette,
Kuching.
Dear Sir.
On page 80 of the Sarawak Gazetie dated the 1st May. 1947, there appears a statement to the effect that during 1941 titles were being cancelled right and left by Magistrates in the Third Division.
I would suggest that this statement is misleading as not one title was cancelled during 1941 in the Third Division by order of a Magistrate.
Yours faithfully.
C. B. MURRAY, Supt. of Lands & Surveys, Third Division.
[In the circumstances the second paragraph of our correspondent’s letter looks like a masterpiece of moderation. It is much regretted that the editorial memory was so much at fault. It is not, we think, disputed that there was considerable con- flict in 1941 between some administrative officers in the Third Division and the Land Office, the former contending that native rights were not sufficiently investigated when alienations of land to non- natives were made. It was never suggested that these charges had any foundation, and we are glad, though, it must be admitted, surprised, to hear that no title was cancelled by magisterial order. The Director informs us that 378 Third Division titles were cancelled in 1941 compared with 343 in 1940, and 662 in 1939, but explains that all these were due to natural causes.—Ed.]
Kuching, June 23, 1947.
The Editor,
Sarawak Gazette,
Kuching.
Sir,
I shall be grateful for a small space in your valuable columns in order to air the results of my observations of one of the prices we all have to pay for war.
It is now nearly two years since the end of World War II. Yet, when we read the daily papers or turn on the radio, we find there is a great deal of unrest and discontentment in every part of the world. There is no agreement in the Four Power Conference, and there is talk that America must fight Russia. The Vietnamites are fighting the French in Indo-China, the Indonesians might rise against the Dutch again in spite of the Cheribon agreement; the bitter struggle between
the Kuomintang and Communist troops continues, terrorism stalks abroad in Palestine, and communal riots disturb India at a time when they are to be given their independence by Great Britain. Along with these upheavals, there are endless strikes in every form of essential service which delay our recovery from the aftermath of war. I do not know how these unfortunate happenings come about over the other side, but I do know that, in South East Asia, it is part of a legacy left behind by the Japanese occupation. These Japanese War Lords preached glibly about Greater East Asia and the Co-prosperity Sphere during the whole period when they were masters, and I am sure the minds of the people were literally poisoned by such propaganda. Can it be wondered that, when the liberating army came to take them off the Japanese yoke, they become changed beings? There are still some who were not influenced and who are satisfied with their lot, but to many what was good enough for them in pre-war years is not good enough for them now. They enjoy once again freedom of speech, for there is freedom of the press. They argue freely that there must be no social discrimination. Some, who are more misguided than others, demand to know why a man who wields a pen should consider him- self superior to a man who pulls a rickshaw for his living. The merchant prince, on the other hand turns a deaf ear to all these protests, and he will be insulted if his servant thinks he has the privilege of joining him over a “stengah" at the bar.
The net is hopelessly entangled, so to unloosen it shall we advocate foresight, tact and patience or the methods of the kempeitai?
Yours, etc.,
Baffled.
Miri,
24th June, 1947. The Editor.
Sarawak Gazette,
Kuching.
Dear Sir,
I wish to draw your attention to your reference in the June 2nd issue of the Gazette to S.R.D. awards.
While it is realized that your journal is a Govern- ment publication which naturally deals more specifically with the affairs of Government and its Officers, I think you might have done the “Also rans" the courtesy of mentioning their ranks, and the orders received, as published in London Gazette. Particularly with respect to the late Lt.-Colonel Chester and those of us at present carrying on our duties in Borneo.
In these days of highly coloured and somewhat garbled newspaper articles, not to mention ener- getic pursuit of publicity on the part of some who performed a duty, as many thousands of others performed theirs, it is so easy to lose a sense of proportion over events of the past.
It is probably not realized for instance that Major Combe and Lt.-Colonel Chester, in their quiet way, performed exploits in North Borneo which for individual merit may have surpassed anything that transpired elsewhere in Borneo; while I, strange though it may seem, was the accredited S.R.D. leader in Sarawak. Not that it matters much at this stage.
Yours faithfully,
G. S. Carter.
From “Adversity”: Internment Quarterly.
(The following correspondence was published in “Adversity" on July 1st, 1943.)
LOVE AND THE CIVIL SERVICE.
Secretariat Mansions, May 1st, 1943.
To Miss Flossie Frivol, Frisky House, Frolicsome.
Madam,
I have the honour to refer to sundry con- ferences that have taken place between us during the last few months and to inform you that it appears to me to be in the interests of both parties that all future negotiations shall be recorded in writing. Further, I have the honour to enquire whether you will be kind enough to partake of dinner at my expense at the Slapantikle Restaurant on May 5th, 1943. I desire to suggest that we wait on each other at approximately 7.30 p.m. (Green- wich Mean Time) in the Cocktail Bar of the afore- said establishment on the aforesaid date.
I have the honour to be, Madam,
Your obedient servant, Filing Redtape.
To Filing Redtape Esq., Secretariat Mansions.
Darling old Pompous,
You bet.
Flossie.
P.S. 1. You are a scream. I didn’t know you could rite like that.
P.S. 2. You will damn well wait on me.
Secretariat Mansions , May 6th, 1943.
To Miss Flossie Frivol,
Frisky House, Frolicsome.
Madam,
I have the honour to refer to my letter of May 1st, 1943, and to your reply (undated) thereto, and to request, pursuant to the opinion expressed in my said letter to the effect that all future negotiations be recorded in writing, that the parol agreement concluded between us at approximately 1.30 a.m. this morning, to wit that, in consideration of my promising to marry you, you promised to marry me, be confirmed by you in writing at your earliest convenience.
I have the honour to be.
Madam,
Your obedient servant,
Filing Redtape.
To Filing Redtape Esq., Secretariat Mansions.
Darling ,
Of course I will marry you if that’s what you mean but don't rite funny love letters. If you don’t know how to write to a girl you should take lessons from your friend Charlie Funangames at whose house we first met you remember darling.
Flossie.
Charles Funangames Esq : Passed to you please for favour of your comments. F.R. 8.5.43.
Filing, old boy, I don’t know what the hell this is all about but if you are getting into a mess with that little bitch Flossie get out of it bloody quick. Please tell her I will sue her if she hangs on to those letters.—Charlie.
Secretariat Mansions, May 9th, 1943.
To Miss Flossie Frivol,
Frisky House, Frolicsome.
Madam,
I have the honour to acknowledge with thanks receipt of your letter (undated) in reply to mine of May 6th, 1943, and to inform you that, in accord- ance with your instructions, I have referred the matter to Mr. Charles Funangames, a copy of whose minute I enclose herewith. I must respect- fully point out that the contents of this minute are not wholly intelligible to me and I would welcome your comments thereon.
I have the honour to be.
Madam,
Your obedient servant.
Filing Redtape.
Monday.
To Filing Redtape Esq.,
Secretariat Mansions.
Darling, Darling, Darling,
That pot-bellied, squint-eyed, splay-footed, disease-ridden, pub-crawling old bastard of corse I didn't mean you to ask him that was just a joke darling I don’t like your friends he’s far too low for you don’t ever speak or rite to him again but tell him from me that if he thinks he can swindel a decent girl with his dirty litel threats he will soon be grining on the rong side of that pock- marked face of his darling we are above that sort of thing I just ment you must rite to me and tell me you love me and what I look like mother always says she won’t let me marry a man who can’t rite English.
Flossie.
Charles Funangames Esq. Passed to you please for information and comments if anv. F.R. 11.5.43.
Oh heck. I’m no good at this sort of game.— Charlie.
(The following correspondence was published in “Adversity" on July 1st, 1943.)
LOVE AND THE CIVIL SERVICE.
Secretariat Mansions, May 1st, 1943. To Miss Flossie Frivol, Frisky House, Frolicsome.
Madam,
I have the honour to refer to sundry con- ferences that have taken place between us during the last few months and to inform you that it appears to me to be in the interests of both parties that all future negotiations shall be recorded in writing. Further, 1 have the honour to enquire whether you will be kind enough to partake of dinner at my expense at the Slapantikle Restaurant on May 5th, 1943. I desire to suggest that we wait on each other at approximately 7.30 p.m. (Green- wich Mean Time) in the Cocktail Bar of the afore- said establishment on the aforesaid date.
I have the honour to be, Madam,
Your obedient servant, Filing Redtape.
Secretariat Mansions, May 11th, 1943.
To Miss Flossie Frivol, Frisky House, Frolicsome.
Madam,
I have the honour to acknowledge with thanks receipt of your letter marked "Monday,” but otherwise undated, in reply to mine of May 9th, 1943, and to inform you that I have forwarded the same to Mr. Charles Funangames who has no material comments to make thereon. I must express my profound regret if my correspondence has proved in any way unsatisfactory to you. I have verbally consulted the Chairman of the Fat Stock Marketing Board of the Ministry of Agricul- ture, who directs me to inform you that I bear great affection towards your person, and that your physical attributes are, with certain minor quali- fications which need not be specified, in my experience beyond compare. I am directed to add that I have caused to be forwarded to you under separate cover a small finger ornament which I am given to understand is the customary earnest of a contract to marry.
I have to the honour to be, Madam.
Your obedient servant,
Filing Redtape.
Judgment Day.
Filing Redtape Esq.,
Secretariat Mansions.
Dear LORD Winston Churchill,
I have the onner to inform you that you are a great big punk and we are undated till you learn to rite like a human and I have the onner to say that I will send the ring back if you want it but if you do I will have the onner to tell you what to do with it you gonk you.
I have the onner to be your obedient servant I don’t think.
Flossie.
P.S. I am going to look for an eliterate rubber planter and I don't expect I will have much difficulty in finding one.
Kuching Market Price List.
Average monthly Market Price (May 20th to June 20th. 1947).