Vol. LXXIV.
No. 1082.
Sarawak Gazette
PRICE
KUCHING, Saturday, May 1st, 1948.
20 CENTS
Contents.
The Sarawak Gazette
SATURDAY, MAY 1st, 1948.
Acknowledgment.
Mr. & Mrs. William Chua Tamby wish to thank the Reverend Father and Sisters, and all relatives and friends for the kind letters of condolence and wreaths sent to the funeral of their beloved son Jimmy Chua, who died on the 23rd March, 1948.
The Old Municipal.
When the Allied Forces occupied Berlin towards the end of 1918 it was found that part of the reparations exacted from the Third Empire were still intact in the vaults of the Reichsbank. The gold which France had so astoundingly disgorged as the price for peace was untouched and still in the sealed boxes in which it had been delivered. Not unnaturally, the defeated Reich delivered unto Caeser; and very possibly in June, 1940, German currency experts marvelled much as the Frenchmen had some score years earlier that the same lot of gold was still intact.
It seems a profitless enterprise that the hard won gains of the gold miner should be stored away from the light of day, away from human enjoyment in the drab vaults of a state bank. It may well be that note issues require a gold backing or that paper money represents good gold harboured away from wear and tear in bank vaults, but it still is poor reward for the endeavour which goes to gain that gold.
By a curious confusion of thought, a land rich in gold is esteemed to be a land rich in wealth. Men have stampeded themselves, and preferably others, into death to gain a soft metal which is won in the most minute of quantities and when it is won serves only the most minute of purposes.
But for all that, the gold miner and his gold are esteemed highly; by contrast the dustman and his rubbish are esteemed but lowly.
Since the times when growing populations became garbage-conscious, domestic refuse has been considered a liability; dustbins become an untidy feature of urban streets and rubbish dumps a means of throwing the refuse away cheaply. The names associated indicate the value which has been placed on it—refuse, rubbish, dust, garbage; nothing associated with the pleasing sound of “gold” or “wealth”; none of the. allure which will keep men planning in laboratories or desolate wastes on how to gain it, but sober meetings of councils on how to get rid of it.
It is interesting, then, to note the operations going on in the padang in Kuching which lies opposite to the Police Station. This area has long been an unlovely feature of wretched leaf attap sheds and crumbling concrete pathways with an irregular turf which held little promise of better things to follow. Of late weeks, the Municipal Department has been lifting the top soil and putting down a good layer of Municipal refuse. The top soil is nowhere deeper than two inches and the subsoil is a discouraging mess of impermeable clay. Between these two, the Municipal carts are inter- posing some two inches of Municipal refuse. The results will not be apparent immediately but it is certain enough that, as the bacterial action starts on the disintegration of the elements of the Municipal refuse, new life will start in the grass which grows from it.
This operation is of peculiar interest to Sarawak, an agricultural country which supports an abnor- mally low stock of cattle. For close on one hundred years it has been a matter for rejoicing that the agriculture exports of Sarawak have been increas- ing. But those same exports have increased only
at the cost of the resources of the Colony. In 1917, the country exported 74,771 tons of rubber and sago alone (an increase of 20,139 tons over the 1940 figures) apart from other important items; these exports are drawn from the soil on which the rubber and sago grow; it is the capital of Sarawak which is being exported. We cannot afford to live indefinitely on these resources. Dayak hill padi land is cultivated on a system of recuperative bush fallow of six to seven years interval which allows the land to recuperate from the drainage of natural resources that a single crop has inflicted. But rubber gardens and estates are not rested for six or seven years unless the incidence of war or of economic necessity enforces it. No rubber planter will replant on an existing estate if virgin jungle is available: the one has its natural resources fully preserved, the other has been slowly drained of its nature as the rising latex is tapped off.
We have been and we still are fortunate in Sarawak that cultivation has been based to a certain extent upon long recuperative bush fallows: we have been unfortunate in that cultivation has often been carried out on steep hill slopes extremely liable to soil erosion. But in time, we shall no longer be able to afford to leave unproductive areas to be nursed back into health by the normal pro- cesses of nature. For the wealth which is removed from the land and exported in bales of rubber and sacks of sago, other wealth must replace it and as the urban areas of Sarawak grow it may well be that the new wealth will come from the Municipal refuse carts.
The failure to appreciate that land, no matter how rich it may be to start off with, is not a widow’s cruse of oil, can cause a devastation incalculably more effective than any military scorched-earth policy. The record grain crops for extensive cultivation probably came from the mid- western states of the U.S.A.; certainly in recent times no more fertile area than those has been opened up. With the bumper crops started an era of devastating agricultural exploitation and of mechanised land robbing. Wealth in golden grain was dragged from the rich loams with a reckless- ness that verged upon the criminal. Balanced farming, crop rotation and careful nursing of the land were forgotten in the golden harvests; forgotten, that is, until the land became thin, barren and unworkable. By that time the havoc which cupidity and stupidity had wrought was irreparable: dust storm became the order of the summer and floods became the order of the winter. What was once America’s greatest asset became America's stain and liability.
Nor is the naivete which expects something for nothing confined to the educated and civilised: the gross overstocking with wretched unproductive stock of the native reserves lying to the south of the Sahara—and this despite the honest efforts of the territorial administrators—paves the way for the steady encroachment of the desert wastes. And here again the effects are far reaching; the American devastation can affect Canadian cattle to the far north with dust balls in the stomach; in Africa, maltreatment of the soil steadilv lowers the depth of Victoria Nyanza with a detrimental effect on the flooding of the Nile Valley.
Within the Empire, we have been reasonably fortunate in the conservation of fertility policy; the good sense that kept the land of Europe in good heart for close on a thousand years has had its effect. In more recent years, the experiments in
composting municipal refuse which the late Sir Bernard Greenwell turned to such good advantage in England and in India where Sir Albert Howard (whom we presume is still living in a fruitful retirement) perfected the Indore system of com- posing have been turned to good advantage. When the stress and strains of wars, wars of nerves, economic wars and economic cycles lessen it may well be that in the United Kingdom the researches of Sir Bernard Greenwell ami of the Cheshire Health Committee (which experimented to ascertain the food value of foods grown on differing soils) may well change the economy and health of the Kingdom.
All this is a far cry from the contents of the Municipal cart, christened in an irreverent moment as the Old Municipal, and from the scheme for dumping municipal refuse on the Kuching padang. It is not, however, entirely without relevance. The Special Commissioner’s office reports that the population of South Eastern Asia is increasing at a rate faster than the rice production can increase, presumably this difference must be an increasing one, and in the ease of the moment we cannot afford to neglect the possible needs of the future.
Or, to be more relevant, where and when manures are not available, see where the long beans, the cucumber and the rest of the compar- able produce grows the better, in the dapor garden where slops and unwanted refuse are thrown or in the carefully tended house garden.
There is food for thought in the dapor garden and. if we dare to christen it, in the Old Municipal padang.
The Governor’s Visit to Silantek.
On March 16th His Excellency the Governor accompanied by the Private Secretary left Kuching in the “La Follette” for Lingga, arriving in the afternoon after a smooth crossing. There the Honourable the Resident, Second Division, Mr. Ditmas, and Acting District Officer Mr. Bruen. joined the party which continued up river to Banting on the Batang Klauh.
On landing at Banting His Excellency was greeted by Penghulu Angkon and escorted to his house, where plates of the new season’s rice were offered and a general talk took place.
Shortly before dark His Excellency and party returned to “La Follette,” and the Penghulu and several of his Tuai Rumah were entertained to drinks on board.
Next morning the party transferred to the m.l. Sylvia, retraced their way down th? Batang Klauh, and turned up the Batang Strap. Such are the bends of these two rivers that an hour’s travelling brought the party once more within a few hundred yards of Banting hill.
Pantu was reached shortly before noon. After lunch His Excellency was entertained by the Chinese Community in the school. then the party set off on the walk to Silantek. A walk of two and a half hours, mostly through an area previously planted with pepper, hut now covered with lalang. brought the party to Batu Besai, Silantek. where Messrs. Grant and Day of the Powell Dufferyn coal team were waiting to greet His Excellency and had tea ready for the perspiring walkers.
Since two small houses had been constructed for the coal investigators, accommodation was com- paratively luxurious for such an out of the way place. That evening the party were entertained to dinner by Messrs. Grant and Day, whilst the follow- ing night His Excellency returned their hospitality, the guests kindly lending their house for the purpose.
On Thursday Messrs. Grant and Day conducted His Excellency round several places from which samples of coal had been taken, including the experimental drift that was being driven into the largest seam. Investigations have not yet been completed but the indications appear to be that the Silantek field is not as promising as was at first thought.
During the stay, Dayaks from nearby houses paid social calls on His Excellency.
Leaving Silantek on foot on Friday afternoon, a walk of three hours, including a rest at a Dayak house en route, brought the party to Penghulu Uli’s house of Christian Dayaks on the Sungei Sanjau. Since the day was hot and the going in- cluded a considerable amount of balancing on batanqs over swampy ground, this was not a very enjoyable walk.
The accommodation at Penghulu Uli's house, however, was commodious, since his father, the recently retired Penghulu Linang, put at His Excellency’s disposal a square building of Malay style, built as an annexe to the main house, and used as living quarters, office, guest house, store or chapel as occasion demands.
On arrival a ceremonial meal was served, then after an enjoyable swim in the Sungei Sanjau, His Excellency and party were entertained with danc- ing. An unusual feature was that several women performed in a most agile manner.
Next morning a three hour paddle down the winding and overhung Sungei Sanjau. and later the Sungei Strap brought the party to Pantu, where they boarded the “Sylvia” and returned to Lingga.
On landing at Lingga, after inspecting the Con- stabulary guard and being greeted by local notables, His Excellency inspected the offices and the new Government quarters which have done much to im- prove the appearance of this somewhat desolate- looking station. The party then visited the Chinese School, where they were regaled with beer and biscuits by the Chinese community.
Concluding with a walk through the bazaar and part of the Malay kampong, His Excellency board- ed the “La Follette" shortly before dark.
Leaving at three o’clock in the morning the “La Follette” made an excellent crossing and reached the Astana in exactly six hours. —(Contributed.)
Notes and Comments.
The Sarawak Gazette offers loyal congratulations to Their Majesties the King and Queen on the occasion of the 25th anniversary of their wedding.
Following upon his visit to Canada and the United Kingdom, His Excellency the Right Honour- able Mr. Malcom MacDonald, P.C., resumed the duties of the office of Governor-General of the Federation of Malaya, the Colonies of Singapore.
Sarawak and North Borneo and of the State of Brunei on the 10th of April.
Racing now seems well established in British North Borneo. Several meetings have been held at Jesselton and although conditions may be primitive judged by pre-war standards the races are well attended and the prize money offered is steadily being increased.
A correspondent has painstakingly extracted an index which is designed to prove that the cost of living in Singapore is lower than in Sarawak. About eighty per cent of the selected items of domestic expenditure do show a lower price level than that prevailing in Sarawak.
Visitors from Singapore, however, vehemently affirm that ends are now further from meeting than ever before. Possibly, however, a higher standard of living has something to do with this.
There are indications that the padi harvest throughout Malaya and Borneo will show a sub- stantial increase upon the 1946-47 season. It is estimated that the crop in Malaya will exceed the previous year’s by some twenty per cent.
On the 16th April, a meeting was held in the Secretariat under the Chairmanship of the Honour- able the Chief Secretary to discuss the future of the rubber industry in Sarawak. Representatives of most sections of the community interested in the production of rubber were present and the discussion was vigorous if pessimistic. The Chief Secretary indicated the intention of the Government to encourage the development of the industry on economic lines within the framework of the exist:ng agricultural policy.
In this connection it is interesting to recall a statement made in the House of Commons by the Secretary of State that “there is a considerable amount of replanting and new planting of rubber in the British territories in the Far East both by plantation companies and by innumerable individual small holders.”
Some Notes on the Census.
(Continued.)
It is now proposed to discuss these statistics in the appendix, but first of all it must be clearly understood that in the absence of statistics of migration, births and deaths since the count of 1939, and because the 1939 Enumeration did not amount to a full Census and is deficient in the in- formation that any statistician requires to determine rates of change in population, no firm conclusions can be drawn. Probabilities will be suggested, but even these will be subject to revision when the fuller information resulting from the statistical analysis is made available later this year. It has often been said that one can read anything into figures, but half the reason for this idea is that most of the people who are willing to discuss statistics are not willing, or have not had the opportunity, to find out how the statistics are derived, the factors governing their accuracy, or the relative importance of the factors relating to changes or discrepancies.
The statistics given in the appendix are divided by Division into eight “racial” or cultural groups. “European” means all those of European parent- age or direct descent and includes Eurasians. The
Malays, Melanaus, Sea Dayaks and Land Dayaks are regarded as indigenous, but it must be remembered that some of the Malays, the proport- ion as yet unknown but to be published in the Final Report, were born outside Sarawak. The group “Other Indigenous” covers all the other indigenous people such as Kayans, Kenyahs, Pu- nans, Kelabitw and many others. Detailed statistics of these latter people will appear in the Report. “Chinese” means all those people claiming to be Chinese by birth, wherever born. The proportion born in Sarawak will also appear in the Report. “Other Asiatic” means all those other non-indigen- ous people of Asiatic birth such as Javanese. Indians. Bugis and so on.
The European statistics require little comment. The change since 1939 is unimportant and the proportion is constantly changing because of the small total number.
The Malays show an increase of 4,831 since 1939, but even this small increase is an unreliable figure because it is known that in 1939 many Melanaus and about 1,600 Kedayans were enumerated as Malays. The reason for the inclusion of Melanaus lies in the fact that the Melanau and the Malay confuse "religion" with “race.” For example, ask a Mohammedan Melanau his "bangsa" or race, and almost always he will reply—‘‘orang Islam,” which, in the absence of any strong apparent racial characteristics, leads the questioner to conclude he is a Malay. In view of the unreliability of the 1939 “racial” figures, the only possible way of effecting a reasonable comparison is by combining the two groups, when it will be found that the over- all increase for the whole country is only 3,612 or 2.9%. One naturally concludes that since there is an increase all is well with these people but if it is remembered that this increase is really only about 2,000 and that the Sea Dayaks and Land Dayaks have increased by 13.5% and 14.2% res- pectively over the last eight years, then one is bound to think again. Personally I am of the opinion that the Malays and Melanaus are approach- ing the turning point and if no change for the better is made in their social structure within the next ten years, then the next Census will reveal a positive decrease. Turning to particular Dis- tricts, we find that in the predominantly Melanau Districts of Oya, Dalat and Mukah where Melanaus and Malays appear to have been enumerated accurately and separately in 1939, the Melanaus have increased by 276 over 6,578 and by 190 over 8,519, respectively by Districts, since 1939. These increases are minute and in the absence of any evidence of appreciable migration one is bound to conclude that the race is stationary, and possibly declining. However, hasty conclusions based on incomplete data are dangerous, but the warning is there, and closer investigation appears advisable.
The Sea Dayaks show an extraordinary increase everywhere but in the Fifth Division. In the First Division the increase is 28% ; in the Second, 8%; in the Third, 14%; in the Fourth, 24%; while in the Fifth the decrease is 7% but as there were only 1.769. in this Division in 1939, this decrease is not important and in the absence of migration statistics is almost meaningless from the point of view of vital statistics. A total increase of 13.5% for the whole country indicates a very considerable margin of natural increase. It is possible that further more interesting information will be obtain- ed for the Final Report when it is expected that statistics for the Second Division, which holds
63,166 Sea Dayaks, and yet shows an increase of only 8%, will disclose evidence of considerable infantile mortality and female sterility.
The remarkable increase of the Land Dayaks by 5,232 or 14.2% causes one to doubt the accuracy of the 1939 Enumeration, and indeed the Assistant Superintendent of Census for the Serian District has argued somewhat convincingly to this effect. Nevertheless the 1939 Enumeration could not have missed thousands of these people, practically all of whom live in the First Division where the popu- lation is more dense and accessible than in most other areas in Sarawak. In the Bau District, for example, the population has actually decreased since 1939, yet the Land Dayaks have increased in that District from 8,286 to 9,530. It is true that the Land Dayaks are straddled across the border with Dutch Borneo and it is more than likely that there has been some movement from Dutch territory into Sarawak since 1939, but this could not account for the large increase, and even if com- bined with the aforementioned factor of possible inaccurate enumeration in 1939 it is not likely that the numbers would run into thousands. One is forced to the conclusion that the natural increase of these people has been very high but is probably lower than 14.2% because of doubtful enumeration in 1939 and migration from Dutch Borneo. People who know the Land Dayaks generally agree that the majority of them live in unhygenic conditions and as a group they appear to be of a physically low standard. It is also generally agreed that the best efforts of the past administration have not been directed towards the Land Dayaks and probably they are the most neglected of all the indigenous people. They complain of an acute shortage of land suitable for cultivation under their particular methods, and generally speaking they app ar to eke out a precarious existence. However, despite all this, we find them increasing rapidly, and one is forced to consider whether or not neglect by the Government has been the cause in part, at any rate, of this increase. Whatever the reason may be, it should be borne in mind that, like the Sea Dayaks who have increased similarly, they live very close to the soil, and their existence depends upon what they can produce from the land or extract from the jungle.
63,166 Sea Dayaks, and yet shows an increase of only 8%, will disclose evidence of considerable infantile mortality and female sterility.
The last indigenous group, “Other Indigenous,” is composed of numerically minor tribes found principally in the upriver areas of the Kapit Dis- trict and in the Fourth and Fifth Divisions. The Kayans are the most important and they appear to have increased by only 105 to 6,176 since 1939. The Kenyahs come next, and these people also show a very small increase of 269 to 5,511 since 1939. The Kayans and Kenyahs are said to be going through a slow process of assimilation and as time goes on it becomes more and more difficult to dis- tinguish between them. It is not suggested that this process of assimilation should he restrained, and in fact it is apparent among all the indigenous people and probably should be encouraged, but this aspect is outside the terms of this discussion. Other minute upriver tribes of this group are the Bukitans. Kajamans, Lahanans, Penans. Rajangs, Sekapans. Sians, Tataus and Ukits. all of whom still retain a certain individuality. Nevertheless most of them show a decrease in numbers since 1939, and it would appear, that this is due to absorption into the stronger grouped as well as to a natural decrease. The Kedayans would appear to have in- creased from 3,291 to 5,271 but this is not really the
case because all the Kedayans of the Limbang Dis- trict, now numbering 1,657, were enumerated as Malays in 1939. Thus it would appear that the Ke- dayans, in common with most of the other minor tribes, are slowly declining in numbers and perhaps are slowly losing their identity. The Bisayahs show an increase of 239 to 2,056 since 1939 but here again it is doubtful if this increase is a real one because of doubtful enumeration in 1939; for exam- ple, 68 were found in the Kapit District in 1947 but none were recorded in 1939 although some are thought to have been there. The Kelabits now number 1,643, whereas 1,734 were enumerated in 1939. Practically all of them were enumerated in 1947 by Mr. Harrison or under his supervision, and there is no reason to question the accuracy of either the 1939 or 1947 figures. There may have been some migration into Dutch territory and we must await Mr. Harrison’s return before comment- ing upon what appears to be a decline in their population.
Also included in the “Other Indigenous group are the Muruts, with whom are allied the Tagals. They have decreased in the Fifth Division from 3,999 to 2,916. A great deal has been written about these people and many have predicted their ultimate disappearance, while others have suggested that the efforts of Missionaries among them may arrest the decline. The figures quoted above are not necessarily to be accepted at their face value because there may have been emigration to North Borneo since 1939, and it would be wise to restrain comment and await the views of the people who know them—views which it is hoped will be published in the “Sarawak Gazette.”
The nomadic Punans are also included in the “Other Indigenous” group. No attempt was made to enumerate these people in 1939—it was not con- sidered possible—but it was estimated that 100 roamed in the Kapit District and 687 in the Baram. In 1947 Mr. Rennick enumerated 629 in the Ulu Rajang, Mr. Morgan found 972 in the Ulu Baram and Mr. Harrison found 232 between the Tutoh and Medihit in the Baram and Limbang Districts. The total number thus enumerated in 1947 was 1,833 whereas only 729 were estimated in 1939, but one must be careful not to condemn the estimate too hastily as it may well be that it was a fairly rea- sonable guess at that time. The Punans move very quickly over long distances and know no boundaries. Tt is quite possible that even now, only three months since the Census, some of them are in Dutch Borneo. Mr. Morgan fears that he may not have enumerated all the Punans in his area because of the extreme difficulty of making contact. Whether or not some were missed, the work done by all three Officers was something much better than could reasonably be expected, and we now have, for the first time in the history of Sarawak, a record of the numbers of these interesting people.
The gross increase of “Other Indigenous” is shown as 2,222, but it must be remembered that this figure contains 1,657 Kedayans who were enu- merated as Malays in 1939, and 1,104 nomadic Punans in excess of the 1939 estimate, so that in- stead of an increase a deficit appears. Observers in the Kapit, Baram and Lawas Districts have long predicted such a situation among the lesser known tribes and it would appear that they are fighting a losing battle against eventual absorption and ex- tinction. It must be emphased however that the figures only convey an impression which can be proved or disproved by recording statistics of migration and births and deaths, but it is an im-
pression which all those who have the welfare of these people at heart would do well not to disregard.
The Chinese increase by 21,493 to 145,119 brings them up to within almost 27% of the total populat- ion of Sarawak. Part of this increase must be attrib- uted to immigration during the years of 1940 and 1941 but in the absence of statistics it is not possible to make a firm estimate. Observers generally agree that the natural increase has been great, particularly in the years of Japanese occupation, when the marriage of young adults partially secured them from Japanese interference. When dis- cussing the natural increase among the Chinese it is well to remember that immigration is a disturbing factor in any calculations. Usually the Chinese arrived in Sarawak as an adult, and very often he or she was of marriage age, thus reinforcing the adult population and in a very short time reproduc- ing, thereby unbalancing and accelerating the natural increase of births over deaths. This is more clearly understood if one takes, for example, a case of five young male and five young female adult immigrants. If, within five years, these ten persons between them have produced 5 children (a low figure), then between themselves they have in- creased 50% in 5 years, whereas it might take ten people born in Sarawak 20 years to achieve the same result. Chinese males are in excess of females by 17,669, due of course to an excess of male over female immigrants, and the extent of Chinese immi- gration may be gauged from this large excess. The problems usually resulting from a large shortage of females are not particularly outstanding in Sarawak because numbers of the Chinese in the rural areas marry Land and Sea Dayak women. The progeny of these unions are usually regarded as Chinese, and thus we have a further contributary cause of the very great increase.
The last group “Other Asiatic” is composed of all those people of Asiatic descent who are not re- garded as indigenous to Sarawak and are not includ- ed in the Chinese group. They are principally In- dian, Javanese and Bugis. It is probable that the Indians have decreased, but the Javanese have cer- tainly increased, partly from infiltration across the border from Dutch Borneo but mainly because numbers of them were brought in by the Japanese and some have remained.
From the statistics we find that the indigenous people of Sarawak number 295,429, and have in- creased by 9% since 1939, while the non-indigenous number, 150,932 and have increased by 17%. The disproportion between the increases is obvious, and one has no difficulty in seeing how quickly the gap between the totals of the two groups must be decreasing. If it should be considered necessary to retard the high increase among the non-indigenous then restraint of immigration would probably give the desired result.
In concluding, I would like to emphasise once again that the views expressed in this paper are little more than impressions, and some of them may be revised when the final statistics are available, but others cannot be proved until further detailed investigation has been carried out over long periods by specialists in social welfare and economy and the like. A population Census should be regarded as a scientific investigation which, though complete in itself, is the foundation of a permanent structure. Fail to build that structure and the whole purpose of the foundation disappears.
J. L. Noakes.
Kuching. 25th February, 1948.
Appendix.
CENSUS OF SARAWAK 1947.
PROVISIONAL POPULATION STATISTICS BY SEX FOR EACH DIVISION.
Note : These figures are subject to slight amendment as checking and analysis proceeds. The final and correct statistics will be published in the 1947 Census Report late in 1948.
*ln the 1939 Enumeration Malays and Melanaus were combined under “Malay” in certain Districts, thus giving too many under “Malay” and too few under “Melanau.” For purposes of accurate comparison these two groups should be combined. The increase of Malays and Melanaus over 1939 then becomes 3,612 or 2.9%.
Retirement of the Bishop of Labuan and Sarawak.
As readers of the Sarawak Tribune have already read, the Right Reverend Francis Septimus Hollis has been compelled by ill health to resign his office. Although he will not be returning to Sarawak the Archbishop of Canterbury has expressed the wish that he should continue in office until after the Lambeth Conference in July so that he may represent the diocese at the meetings.
It is not generally known that before his ordinat- ion in 1913 the Bishop was a Fellow of the Surveyor's Institute. His first curacy was at Ashby- de-la-Zouch but in 1916 he came out to Sarawak as Assistant Priest at St. Thomas’ Cathedral. In 1923 ho went to the Land Dayak Mission at Quop and in 1928 returned to Kuching as Principal of St. Thomas’ School. He was collated Archdeacon of Sarawak in 1934 and consecrated Bishop of the Diocese in 1938.
An account of his Church work will no doubt be published in the Diocesan Magazine and other pipers. We can only speak of two subjects which he made his special objects—these were St. Thomas’ School and the Asian Priesthood. In both of these he never spared himself and all will agree that he was successful in his endeavours to promote the welfare of his beloved school and encourage and increase the Asian Priesthood.
He spent longer in Sarawak than most of the former Bishops and he had an intimate knowledge of local conditions. At the age of fifty-seven he had to endure three and a half years of a Japanese prison camp. During that time he upheld well the traditions of his Church. It is sad to learn that the privations of those days no doubt aggravated his failing eyesight.
The Anglican Church in the Diocese will long remember him as a true and pious gentleman.
Import Control.
The drain on the gold and dollar reserves of the sterling area continues and remains a cause for serious anxiety. At present the imports from dollar and other hard-currency countries into the United Kingdom, the Colonies and the rest of the sterling area still substantially exceed the current earnings from exports to those countries. This pro- blem is being tackled in the United Kingdom and elsewhere, but it is one which must be viewed generally, and which cannot be looked at only in the light of the imports and exports of individual parts of the sterling area.
It is clear from the above that the sterling area countries as a whole must not only attain an overall balance in their trade and payments with the rest of the world, but have the even more difficult task of achieving a balance with dollar and other hard- currency countries. The immediate and urgent objective is to reduce the present serious deficit in trade with them to the lowest possible level.
This Government is confident that the needs of the sterling area in this respect are already generally realised, together with the remedy— namely, for each constituent country to reduce imports from hard-currency areas to those goods
and services which are essential for its own economic activities whilst increasing exports which will earn or save those hard-currencies to the greatest extent possible.
Colonial Governments have been kept informed by His Majesty’s Government in the United Kingdom of the imperative need for keeping a continuous watch on the levels of dollar and other hard-currency expenditure. For this purpose these Governments were requested by His Majesty’s Government some months ago to keep the rate of expenditure of their territories in Western Hemi- sphere countries during 1948 within a limit which was based on a computation of essential require- ments from those countries during the year. It is intended to review the position at quarterly intervals during the year, to see whether imports are conforming to this arrangement. It may be possible for expenditure to be increased to meet unforeseen essential needs: conversely, circum- stances might compel a reduction in the present limits
It is felt that it may assist traders to have this statement of the general background, and that they will all co-operate readily with this Government in the full understanding that our import policy, whilst having due regard to our own economic needs, must play its part with that of the other sterling area countries in the vital task of checking the drain on gold and dollar reserves.
A Triumph in Printing.
The Acting Government Printer (Mr W. J. Chater) is to be congratulated on the work of printing and binding the Revised Edition of the Laws of Sarawak—the largest undertaking the Printing Office has ever attempted. The Edition is in three volumes of approximately 500 pages each.
After the war only two Linotype machines were working out of four and only one large printing press instead of two, but in spite of this handicap work was begun early in 1947.
Metal for the Linotype machines was scarce. It was found impossible to purchase new supplies and the quality of that left after the Japanese occupat- ion was extremely poor. It was found that through bad usage the metal contained impurities which clogged the Linotype machines, blurred type faces and caused commas and full-stops to break off during printing. The metal was still in this condition when the first volume was set up in type and a means of purifying it was not found until the second volume was well on the way.
The original aim was to complete the printing by the end of 1947 but a halt had to be made after the first volume was set up in type, the reason being that no more metal was available and paper had not arrived from England to enable the printing off of the pages ready for printing and re-use of the metal. The paper eventually arrived in October, 1947, and printing was commenced in the middle of that month.
The whole of the type was set up by one Dayak and two Malays. Only the Dayak has a know ledge of English.
The printing was done on a press 25 years old which had been badly sabotaged by the Japanese. A number of spare parts were made locally to get
the machine into running order after the occupat- ion. It was only in 75 per cent running order when the printing of the laws was commenced, which meant continual adjustments and loss of time. It was not until the second volume was in print that spares arrived from England and the necessary repairs were carried out.
Paper had to he fed into the machine by hand. Pages were printed four at a time but since the total number of pages, including reprints of certain Titles, amounted to nearly a million printed pages the operator had to feed in by hand nearly a quarter of a million sheets of piper. The press work was done by three Dayaks and one Malay. Here again, only one (a Dayak) has a knowledge of English.
The printing took five months to complete and the binding, which is done by hand, took a month. The first bound volumes were ready on 27th March, 1948, and distribution throughout the Colons was completed by 19th April, the date on which the Revised Edition came into force.
Pure gold leaf is a feature on the handsome binding. This is applied under heat after the covers have been suitably prepared with white of egg. The number of eggs used in binding some 1,500 volumes must be considerable, but no inform- ation can be elicited from the Printing Office as to what happens to the yolks.
Owing to the lack of machinery and trained staff it was only possible to complete this work by work- ing overtime every day and on Saturdays, Sundays and public holidays.—(Contributed.)
Literary Criticism.
It’s very bard to write a sonnet If you keep the rules of course Even tapping stress like morse, Hard as making up a bonnet With a chic decor upon it. We admire you ape the corse Of Ages past, invoke the force Of giants, model pastiche on it. Claim the licence of a poet Produce ironic mock heroic Addresses from the world of Teelings. But my dear friend kindly stow it: You should not use a false heroic T’express the second Rajah’s feelings.
T. P. C.
“UP With Which I will not Put”
Winston Churchill has said clearly that he dislikes—in fact, up with which he will not put, the rather stereotyped official language used in many Government Departments.
Of course there must be some rein on the individual fancies of civil servants. It wouldn’t do for high officials to write like Mr. Jingle talked, nor would it be fitting for cinema-loving governors to write their fellows in the language of the screen.
Nevertheless there surely must be some civil servants, who long to divorce themselves from the
rather pompous style which seems to be uniform in all Government Offices.
Even in Rajah Brooke’s time I have run across a gentleman who begged someone or other to explore every avenue and leave no stone unturned.
It is refreshing, therefore, to read some of the Rajah’s Orders to his officers.
For instance in February 1872 he wrote “The Rajah sends to the different outstation officers the comparative miscellaneous and extra outlays be- tween one station and another in which he thinks much reduction might be made............the Rajah
regrets to see that an unreasonable extravagance is carried on in the Mukah Residency. One item, a feast inclusive of bull, coming to $65.................the
Rajah hopes that every care will be taken by an officer against muddling away the public money” (nothing mealy-mouthed about that, is there?) “ . . should emergencies arise he is fully aware that expenses must be incurred.”
“It is scarcely necessary” he goes on “to add that the officer in charge of a station is not justified in spending the Government money in such a way.” (That bull has apparently stuck in the old Rajah's throat.) “If the outlay of Mukah be compared to any of the other Residencies it will be found that without extra efficiency Mukah is spending three times as much as any other and” (here is the sting) “the Rajah requires this extravagance to be speedi- ly rectified.............” Short, to the point and no
ambiguity.
Continuing, the Rajah gives figures to hammer in his points. For whilst Bintulu spent $180 on P.W.D. for a year Mukah spent $1,580. Under the heading of secret service, however, there does not seem to have been extravagance. For a year Sibu spent $351. Kalaka $50, and Bintulu only $43.
On the 12th August 1872 the Rajah writes “Henceforth Kuching is to be the name of the capital, and the term Sarawak is only to be used when the whole territory is spoken of.” It might be argued that the wording of this order is not above reproach, but it only took twenty-six words to make such an important announcement.
In spite of seventy-six years many Dayaks still talk of “going down to Sarawak” when they come down to a station to ask for a pass to Kuching.
What joy there must have been when the Rajah gave out “His Highness the Rajah directs that the duty on all wines, beers and cigars shall from and after the 31st July 1875 be abolished.”
Twenty-four words.
Brevity, however, may be overdone and I do not expect that the very brief list of public holidays published in March 1872 met with approval. Ap- parently it was not thought necessary to have more than five holidays a year as the order reads. “The Rajah commands the following holidays shall be observed throughout each year :—
New Year’s Day to Europeans and Natives. Hari Raya after Ramadan to Europeans and Natives.
Anniversary of the Rajah’s Birthday—June 3 to European and Natives.
Good Friday to Europeans only.
Christmas Day to Europeans only.
On the above days the Government offices will be closed.’’
There may be more work for the College of Heralds to do oyer flags for Sarawak. One of the oldest pre-cession flags was that flown occasionally by the Church of England in Sarawak.
On 1st May 1871 the Rajah commanded "The Rajah has been pleased to grant the Mission a quartering of a Christian badge or monogram in the Sarawak flag. This is to be recognised in future as the Mission flag." Later the Roman Catholic Mission was granted a special flag, and the Borneo Company had one too.
In 1870 Chinese Secret Societies were a menace to the country. In view of the recent voting in the House of Commons on the subject of capital punishment, and the long discussions, conferences and deliberations which will assuredly take place in His Majesty’s Colonies on the very vexed quest in, the Order.I quote below is almost alarming in its, brevity, directness and finality.
“The Rajah in Council lays before the Mem- bers the desirability of passing a law of capital punishment on any Ch:nese who stands in the capacity of Leader of a Secret Hueh, all such Hueh or Secret Societies haying been strictly pro- hibited by Government. The leader of such Hueh will be known principally by taking part in delivering oaths to subordinates, or those who have been concerned is secret correspondence about the Societies. Unanimously passed. Quick work, that! Drastic but, as the events turned out, most necessary.
O. F.
[At the dime this article was received, we ehanced upon the following spirited correspondence which may be of interest.—Ed.]
5th March.
To
The Manager,
Borneo Company Ltd.
Sir,
Disposal of Obsolete Ordnance.
The students of the future School, having acquired a 50 prahu lomba for use on the river, would like to mount a light piece of artillery in the bows and are advised by their naval architect that a Dayak meriam of 30 katis would be a suitable armament. They have heard that at one time the Borneo Company had some old cannons in their yard and have asked me to enquire whether any of these are still available.
The gun would be used—primarily—for shooting crocodiles with and in case the management of the B.C.L. has any qualms about the ulterior purposes for which the gun might be required, I am instructed to offer you a six months guarantee that the weapon would not be used for piratical attacks on vessels chartered by your company.
I have the honour to be,
etc. etc.
10th March.
Dear Sir,
Disposal of Obsolete Ordnance;
We have the honour to acknowledge receipt of your letter of March 5th, on the above subject.
Unfortunately our own arsenal became sadly depleted owing to the depredations of certain unauthorised immigrants during the early part of this decade, and we are left with very little reliable artillery.
We can offer you for immediate delivery a fine line of twin howitzers, slightly rusty, built in 1844 but recently overhauled (in 1879, to be precise). However, Horace has come to the conclusion after much manipulation of his water-cooled slide rule, that these are possibly slightly too heavy. They weigh just over 10 cwt. each, and it is calculated that owing to the fact that your No. 3 from stroke tends to tire easily, a pronounced list to port would become noticeable after a short while, with a consequent deterioration in accuracy.
A possible alternative would be a rather large transportable meriam which is situated in the open just behind the totem-pole outside the museum.
As none of the foregoing being suitable, we are writing to our Master Gunsmith in a neighbouring country, and enquiring as to the latest position as regards casting of new weapons and the difficulties of gun-running under the Colonial Government.
Your offer of 6 months freedom from piracy for our own vessels is much appreciated, but you have not indemnified us against Letters of Mart and Counter-Mart; Arrests, Restraints and Detainments of all Kings, Princes and People, of what Nation, Condition or Quality soever; Damage by Hooks, Oil or Sea Water; Jettisoning or Washing Over- board; or Free of Particular Average. However, to show our appreciation of your offer, we absolve you from such promises in so far as any vessels in opposition to ourselves may be concerned.
We have the honour to remain.
Dear Sir,
Yours in Barratry,
Adscriptus Glebae.
The New Look..............
"A recent announcement from Paris that Christian Dior had launched a new slim line staggered clothes manufacturers in all parts of the world."—A report.
The two new models which M. Dior has evolved from his last season’s New Look styles have set all Paris by the ears. The first of these two intrigu- ing models is the Coclie model inspired by lines of Chinese slimness. The other, of course, is the. Mermaid Silhouette.
Skirts are longer and bell shaped to accentuate the graceful feminine lines; hips are emphasised, by pads where necessary, to give a full flowing effect to the skirt. To control the waist line, the new wasp-waist corselet has been specially designed and gives the ‘hour glass’ silhouette which, M. Dior insists, is so much a part of the revolutionary aspect of the new femininity.
The accessories to these enchanting new models are as elaborate as they are delightful. An ultra modem hat is the crownless platter which should always perch with a slight forward tilt and which if worn only with creations of the new Coolie Line. Another headwear style is the skull cap which is gayly decorated with ropes of coral twisted round the edge or elegantly bunched to one side.
The Mermaid Silhouette is designed for evening wear and is moulded to the figure from a strapless top tailing away into a fishtail train with the skirt in front slit almost to the knees. The whole effect is one of graciousness and femininity.
The Coolie Line is a development of the New Feminine Look modelled upon the Chinese coolie jacket. The many models are designed for wear by day or by night.
................And The Old Look.
The Old Look, like the Mermaid Silhouette and the Coolie Line, makes a complete break with the Bread Line style, one so popular in the homes of fashion.
The keynote to the Old Look styles which have proved so popular in Kuching is one of severity ; the cut is strictly practical in appearance.
The neck line of the Old Coolie Look model is often excessively decollete with an irregular edge bordering the open neck. Over one shoulder a piece of self-coloured cloth is negligently thrown to break the severity of the outline and, when heavy loads are carried on the shoulder, it also serves to pre- serve the natural colours of the undergarment. On lot days it is often used as a kerchief. The waist line has a corrugated effect developed from the muscular appearance of heavy-weight lifters and may be enhanced by a length of hempen rope or belt of narrow material, care being taken not to fasten tightly or to give a constricted effect.
The nether garment is short; rarely reaching to the knees, and presents a patchwork effect-both back and front. The patchwork material is sewn over the garment, the stitching often being finely and delicately worked. The hem may be uneven to give an old world appearance.
The accessories strike a keynote of simplicity; in addition to the cloth which is lightly thrown over the shoulder, a bandeau is often worn round the hair to control the popular laisser faire hair style. Footwear is not essential but when it is worn care is taken to avoid over-elaboration. The shoes, made of rubber, are loose fitting and laceless
The Old Look is designed for wear by day and by night.
N.
Fire Engines Again.
“Who is this Royston Crow who has been croaking in the last Gazette”? asked the Ancient.
He was so angry that he ordered himself a beer by mistake without waiting for anyone to stand him one. “I suppose it must be one of these ‘foreigners’ who has not taken the trouble to read up his old Gazettes.”
There was a respectful hush while he continued.
"This house naming cropped up some years ago over the name of the house for a former Chief Justice. He wanted to call it, (and eventually it was officially recognised), ‘The Judge's House.’
I never thought much to that. It always remind- ed me of that story by Bram Stoker about the student who went nuts through overwork and hung himself. Stoker worked it round that the bad old Judge got down out of his picture and did it for him.
There were a lot of rats in it too and I can’t abide rats. You see, from that, all the houses were named after their occupants. The Postmaster- General was to live in ‘Rowlands Hill,’ The Princi- pal Medical Officer in ‘Tourniquet,’ The Municipal Commissioner (as he was then) in ‘By-Laws,’ but the thing that floored ’em was that the chap living in ‘Swallow Cottage’ in those days was a teetotaler.
Did I ever tell you the story of the fire practice? In the twenties, the man who was responsible for the Fire Brigade used to live in a house at the junction of Haji Taha and Blacksmith Roads. His usual method of training the Fire Brigade was to ring through to the Fire Station and bawl down the telephone, ‘My 'ouse is afire.’ Then he used to take the time they took on a stop-watch. He never varied the programme.
One night he was escorted home from the Club by the District Officer and a young Police Officer. The former was driving a Baby Austin and the latter an enormous Harley-Davidson motor bicycle. He asked them in for a usual one for the road, which they accepted. In the course of conversation, 8.... let out that he was proposing to have a fire practice that night. The District Officer backed up by the Policeman suggested that they broke new ground and had a new rendezvous. 8 . . . . was not very keen but eventually admitted they knew the way to his house pretty well. The next thing to decide was where to have the 'fire.'
It so happened that a newly married couple had just returned from their honeymoon and had just moved into the White House, (now occupied by the Resident); this was the suggested objective. I may add here that all the officers concerned were jealous bachelors.
S . . . . objected that there might be repercuss- ions, the bridegroom being notorious for having no sense of humour. The Policeman pointed cut that they were nearer the ‘White House’ than the Fire Brigade and would get there first. So over- persuaded, S . . . rang through to the Fire Stat:on and yelled down the telephone—‘Mr. H .... ’s 'ouse is afire.’ The party then rushed off to head them off.
Well, the Fire Brigade must have moved some, for when they got there the brigade was almost in acton. H . . . . was stamping up and down the verandah shouting ‘This is an outrage. What is the meaning of this’? S . . . . looked at H . . . . blankly and replied ‘Your ’ouse is afire Mr. H . . . ’.
Well, eventually it was all explained the brigade called off and sent home and were later congratu- lated for beng so efficient. These doings echoed round the town for a bit as you may guess and eventually died down.
In due course Mrs. H . . . . presented H . . . . with a firstborn and the District Officer got a very cold stare from H .... in the Club when he asked him if he was going to call it Phoenix.
(Contributed).
Films of the Month.
The month’s films produced the usual bag of American musicals and American victories. It is a far call from the magnificence of the early Broad- way Melody films to the repetitive post war musicals and the change leaves the cinema-goer with the im- pression that fewer films and greater merit might better justify the present enormous expenditure on film production.
In the early part of the month there was an American film of considerable taste and restraint. Darryl Zanuck, who last year won a Hollywood award for the best production of the year, produced the film version of Richard Llewellyn’s novel "How Green was my Valley” and this was shewn twice in two successive weeks. The technical difficulties in the production of the film must have been con- siderable and it came as no surprise to hear Ameri- can accents and Irish brogues tumbling over the true Welsh intonation. Mr. Zanuck had little appreciat- ion of what the interior of a Welsh miner’s cottage is like and even the exterior views were not consistent. But such was the sincerity and worth of the film that incidental inaccuracies did not jar. The script for the film had been written with a clear and sympathetic understanding of the author’s intention; the casting, with the one exception of Bron, had been done with skill and with more attention to the spirit of the book than to the promise of box-office receipts. With unconscious tribute, many of the audience characterised the film as ‘very sad’ but the film purported to portray the lives of people who lived in a Welsh mining village and sadness there, as elsewhere, plays its part.
‘How Green was my Valley’ must be amongst the best films which Hollywood has produced of recent years. Richard Llewellyn’s second novel ‘None but the Lonely Heart’ should be equally interesting as a film.
A film which might be of interest in Sarawak is a short British film "Lily Marlene” which would probably be produced in 1944 or possibly earlier. As the title indicates, it is a history of the one famous march which was written during the recent war. At a time when the best that the English lyric writers and composers could produce were insipid songs like The White Cliffs of Dover and Room 504, a German wrote and a Swedish girl sang "Lily Marlene.” To the words and the music of this, the Africa Korps marched to El Alemein and, with the turn of the tide, the Eighth Army counter-marched to Cap Bon. The peculiar feature is that, during the stress of war when propaganda is a weapon not to be despised, so unprejudiced a version of a German theme should have been produced in an English Studio.
The press advertisement for Rhapsody in Blue induced a better than average audience to attend and most suffered from disappointment and bore- dom. What promised to be a sparkling musical show turned out to be a scrappy, ill-conceived and badly executed record of the life of an American song writer and composer. Not even the intention of paying tribute to the dead composer could reconcile the audience to the film’s painful short- comings.
There was a time, and Rhapsody in Blue served to recall it, when the cinema-goer could be sure of three or four items on the programme and it was a bad business if at least one of the four failed to
entertain. In these enlightened days, however, the film programme tends to be divided into three parts; the first consists of blurred advertising slides which no one minds very much because it gives the opportunity to glance round, talk and, if one is in a strategic position, get a drink. There follows on, a feature ‘Forthcoming Attractions’ which would be better labelled ‘Forthcoming Films'; then the principal film. News reels, which are usually good value for reluctant money, are not frequent and short comedies, which may well provide the consolation prize for the evening, are rare. Sober minded (and, quite by the way, cheaply produced) educational films are unfortun- ately, not quite so rare. Many men spend a not inconsiderable time as the bane of some worthy teacher’s life and it is not expected that a busy film producer should also saddle himself with this educational responsibility.
As regards the other films of the month, we saw but few and so there is little to be said.
This Sarawak.
(With apologies to the New Statesman and Nation.)
All appointments carry a cost-of-loving allowance. —From an advertisement for the Colonial Survey Service in Sarawak in the Otago Daily Times.
In a recent reorganisation of the District Office, a dead bird was found amongst pre-war Court records.—A report.
The temporary shop houses are in a state of des- pair.—article on Sarawak.
Before the lost war.—From a letter.
Plaintiff tried from the very outset to drag the humble appellant into a perplexing maze by re- presenting himself with a false name, which action calls for in question as premedotatingly suggestive of this eventual false claim in process against the humble appellant.—Extract from a petition.
With much rejoicing the Government outboards arrived during the month.—A report.
A stern warning, followed by a suspension if it is not needed, would have a salutary effect.............
—North Borneo News.
It stated that the President and General Secretary of the U.S.N.A. sent their proposals and rejectment to the visitor Lord Listowel.—A letter to Sarawak Tribune.
The Borneo Company Ltd., Straits Settlement, Fed. & Unfed., Malay States, Sarawak, Siam.—An address.
Awarded 5 days cells. On June 3rd ’42, he did bow down rudely to the ground to a German officer instead of militarily saluting as is ordered.
Awarded 8 days cells. He was found to be writing P.O.W. on the coat of a German who had put it down.
Awarded 5 days cells when on morning parade he is knitting when all is standing to attention.
Awarded 5 days cells for undisciplined behaviour, boxing and smoking on morning parade of April 10th, '42.—A few German awards.
Conspiring together with others so as to obtain money to permit the sale of unlawful marine fish. —The China Mail.
In private life, he was also a gentleman to the backbone.—Singapore paper.
We want to put a commemorative plague in our new ship.—A letter.
The General Attorney.—An address.
But in any way I hope I will not be creating any trouble whatsoever just to have the opportunity to be asked to leave my service without a notice and freed from my debts.—A letter.
AT THE CLUB.
To win the first hand is bad luck No, just bad form.
735, That’s not a bad score It's the time they started at.
Fifty Years Ago.
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, MAY 2nd, 1898.
“PIGS AND A PYTHON.”
We have the following “snake story” from Mr. Ernest Hose an able and experienced field naturalist. The other day at Tambak Mr. Hose, hearing the cries of wild pig proceeding from the jungle adjoining his house, went with his dogs to investigate matters; he shortly came upon a large python surrounded by about twenty pigs, savagely goring it with their tusks : a young pig had been seized by the python and its cries of distress had probably summoned the other members of the herd to its assistance; their opportune arrival enabled them to effect a rescue for the python was so harassed and lacerated that it relinquished its hold on its prey, which was so little injured, that it decamped with the rest of the herd on perceiving the presence of interested human spectators, leaving the final dispatch of the python to the un- tender mercies of Mr. Hose.
Re the Amoking and Death of Haji Hassan Lupa.
Friday 15th of April, 1898, at 6.30 a.m. Haji Hassan Lupa, on remand, in irons, on a charge of pantak, etc., “amoked” it occurred thus, when private Bakar, Sarawak Rangers, went to open the jail door to hike this man out to bathe, etc., he, i.e. Haji Hassan Lupa, snatched Bakar’s parang from its sheath and tried to cut him down ; Bakar had unlocked the prisoners handcuffs as he said he wished to put on his coat; Bakar was wounded on the forearm, not a dangerous wound, but Bakar lost a good deal of blood : Haji Hassan Lupa of course meant to kill him. The prisoner then rushed out-
side the Fort and stood waiting to kill anyone who approached him, he knocked off his leg irons, and was making for the Kampong, as he had already wounded one man. and he would not surrender, I ordered Corpl. Dalang, Sarawak Rangers (a good shot) to shoot him; this he did and the Haji died 2 hours afterwards. This was the only course we could pursue, if he had managed to get off into the Kampong the carnage would have been fearful.
[Note.—This account of the death of Haji Hassan Lupa follows upon an account of his trial for terrorising Bintulu district by imposing evil spells upon persons. He is described as "an elderly man with a villainous, pock-marked face who did no work and who had no inheritance".—Ed.]
Notice.
It has now been decided that amalgamation of the posts of Special Commissioner in South East Asia and Governor-General, Malaya, shall take effect on May 1st. Mr. Malcolm MacDonald will bear the title of “Commissioner-General for the United Kingdom in South East Asia." He will continue to communicate with the Secretary of State for the Colonies on matters with which he formerly dealt as Governor-General, Malaya, and will be responsible as hitherto for co-ordination of administration and policy in relation with Federation of Malaya, Singapore, North Borneo, Sarawak and Brunei. He will be responsible to the Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs for work previously carried out by the Special Com- missioner’s organisation and in his relations with foreign territories with which he is concerned he will have the personal rank of Ambassador.
Notice.
It is announced that Her Majesty the Queen has been graciously pleased to consent that the Colonial Nursing Service shall be given the title of "Queen Elizabeth’s Colonial Nursing Service."
(The unified Colonial Nursing Service was formed in 1940. Candidates for the Service retain the right of choice of the Colonial territory on first appointment. They are not transferred to another territory without their consent. Nevertheless transfers are now possible on request or promotion within the 26 dependencies or groups of territories whose appointments come within the Service. All members are State registered nurses and most are also State registered midwives. After 1st January, 1949, this latter qualification will become com- pulsory. The origin of the Colonial Nursing Service dates from 1896, when the first trained nurses were sent out to Mauritius under the auspices of a voluntary society. In the following year the first two Government-employed nurses left for the Gold Coast. The number of appointments rose rapidly in succeeding years, reaching three figures in 1925. A total of 228 appointments was made in 1947, and to-day the establishment of the Service stands at over 800.
During the second World War 52 members of the Nursing Service lost their lives, the majority in Malaya).
JUBILEE RECREATION GROUND FUND.
INCOME AND EXPENDITURE ACCOUNT.
For the Year ending 31st December, 1947.
BALANCE SHEET.
As at 31st December, 1947.
JUBILEE RECREATION GROUND FUND.
I have examined the above Balance Sheet with the books and vouchers of the Fund and am of the opinion that the same is properly drawn up so as to exhibit a true and correct view of the state of the Fund's affairs.
THOMAS TAI,
Honorary Auditor. Kuching. 15th March, 1948.
TAN CHENG PUN, Chairman.
E. M. MARJORIBANKS, Honorary Secretary.
C. S. WERE, Honorary Treasurer.
FORT ARUNDELL.
Readers may recall a reference in the previous Sarawak Gazette to the
illustrated supplement which the Honourable the Resident, Second Division,
attached to his monthly report. The illustration of the new fort at Lubok Antu
is reproduced from one of the photographs.
News from Far and Near.
FIRST DIVISION.
The District Officer, Kuching, (Mr. Outram)
reports two cases of cheating which were tried
before the District Court in March. The first
concerned a well-known character who had assumed
the role of “broker” (a profession which in
Kuching covers a multitude of nefarious occupations)
and who had collected various sums of money for
services which, in fact, he was never in a position
to render. The second case, which was dismissed
for lack of evidence, concerned a local Chinese who
claimed that he had been spell-bound by a Chinese
medicine man who induced him to deposit two
substantial sums of money for the appeasement of
the spirits. The spirits were later found to have
consumed the money and “the complainant
naturally developed a further ailment, sakit-hati, in
addition to his original one.”
The following is an extract from the report of
the District Officer, Kuching : “On the 27th a
Malay who had found a small bomb of some description
behind the bazaar at Bintulu and brought
it to Kuching, was tampering with it in Kampong
Gersik, when he became apprehensive and threw
it out of the house. It immediately exploded,
causing a 2-foot crater in the ground but no other
damage.”
The District Officer, Kuching, records the
following story from Lundu : “The Native Officer
was discussing with a Dayak Tua Kampong the
eternal Dayak problem of pigs versus padi. The
Native Officer was trying to impress upon the Tua
Kampong the higher value of padi as a means of
subsistence in comparison with the tame pigs,
which are so often allowed to stray from the
kampong and damage nearby padi fields. To the
(intended) rhetorical question ‘Now, which is more
important, your padi or your pigs?’—he received
the answer our pigs.’
The Native Officer : Oh, surely not, you can't
exist without your rice but you can get on all right
without pork or else by relying on wild pigs. The
Tua Kampong : 'No. We must keep pigs to kill
for our begawai (ceremonial feasts and offerings to
the spirits); if we do not hold proper begawai the
padi will be no good.' ”
The following is an extract from the report of
the District Officer, Kuching : “Padi harvests in
the Left Hand Branch (of the Sarawak River) are
reported not to be fulfilling earlier expectations
owing to the depredations of pigs and rats. But
even so, the Dayaks will have considerably more
rice to eat this year than for many years past. For
this reason the prestige of the present District
Officer in the Left Hand Branch is distinctly high,
the Dayaks attaching considerable importance to
the personal blessing accorded by the District
Officer during his extensive tour of the area last
October just when they were starting to plant.”
The District Officer adds “A risky business
pinning one’s reputation on the whims of the
weather and on the vagaries of rats and pigs !!”
The District Officer, Bau, (Mr. Lloyd Thomas)
reports further prosecutions for the manufacture of
arrack without licence.
A miner was bound over to be of good behaviour
for six months in connection with a case involving
the theft of $1,200 from a Chinese merchant at
Bau. The merchant prejudiced the efforts of the
police in their investigation by failing to report the theft until the second day.
Trade at Bau brightened up towards the end of the month as a result of the gradual fall in the price of rice.
The District Officer, Serian, (Mr. Roberts) reports that the padi harvest has been good with a result that the price of rice has fallen away from $1.60 per gantang at the beginning of March to $1.20 per gantang at the end of the month.
The District Advisory Council, Serian. met from 9th to the 11th March. The District Officer com- ments that the proceedings were much livelier than previously and that the members showed keen interest and an intelligent appreciation of district affairs.
The Native Officer-in-Charge. Lundu. (Abang Haji Adenan) reports that the people of Kampong Sileng have almost completed repairs to the Kampong Road. Work will be resumed after the harvest.
SECOND DIVISION.
The District Officer, Simanggang, (Mr. Bruen) reports two cases of tuba fishing in the Undup area. He suggests that tuba fishing is being carried on, surreptitiously, on quite a large scale in many areas.
The following is an extract from the report of the District Officer, Simanggang; “Considerable interest has been shown by the Dayaks in the Bijat Area in the proposed bazaar to be built at Tanjong Bijat. They are not, however, readily prepared to bid for lots on the open market, as they are not prepared to compete with Chinese bidders. As their idea is to build a shop house and then let it out to the Chinese, they cannot be allowed any preferential terms. Every effort is being made to encourage them to start and run their own bazaar, but the idea of actually running shops appears to be abhorrent to them, and they will probably go in. kongsi, bid for lots in the open market and then let them out.”
The District Officer, Simanggang, reported in February a case where a quantity of jelutong was returned by the consignees as being below standard. On examination it appears that the jelutong was not merely of a poor quality, it was mostly clay with a veneer of jelutong stuck onto it. Action has been taken to trace the tappers concerned.
It is intended to start a prison padi farm of about throe acres at Simanggang. Although the venture will not be without difficulties the scheme will provide experience and practical instruction for the prisoners.
The following is an extract from the monthly report of the District Officer, Simanggang: “A noteworthy case of amputation was recorded during the month, when a young male maias was brought in with a broken finger which had turned gangrenous. Using a local anaesthetic, the Dresser amputated the finger and put in four stitches. No force had to be used on the maias to keep him still
during the operation, indeed be himself was an interested spectator of the proceedings. By the end of the month the wound had completely healed. This maias, together with one other which was confiscated in Engkilili from a Dutch-side Dayak, has heen admitted to the Maias Rest House. This house is now full and no further applicants will be considered, for apart from the lack of space and the complaints of the Agricultural Department about damage to the pineapple garden, no vote exists to defray the cost of board and lodging for this Rest House which is, in many respects, a charitable institution."
The District Officer, Saribas, (Mr. Waine) reports that applications from ten Dayaks from the district have been received to attend the Rural Training Centre at Kanowit. He suggests that the distance of Kanowit from Saribas has discouraged a number of would-be applicants.
The advantages of mechanisation seem to have appealed to the Dayaks at Penyalaneh kiri. The Tuai Rumah there has requested the loan of the Government bulldozer, which was used at Debak, in order to level the site of a new house.
In the course of a tour of Ulu Layar, the District Officer was horrified to find a man, aged about seventy years and who is a lunatic, kept in a cage on the verandah of the house at Raba. The cage was about seven feet long, three feet wide and four feet high. Arrangements were made for the unfortunate man to be sent to Kuching.
The District Officer, Kalaka. (Mr. Wilson) reports that the three Dayak houses planting padi at Lubok Nibang, Kerian returned home without harvesting at all. the entire crop being destroyed by rats. Kabong also suffered from rat infestation. Elsewhere in the Second Division reports of the padi harvest, almost without exception, were good.
The following is an extract from the monthly report of the District Officer, Kalaka: “The Dayak sago factory at Enkudu now employs a hundred persons and a ‘boom town’ of four hundred and fifty persons has sprung up near the factory. Every house in the Sebetan except one is reported to have a financial interest in the venture which, because the shareholders possess extensive gardens, is reasonably well assured of sago logs to work for the next two years.”
THIRD DIVISION.
The District Officer, Sibu, (Mr. Fisher) attributes a sharp decline in Court work during February to the fact that people were too busy to afford the time for litigation and also because of the public of Sibu seldom venture out of doors on rainy days. Sibu had its fair share of wet weather during February, the rainfall being 19.71 inches.
The District Officer, Sibu, reports that the Native Treasury continues to function satisfactorily and the Penghulus are definitely enthusiastic about it.
The District Officer, Lower Rejang, (Mr. Snelus) reports that there was no serious crime throughout the district and, concerning petty theft, adds. "Those involved in thefts were almost all Dayaks.
It has been a noticeable feature of post-war Sarikei that Dayaks have been responsible for many more petty crimes of this nature than the Chinese, whereas pre-war it was the Iban who was the more law-abiding. ”
The Dresser-in-Charge at Sarikei attributes a drop in the number of outpatients to the rest and good fare associated with Chinese New Year. The District Officer, however, suggests that the padi harvest probably kept many would-be patients away.
The following is an extract from the report of the District Officer, Lower Rejang : “Penghulu Giman’s anembiak held a combined tuba fishing in the Sarikei river on the 11th. Had the weather held it should have been a success, but since the landas was still with us the fates, not unnaturally, decided otherwise and heavy rain the night before swelled the river and stirred up mud so that the fish availed themselves of the opportunity not to play. The Penghulu's efforts to persuade his followers to postpone the fun till a more propitious occasion fell on stony ground : a complete and disappointing flop resulted.”
Tidal floods did considerable damage to the bunds on the Sungei Kelili demonstration plot during February. The Agricultural Assistant reports that the Mugu padi reserve is producing disappoint- ing results, the natives getting a particularly poor return owing to their laziness in weeding.
The following is an extract from the report of the District Officer, Lower Rejang : "On the 6th the inaugural meeting of local Chinese Headmen was held at Binatang. Business was this time mainly confined to explanatory remarks and details of organisation; but it was agreed that these meet- ings should be held monthly in future and it is hoped that they will develop on the lines of an Advisory Board for Chinese Affairs. Similar meet- ings are to be started at Sarikei next month.”
The District Officer, Kanowit, (Mr. Drake) reports that Penghulu Itom of Meluan advised the Divisional Agricultural Officer that grass hoppers (buntak) were doing much damage to padi in the Meluan district. An Agricultural Field Assistant was sent to Meluan during the month with supplies of lead arsenate to try and combat these pests.
[Although reports throughout the Colony indicate a certain amount of destruction by pig and deer, there has been hitherto, few reports of depredation by grass-hoppers.]
The first 'talkie' in Kanowit was shown on the 8th February by a travelling cinema.
At Dalai on the 28th February, tuba fishing took place as part of the ceremony of berkaul (a ceremony to ensure good luck and prosperity for the succeeding twelve months).
The following is an extract from the report of the District Officer, Kanowit : "Any amount of sago rasping nails are available at $30 a kati; they are stated to be of inferior quality, but since they are the only kind available to meet the demand they must perforce be used. They are being imported into this district from Kuching and also possibly from Sibu. The price quoted above may
be compared with the $5.80 charged for rasping nails supplied by the Supply Department.
The District Officer, Kanowit, reports that it seems probable that unless the sago market makes a fairly rapid recovery considerable quantities of consumer goods will be moved out of the district to areas of greater purchasing power. So far as can be ascertained, local bazaar trailers work on a system of sale or return of goods, so that they stand to loose very little by way of dead or slow moving stocks. This system however does increase overheads and eventually means that a higher price has to be paid by the consumer.”
The District Officer, Kapit, (Mr. Rennick) reports that Belaga has been without a wireless operator and as a result the station has been cut off from telegraphic communication.
FOURTH DIVISION.
The Honourable the Resident, Fourth Division, (Mr. Gilbert) reports that the Bomb Disposal Squad had cleaned up the Miri district, with the exception of Sibuti, during the month of February.
The rehabilitation of the Miri Brick Works has proceeded sufficiently to allow the manufacture of an experimental batch of bricks. The re-building in Miri will be considerably speeded up when the works are in full production and the present excessive price of building materials should be reduced.
The Cold Storage building has been completed and this may be said to be the first building to be erected in the new Miri.
Two civil marriages, were performed at Miri during the month. Both brides bad recently arrived from Australia.
The District Officer, Miri, (Mr. Lascelles) reports two cases of unlawfully smoking chandu. He comments that the regrettable aspect of this type of crime is the difficulty of tracing the importer and purveyor of the chandu who stands to make such heavy profits out of the illegal traffic.
The news that His Excellency the Governor had commuted the death sentence on Abdul Hamid to one of fifteen years’ imprisonment was received with great satisfaction by the Malay community at Miri.
The following is an extract from the February report of the District Officer, Miri : “The 10th and 11th, Chinese New Year, were celebrated as a Public Holiday. In view of the combustible nature of the Miri kajang bazaar, it was found necessary to forbid the firing of crackers in the bazaar area. One misses the old Chinese New Year scenes when Cross Road used to be closed to traffic, temporary roofed in with kajangs and open for 14 days to free gambling for all and sundry.”
The District Officer, Miri, reports that on the 23rd February the first mail for sixteen days arrived from Kuching. He adds that this may be of interest to those who imagine that there is a frequent mail service between Miri and Kuching.
The following is an extract from the report of the
District Officer, Bintulu, (Mr. Drake-Brockman) : “A meeting between the Honourable the Resident, Fourth Division, and the majority of pre-war shop- house-lot owners was held on the 14th. Those present agreed to the suggestion of exchanging their pre-war shophouse-lots for lots in the new town lay-out, the land to be held on the same terms as that held pre-war. They asked Government to build one block of 12 shophouses first, each shop when completed to be offered at cost to the owner of the lot on which it stands. The object apparently is that the towkays will not thereby have their money tied up while building progresses.”
FIFTH DIVISION.
Commenting upon the decline in population in parts of the Film Division, the Honourable the Resident (Mr. Anderson) attributes this, in part, to the obstinate disinclination of the sick natives to visit a dispensary until they are past all cure.
In the month of February, the Honourable the Resident caught a half pound pekan on a big Alexandra bea Trout fly in the Kerangan above Lawas Estate. He was unfortunate enough to miss two much larger ones.
The shortage of cartridges in the Fifth Division (and this applies to other Divisions also) has led to increased ravages in the padi crops by wild pig.
The Cadet Officer, Limbang, (Mr. Harper) reports that a Malay boy was taken by a crocodile at Kampong Pemukat. The boy, with a companion, was returning from a fishing expedition in a small prahu which was upset by the crocodile.
CORRESPONDENCE.
THE MELANAU TINTAGEL.
Kuching, Sarawak,
8th April, 1948. The Editor,
Sarawak Gazette,
Kuching.
Dear Sir,
The short reference in your last issue to the supposed remains of Tugau’s days is of great interest to all who wish to learn more about the Melanaus, as there are probably more tales of this great chief than of any other Melanau.
There seems to be no doubt that Tugau did really exist and that he was a noted chief. His date, however, is uncertain and I could never get any- where near an accurate figure.
For some reason the Melanaus, although most of them know the legends, seem to be unwilling to talk about them. As I have already written about the bantut there appears to be agreement among them to keep the story to themselves.
This recent “find,” however, does prove that there may be some truth in the stories of Tugau’s great house at Retus. The posts, it is said, were so big that three people could not encircle them with their arms. More than once I attempted to get Melanaus to take me to the remains of this house which, most people said, still existed but I was never able to bring them up to scratch.
Of course the stories differed, but they did agree on one point—and that was that Tugau was a giant of a man and all he had was in proportion. For instance it was said that his balls of baked sago were the size of a modern football and that he could eat dozens of them at a sitting.
Unfortunately many of the most intriguing stories are too Rabelesian to print here. It is strange that there are so few records of this supposed Tintagel in the Retus and I await with eagerness more discoveries from Sibu.
If anyone would like to correspond with me on this subject I should be pleased to exchange letters.
Yours faithfully,
J. B. Archer.
Kuching,
8th April, 1948. The Editor,
Sarawak Gazette,
Kuching.
Dear Sir.
Is it possible that the belian monoliths referred to in “News from Far and Near” were erected after the issue of the famous order that wooden houses would hereafter be built of brick ?
If so it might help our learned historians to fix their date.
Yours faithfully,
Tomk.
Kuching,
15th April, 1948. The Editor,
Sarawak Gazette,
Kuching.
Sir,
May I crave a little space to cast some more light on the mythical Tugau mentioned in “News from Far and Near” in your April issue?
The monolith referred to is one of the remaining posts of Tugau’s house. It is similar to any of the main posts in any Kenyah or Kayan house to-day. The Seduans’ house at Kampong Nangka, Sibu, possessed similar posts, (not quite so large), before it was burnt out just before the second World War, as did also an old Melanau house at Medong above Dalat in the Oya river.
The last reach of the Retus before it joins the Batang Igan is remarkably long and straight. Legend has it that Tugau was responsible for this, widening and straightening the Retus as a defence for his house.
Tugau was indeed a mighty man of valour, but in other respects he also would appear to have been exceptional. One of his physical attributes, if true, would have caused a few letters to The Lancet.
Yours faithfully,
The Ancient.
A MEMORIAL.
Sarawak Oilfields Ltd.,
Miri,
19th April, 1948. The Editor,
Sarawak Gazette.
Kuching.
Dear Sir,
I have read with interest the proposal outlined in the April 1st issue of the Gazette to erect a mem- oral to Officers of the Sarawak Civil Service who lost their lives in the service of this country during the war.
The idea is I think a worthy one. and would have my active support, but I would like to express dis- agreement with the principle of any such memorial to include the names of Government Officials only.
There were several others (non-Gov’t. people) no less devoted to Sarawak, who were victims of the same tragic circumstances, and in my opinion no discrimination should be shown in honouring the names of those who lost their lives as a result of Japanese aggression.
The names of two victims of the Long Nawang massacre immediately come to mind :—
Mr. B. B. Parry—General Manager S.O.L. who stayed behind in Borneo against the orders of the Authorities.
Rev. Father J. Feldbrugge—Roman Catholic Priest.
There were others, including women and children.
Furthermore there were some Sarawak people who died at the hands of the enemy in North Borneo while a few North Borneo Officers perished in Sarawak.
Apart from one or two other nationals most were Britishers, and I would like to submit for con- sideration the suggestion that the proposed Memorial should include the names of all those pre-war European residents of British Borneo as a whole, who died during the Japanese occupation.
Yours faithfully,
G. S. Carter.
[The invitation to subscribe towards the cost of a memorial which was reprinted in the last issue may have appeared misleading. The request for corrections to the list emanated from the sponsors; the text of the invitation does not close until after the last name on the list, the reprint being un- broken throughout. Mr. Carter’s letter has been forwarded on.—Ed.]
WHAT’S IN A NAME.
Kuching,
22nd April, 1948.
The Editor,
Sarawak Gazette.
Kuching.
Sir,
I am sure the Housing Committee are grateful to the Royston Crow for bringing up the question of house names I am told they would welcome
suggestions from your readers. I must add a word of warning however. I am also told that any one suggesting names like Mon Repose or The Cedars will be handed to the dog catchers as bait.
My own suggestion is that the Committee should look into Sarawak History for names. How about “ZAHORA” for instance.
By the way, there is no truth in the yarn that the Fiddler has challenged the Royston Crow to a duel to the death, to be fought in the Lilian Bar.
Yours faithfully,
Kachang Panjang
From “Adversity”: Internment Quarterly.
(The following short story was published in “Adversity" on 1st July, 1943.)
The Intruder.
The distant flying figure was making for the leafy thicket in the hollow below us, glancing back and up over his shoulder ever and anon, and zigzagging as he ran, hoping to avoid the shafts that he guessed would follow.
Hanfred, the stoutest archer in our Company, laughed grimly beside me as, with eyes fixed on the figure, he fitted an arrow to his bowstring.
"Ho, knave!” he rumbled, half to himself, "thou’lt carry thy news, not to thy friends, but to Hell!”
Up came his bow, and as his right arm slowly went back and the string became tauter, the sinews of his great shoulders cracked under the strain. The rest of us held our breaths and watched.
Twang !
Another breathless second; and then the fugitive, who had by now almost reached the sanctuary of the wood, hesitated, ran a few mere paces, stumbled, pitched on his face, and lay still in a grotesque attitude.
And even at that distance, the gleaming shaft that protruded from between his shoulder-blades seemed to me to quiver in the dappled sunlight....
“Did’st see?” roared Hanfred joyously, nudging me in the ribs with his vast elbow, while a murmur of applause swelled up from the others.
"Art awake?” he went on, as if impatient at my delay in paying tribute to his prowess. "Wake up !” And he nudged me harder than ever............
I sat up, rubbed my eyes in the darkness, and gazed at the faint blue square of Malayan night visible through the windows. Blast these historic- al novels, and damn cookie's indigestible steaks.
“Aren't you awake yet?” came my wife’s whisper, with a final nudge. And then : “There’s somebody on the verandah—I thought at first it was you out having a cigarette.”
Silence again, while I tried to listen and to collect my scattered senses. Not a sound for some moments, except the seething twitter of cicadas in the night outside.
Twang!
There it was again, but there was now no mistaking its origin. It was the noise made by some moving body brushing against a chik wire on the verandah.
“Switch on the light,” I said foolishly, not realising in my half-awake state how I was thus proposing to offer an excellent target to the unknown.
As the light went on I caught sight, through the doorway leading to the verandah, of the drab figure of an undersized Chinese ducking to a crouch in the sudden glare. He blinked and looked scared, but made no attempt to move.
I slipped out of bed, and as I am not gifted with much of what a famous general once called “one- o'clock-in-the-morning courage,” I kept the more solid articles of furniture between me and the stranger as I cautiously approached him.
I searched him. Nothing in his hands, nothing in his shabby clothing. Nothing, that is, except a packet half-full of cheap cigarettes, and a grubby piece of paper on which were scrawled some Chinese characters.
“What are you doing here?” I demanded. The futility of this question only occurred to me later, and I excused it with the thought that I was not as yet fully awake.
He mumbled something unintelligible, and his voice trailed away.
I took him by the arm and led him out of the bedroom and on to the verandah at the front of the house, my wife following. There I sat him down and offered him a cigarette, which he took eagerly. Then I repeated my question.
Little by little I got a story of sorts out of him. He did not come to steal anything, he said. (I expected that). Two men were following him, and he had climbed up through the steep jungle at the buck of the house to e cape them. Seeing the house, he had mounted the steps leading to the verandah; there, finding the door bolted from inside, he had clambered over the railing beside it and on to the verandah.
Who were the two men, I asked, and why were they following him?
But at this he shivered a little, glanced over his shoulder through the window with a queer express- ion in his eyes, and lapsed into obstinate silence. And nothing more from me could get anything further out of him.
I decided that it was high time I rang up Bill, who was the local Police Officer and my very good friend.
“Bill,” I said proudly, “I’ve got a burglar for you.”
“Go to Hell,” came Bill’s sleepy and querulous voice, “and think up a funnier one next time you decide to wake up a hard-working policeman after midnight.”
“Half a minute, Bill,” I begged, “it’s absolutely true.” And I gave him the facts.
My story woke him up to such an extent that within ten minutes I heard his tyres crackle on the porch gravel and he appeared with two stocky Malay policemen and a Chinese detective. With- out, further ado he began to ply the intruder with questions.
But Bill, with all his deft cross-examination, could get nothing more out of him than I had.
“He didn’t come to rob you,” said Bill, with a cynical smile. “That's a likely one!”
I had been observing our prisoner closely while Bill questioned him.
“I’ll tell you what, Bill,” I said. “From his appearance, and his attitude, and his story, and above all the expression in his eyes, I think he’s a hit crackers. Delusional insanity, or something like that. The kind with delusions of persecution.”
“Tripe!” said Bill rudely, but with that disarm- ing smile that robs his remarks of offence. “And I could put up a better yarn than his without much effort. They all trot out something like that. It gets monotonous.”
He touched the captive formally on the shoulder, told his policemen to put him in the car, and stood up to go.
“Thanks most awfully, Bill.” I said. “How about a quick one for the road?”
“No, thanks. Not while I’m on duty.”
So Bill departed with his prisoner, and with any thirst he may have had on arrival.
I went away on local leave a few days later, so that it was several weeks before I met Bill again.
“How about our burglar?” I asked him.
“Oh, that gentleman? His case comes up to- morrow, but you needn’t bother to come to court.
The case is all sewn up, and he’s going to plead guilty.”
“Guilty? But what about his story?”
Bill chuckled. “He admitted to me afterwards that it was all a put-up yarn, and that he'd gone to your bungalow to see what inconsidered trifles he might be able to pick up. And what’s more, he said he didn't mind if he got caught. It seems he's destitute, and he’d prefer the food and shelter he'd get in gaol to his chances outside. And apparently he's an enthusiastic amateur, for his finger-prints are new to us and they’ve got nothing on him at Headquarters.”
“What about that bit of paper I found on him?” I asked.
“Oh—that? Some gibberish about. ‘The Guild of the Silver Arrow,’ and ‘oblivion to him who speaks.’ I thought at first that it might be secret society stuff, but as far as is known there isn’t one of that name. May be part of a prayer, or something.”
Bill hopped into his old car and stamped on the noisy self-starter. And he apparently could not resist the temptation of a parting gibe as he drove off.
“Delusional insanity!” he grinned. “Ho ho ho!”
“All right, Bill,” I shouted after him. “Don’t rub it in, curse you !”
But somehow I didn’t feel satisfied about it all...........
And so on the morrow Lim Ah Chan, for such was the intruder’s name, pleaded guilty to a charge of breaking and entering, and was duly sentenced to four months’ rigorous imprisonment.
It was part of my official duties to visit the Gaol once or twice a week. On my next visit there be was, lined up for inspection with the rest. And the first thing I noticed was that he looked not only healthier, but more cheerful.
“I am happy here, Tuan,” he said, in answer to my question. “The food is good, and the work is not too hard.”
And he grinned as I passed along the line.
It was the same on my subsequent visits as the weeks lengthened to months; and the Head Gaoler spoke of him as a model prisoner. But there came a day when I saw the old, hunted look back in his eyes. His grin had vanished, and he was nervous, ill at ease, and silent when I spoke to him. I tackled the Gaoler about him.
“I can’t make him out at all,” said the Gaoler. “He never gave us the slightest trouble until a few days ago, when I had to refuse a request of his to move him out of the cell he shares with another prisoner—a Chinese who's in for a week for some minor offence. I suppose Lim was used to having that cell all to himself, but we can’t pamper prisoners like that. Some of them seem to think this is a hotel. And what’s more, he refuses to work in the same gang with this other fellow.”
Perhaps, I thought to myself, my diagnosis of delusional insanity wasn’t so far off the mark after all.
But on my next visit he was his old cheerful self again, and the grin was back in position. I found on enquiry from the Gaoler that the other prisoner whose company Lim disliked had been released. And Lim himself was due for release within the coming week; so that I did not expect to see him again.
But in this I was mistaken.
I was walking through the town a few days later when a familiar scruch of brakes made me turn my bead. It was Bill; and he seemed, as usual, to be in a hurry.
“Hallo!” he shouted, above the din of his ancient car. “The very man—doing anything special? If not, hop in—I've got something interesting for you to see. Mind your fingers—that door’s a bit wonky.”
We shot forward with a few preliminary jerks. Bill drove fast, and what with the rattle of the car and the condition of the springs conversation became impossible, and my questions remained unuttered.
About two miles outside the town we drew up at the roadside, where a Chinese who awaited us led the way down a winding jungle path after a hurried word in an undertone with Bill. The path twisted and turned for a hundred yards or so, then straightened out as it led downhill.
Here we stopped abruptly, and I found myself looking down into a half-cleared glade, in the centre of which a figure lay prone and still.
And even at that distance, the knife-haft that protruded from between the shoulder-blades seemed to me to quiver in the dappled sunlight............
It was Lim Ah Chan.
He lay with the left arm stretched stiffly forward beside the head, and the right extended, with equal rigidity, outwards at right angles to the left. The right leg was doubled up under its fellow.
And as I stood over him a minute later, I felt that there was something vaguely familiar about this position. It puzzled and irritated me in a minor way; in a way that I could not understand.
They never caught the murderer. He had vanished without a clue or a trace, without even a finger-print on the knife. Nor could Bill ever trace the prisoner whom Lim Ah Chan had tried to shun in the gaol.
My mind must have been running unconsciously over the whole affair, for a few nights later I suddenly awoke with a start, as one often does when the answer to a puzzling question leaps to the brain, as a bubble rising to the surface of a still pool.
For I had suddenly remembered why the position of the body had struck me as familiar. It was exactly the same attitude as that of the dead fugitive in my dream, the queer dream that had, so to speak, ushered in Lim Ah Chan’s visit to the bungalow. Arms at the same angle, right leg twisted under the left.
Then, as I lay awake, other pieces seemed to fall into place as in a jig-saw puzzle. The arrow as the key to the dream, and then this “Guild of the Silver Arrow” business. Nor could I, on reflection, recall any historical or other novel or book in which I had read of any such happening as that of the dream.
Much has been written lately about the Fourth Dimension, and about the possibility of moving forward and backward in time as in space. But that is all in the realms of theory.
The whole thing, I concluded, was just a series of coincidences.
And yet, I wonder...........
Kuching Market Price List.
Monthly Average Market Price from 20th March, 1948, to 20th April, 1948.
Notice.
Rice Ration.
The basic Rice Ration for the whole of Sarawak for the month of May, 1948, will be 20 lbs. per person per month with a supplementary 10 lbs. per person per month for heavy workers.
iii ADVERTISEMENTS. [May 1, 1948.]
ESTABLISHED IN SARAWAK OVER 90 YEARS.
IMPORTERS AND EXPORTERS.
RUBBER AND PRODUCE MERCHANTS.
GENERAL SECRETARIES.
SHIPPING AND AIRLINE AGENTS.
TRUSTEES UNDER WILLS.
ALL CLASSES OF INSURANCE.
TIMBER WORKING AND EXPORTERS.
BANKERS.
SARAWAK.
KUCHING SIBU MIRI
SARIKEI BINATANG KAPIT
BRUNEI STATE.
BRUNEI TOWN KUALA BELAIT
NORTH BORNEO.
JESSELTON SANDAKAN
Also branches throughout
MALAYA and SIAM.
[12-9]
Printed at the Government Printing Office, Kuching, Sarawak, by W. J. Chater,
Acting Government Printer.