Vol. LXXIV.
No. 1089.
Sarawak Gazette
PRICE
KUCHING, Wednesday, December 1st, 1948.
50 CENTS
Contents.
The Sarawak Gazette.
WEDNESDAY, DECEMBER 1st, 1948.
BUS STOP
The Kuching Municipal Board has recently erected a number of bus stop signs in the Municipal area and will shortly be acquiring powers to compel omnibus drivers to halt at scheduled places only. This regimentation is a timely move; on a recent journey to Pending, no less than seventeen buses wet counted on a 4 1/2 miles stretch, some hurrying on their business, others parked at convenient places. Convenient, that is, to the drivers; two were parked alongside one another in Padungan whilst the drivers exchanged news and views; one parked five yards further on, provided all the fun of an obstacle race for passing vehicles; another had equitably stopped his machine in the middle of the road so that passengers from the left would walk a distance equal to those coming from the right.
The by-laws enforcing the use of authorised halting places will be welcomed not only by the public but also, it is hoped, by the Omnibus Owners’ Association. The signs themselves, being temporary only, are not very substantial; one feels that neither the sign nor the bus will be there for very long and that those who wish to benefit from the amenity will have to move smartly. The temporary signs lack the solidity of their English counterparts which give a comforting impression of being there to protect the passenger’s rights as well as to control traffic.
An American visitor, commenting upon the English people, is reputed to have said “They so love queuing that they even queue for buses." There are, of course, ways other than queuing by which to gain a seat on public transport. There are the blunderbuss tactics of heavy feet and sharp elbows which might appeal now to a young and vigorous nation; there is the thoughtful strategy of ignoring the transport signs and insinuating one- self some hundred yards in advance and imperiously signalling the bus from that vantage point.
But, whilst conceding the joy which any well endowed individual might derive from such physical or mental exericse, an orderly place in an ordered spot has much to commend it.
The bus user and the road user are both likely to benefit materially. For the convenience of passengers, it is proposed to indicate by coloured patches where buses passing the signs are bound for. The Punjab Mail or the Borneo for example, will carry colour indications of their destinations, an amenity which is often lacking at the moment. Ultimately it is hoped that a convenient time-table of buses at quarter hour or other interval will be arranged. For the road user, it will be an advant- age to know that a bus is not likely to stop in the middle of the road, on a bend or on a blind comer. With bigger and better signs, the omnibus driver may be encouraged to make bigger and better signals; to make movements of the arm which convey a clear meaning and do not leave doubt as to whether it is a signal for turning right or left, flicking the ash off a cigarette, greeting a friend or stopping sharply.
It is not intended to suggest that the omnibus driver is a nigger in the woodpile; few of the road users can hold themselves blameless : pedestrians use the long diagonal and not the short base; motorists like to be sure of the defence ‘but I sounded my horn; cyclists like to ride two and three abreast, which may be sociable but which is not safe on narrow roads bristling with telegraph poles and lamp standards. Curiously enough, some
cycles are equipped with a red and a white light facing forward. One cyclist explained that superior lighting sets such as his were most expensive and naturally he wanted to have the lights in a position where he could appreciate their excellence. The satisfaction unfortunately is gleaned only by the bewilderment of vehicles faced with contradictory signs.
Those who use internal combustion engines on the roads control a means of arriving at a destinat- ion in an amazingly short time and it is improper to use this advantage to the peril of those who move more sedately. The indomitable Mr. Haddock indicated in no uncertain terms the dangers of harnessing some ten, twenty or even thirty horses under one bonnet; where the horse power is associated with unceasing fireworks, braying horns and sulphuric stenches some degree of control and restraint will not go amiss.
In conclusion, we quote from a District Officer's recent report :—
“Silence (comparative) now reigns in Kuching. The Officer Superintending Kuching Constab- ulary Sector has been carrying out a campaign against the unnecessary blowing of motor horns. Local drivers accused of negligent or dangerous driving will now have a good excuse for not having given warning of their approach ! !”
Speech by His Excellency the Governor at the opening of the Council Negri, 29th November, 1948.
Mr. President, Members of Council Negri :
It is with great pleasure that I welcome you to the third Budget meeting of this Council since Sarawak was released from enemy occupation.
There are several important measures for your consideration, among them the Supply Bill; and I will deal first with the financial position of the Colony.
At the last Budget meeting this Council provided for an excess of expenditure over revenue for the year 1948 of $1,473,000. The revised estimates for the year 1948 show a revenue of $13,713,000 and an expenditure of $15,011,000, involving a deficit, slightly less than that originally estimated, of $1,298,000. These revised figures represent substantial increases both in revenue and expen- diture over the original estimates, more than $2 million in each case.
The increase in the revenue is in the main derived from customs duties which at the close of this year will be found to be about $1 1/2 million more than the sum originally estimated. A further large item is the sum of $060,000 received from His Majesty's Government in repayment of sums expended from the Colony’s revenues in respect of Colonial Development and Welfare Schemes.
The increase in expenditure is to a large extent accounted for by a sum $1,300,000 on account of arrears of salaries and kindred items. Three- quarters of a million dollars is the direct result in 1948 of the revised salary scales recently approved by the Secretary of State. These, with bis consent, are made retrospective to July, 1946, and the arrears are being paid in instalments to avoid the possibility of inflation. Of the balance, unforeseen
expenditure on account of cost of living allowances, due partly to increase of Establishment, is res- ponsible for $450,000 and $125,000 represents the balance of back pay for the period when the country was occupied by the enemy.
As the prices of essential commodities had been on the increase ever since the war and the cost of living had risen to such a degree that the com- paratively low scales of salaries of the public service were forcing many members of it into unavoidable debt, this Council will, I am sure, agree that it was right and proper that the relief granted by way of revised scales should be ante- dated to July, 1946, the date upon which Sarawak became a Crown Colony.
Further substantial items in the excess of the actual over the estimated expenditure in 1948 are the sum of $450,000 for Colonial Development and Welfare Schemes, which will be later recoverable, and the sum of $350,000 on account of loans granted during the year for the re-building of bazaars destroyed by warlike action.
On the basis of the revised estimates of revenue and expenditure the Colony's General Bevenue balance at the end of this year will be in the neighbourhood of $8,885,000.
I now turn to the coming year, 1949. The Supply Bill will be before you for consideration in the course of the next few days and the printed Estimates, in which full details of Revenue and Expenditure are set out, are now available for your study.
The revenue for the coming year is estimated at just over $14 million, representing only a slight increase over the revised estimate for the cunent year.
Excluding Colonial Development and Welfare Fund reimbursements, the estimated revenue is a little over $12 1/2 million and provides a surplus over the Annually Recurrent Expenditure, in which are included Personal Emoluments, of $1 1/2 million.
On the expenditure side revision of salary scales and the necessary increase of Establishments have resulted in an increase of $1 million under Personal Emoluments. Special Expenditure amounts. to nearly $3 million. This includes arrears of pay, allowances and pension contributions payable in 1949, as well as the purchase of essential equip- ment such as new launches and diesel engines for the Marine Department ; new machines for the Printing Office ; locomotives, waggons and trucks for the Public Works Department; reserve ammu- nition supplies for the Constabulary, and a variety of other items required for the efficient conduct of their business by all the various Government Departments. Although provision will have to be made in future years for the replacement of machines and equipment as these wear out, the bulk of this expenditure can be regarded as non- recurrent capital expenditure required by the general expansion and improvement of the Govern- ment Services.
Extraordinary Expenditure also accounts for nearly $3 million in our budget for the coming year. This represents the amount of money which can usefully be devoted to capital works such as roads and buildings within the capacity of a limited staff and limited equipment. Proposals for new works and replacements amounting to three times as much were submitted, and the total which can be undertaken in a single year had of necessity to
be drastically cut. Approximately 60% of the total is for rehabilitation work and 40% for essential new works.
Provision has been made for the grant of further loans for re-building of shophouses in the war damaged areas to the extent of $750,000. This is regarded as an essential contribution towards revival of trade and the stimulation of the product- ion of raw materials. There is another item of $8(X),000 on account of 1948 Revotes.
The total expenditure for the year 1949 is estimated to be a little over $19 million and the gross deficit in the 1949 Budget is thus in the neighbourhood of $5 million. Much of this, how- ever, as lias already been indicated, cannot properly be charged against the year's accounts. A large sum will be recoverable from the Colonial Develop- ment and Welfare Funds on account of the year's spending; and a further three-quarters of a million dollars, as I have just mentioned, is for building loans which will later be recoverable. Further- more, much of the Special Expenditure is not strictly on account of the year 1949, but, as for instance in the case of arrears of pay, is on account of charges in respect of former years which fall to be paid in the coming year. There is actually one item, a sum of $50,000 for Defence Sendees' pay which dates from 1941. The true working deficit for which we are budgeting in the year 1949 is in fact $2,033,000.
This may seem, and indeed is, a large sum, but I do not think that it need cause undue alarm.
The Colony is faced with this problem. The development of new fields of production and the opening up of new land is inevitably a long term proposition. With the aid of Colonial Development and Welfare Funds we are carrying out surveys and preparing schemes for the development of our agricultural, fishery, forest and mineral resources. But some years must inevitably elapse before the results of these surveys and plans make themselves felt by way of increases in the Colony's revenue. Are we to do nothing in the meantime to improve our social services and make up other deficiencies? Are we to delay the expansion and improvement of these services until we can see results of our development plans in the shape of new sources of revenue? Or, alternatively, should we begin to build up these services now to a standard which may reasonably be assumed to be one which the Colony will be able to maintain when its revenues increase? These are the two courses open to us. I think you will agree that your Finance Committee has chosen rightly in deciding to go ahead with these improvements, even though in the meantime it seems that our expenditure is exceeding our revenue.
The budget for 1949 reflects substantial all- round increases in the Annually Recurrent Expenditure of most departments. This is due partly to improved scales of salaries and partly to increases of Establishment. These increases are the most marked in the Departments of Medical and Health, Education and Constabulary. There is also a considerable increase in the amount allocated by way of grants to Local Authorities.
In previous addresses I have stressed the urgent need to improve the Health and Education Services of the Colony and also the great importance which is attached to the establishment of Local Autho- rities, and I do not suppose that there will be much
criticism of the increases under these heads, except perhaps that they are not big enough.
The need for the very substantial expenditure on the Constabulary, which in 1949 amounts to no less than $1,200,000, may not be so apparent. It certainly represents a larger proportion of the total expenditure of the Colony than would normally be regarded as desirable.
There is in existence a very real threat to peace and good order in all the countries of South East Asia. World Communism has adopted a policy of creating chaos and disrupting production through- out the whole area. There is clear and unmis- takable evidence of this. In Burma, in Siam, in French Indo-China, in Malaya and in the Nether- lands East Indies the communists have taken up arms and resorted to violence and sabotage. Sarawak has so far remained peaceful. It is necessary for Government to ensure that it con- tinues peaceful. For this purpose we must have and must maintain for so long as this threat con- tinues a well trained, well equipped and adequate police force. Provision for this has accordingly been made in the Estimates. However much we may regret the necessity to spend so large a sum on our own internal security, it would be foolish in the extreme not to take this elementary pre- caution in view of what is happening in the countries all round us.
Despite these increases in the Annually Recurrent Charges there is, as I have said, a surplus of nearly $1 1/2 million of revenue over the total of such charges. This would not normally be regarded as an ade- quate margin from which to provide for Special and Extraordinary Expenditure out of a total revenue of $12 1/2 million, but the Revenue position should improve as the development of our resources takes effect.
When I last addressed you I emphasized the importance of the development of Local Govern- ment and 1 am glad to be able to tell you that considerable progress in this field has been made during the year. Members of Council will observe that in the 1949 Estimates provision is included for substantial Government grants to new Authorities and it seems probable that, during the year, the Fin- ance Committee of the Council will be asked to make additional sums available for further Authorities, the constitution and organization of which are not yet complete. The Authorities so far constituted are all Iban Authorities; those which we hope to establish next year include Melanau and Malay Authorities—one of these sharing an office and office staff with a Dayak Authority—and a mixed Malay and Chinese Authority in the 5th Division. This last represents perhaps the most interesting political experiment this territory has yet seen, and upon the success of this and of similar mixed Authorities which is hoped to establish in the near future, will ultimately depend the success of our efforts to establish a form of Government in which racial differences disappear and the several races work together and are bound together by the common link of citizenship of Sarawak.
Progress has also been made, as a result of examination of the working of existing Local Authorities, in formulating certain general principles which will govern their establishment and their development in the early stages. It has been decided that the Government grant shall, for a period of at least 3 years, be a grant of $5.00 in respect of every tax payer. This may
be considered to be an unnecessarily lavish allocation of public funds to these bodies, but I would remind members that the Local Authorities already undertake functions and responsibilities— involving expenditure—previously undertaken by the Central Government. The Junior Executive Officers of Government—the Tua Kampong, the Penghulu and, in some cases the Kapitan China— will no longer be paid by the Central Government but by the Local Authority. The Local Authorit- ies are already accepting responsibility for the financing of primary education, which has in the past been financed, very inadequately, either by the Central Government or by the Missions. The Local Authorities as their capacity and means increase will doubtless undertake other financial responsibilities in connection with services at pre- sent either non-existent or financed by other agencies.
Among the Bills before the Council at this session is the Local Authorities Ordinance, which super- sedes both the Rural Areas Ordinance, and the Native Administration Ordinance, and provides for a variety of powers not at present contained in other legislation. It was considered advisable in the preparation of this Ordinance not only to pro- vide for the exercise of powers to be conferred upon Local Authorities, as and when constituted, but to include the powers at present exercised under the Rural Areas Ordinance by the executive officers of Government. Members who have studied the bill will observe that it covers a very wide field, and that provision is made, either in the Ordinance itself or by the clauses relating to By-laws and Regulations, to cover every aspect of the activities of Local Government bodies.
One of the most important of these is the power to levy rates and cesses for legitimate purposes approved by the Authority. In other words you are being asked to pass legislation whereby power will gradually be handed over to the people of Sarawak to decide, subject of course to a measure of control in the early stages, the local objects upon which they wish their money to be spent and the extent to which they are prepared to contribute towards such objects.
During the present year Local Authorities have been constituted with jurisdiction over some 64,500 people. Plans for 1949 envisage the setting up of Authorities with jurisdiction over a further 122,000 persons. If the population living within the jurisdiction of existing municipal Authorities is included, the total number of people living within the jurisdiction of Local Authorities of one sort or another amounts to 240,000. Thus, less than 18 months from the setting up of the first "Native Authority” in Sarawak no less than one-third of the population of the Colony will be living within the jurisdiction of such Authorities, and nearly one- half of the population will be within the jurisdict- ion of some kind of Local Government.
Through these Authorities, which are composed of their own local representatives on the spot, it is confidently hoped that the people at large will be encouraged to take an ever greater share in the res- ponsibility of government and will be ready (as indeed they have in some areas already shown them- selves to be) to shoulder greater financial burdens when they know that the money which they con- tribute is being spent by themselves upon objects which they themselves desire.
Agriculture, as you are all aware, lies at the very
basis of Sarawak's economy and I propose now to mention some matters in connection with it which have been the subject of recent consideration.
The examination of data collected in the prelimin- ary stages of the Soil Survey has emphasized the extent to which Sarawak is dependent for its locally-produced rice supplies upon the produce of dry padi farming on steep hill-sides, and the alarming rate at which, as a result, the hills are being denuded of their forests and are becoming eroded and infested with lalang. The preliminary figures now available suggest that the continuance of dry padi farming in its present form and on its present scale may have disastrous effects on the economy of the Colony within the next three or four generations. This is a very short period in the life of a country and this state of affairs clearly demands our urgent attention.
The world food situation is at present critical, and we cannot expect to receive increasing supplies of rice from abroad. In fact they will probably diminish. Proper utilisation of our wet padi lands will make us less dependent on imported rice and will at the same time preserve our hill forests. The preliminary figures obtained from the survey suggest that, though there are no vast reserves of wet padi land in Sarawak, intensive cultivation of existing and potential wet padi land could probably produce regularly a sufficient "subsistence” ration of rice for Sarawak’s present population, without assistance from imported rice, even if dry padi farming on hill-sides were to cease entirely. We must use to the full all our wet padi lands and cultivate them intensively. Government will help in achieving this aim and Local Authorities can do much by encouraging wet padi cultivation by existing methods and by making suitable land available to those who are willing and able to use it properly but in the last resort success depends on our rural population.
Controlled drainage and irrigation schemes can do a great deal to improve the productivity of our wet padi lands, and an experienced engineer of the Malayan Drainage and Irrigation Department recently visited Sarawak at our request to give specialised advice on several projects which we are considering. His advice has been very valuable and his views on certain of our projects encouraging, but we must beware of trying to rush ahead with ambitious schemes without adequate preliminary investigations and planning by qualified and experienced men.
Experiments in mechanical cultivation are pro- gressing steadily and valuable experience is being gained. A well-known English engineering firm has, in consultation with the Director of Agriculture, designed a new type of wet padi field cultivator for attachment to a small tractor, and it is hoped that the machine will arrive in time for a trial this season.
The report on the possibility of cocoa production in Sarawak, which I mentioned at your last meeting, indicates that, though the potentialities are not great, establishment of the crop, even on a comparatively small scale, would substantially benefit the country’s economy. The most promis- ing areas are in the Fifth Division, but the data obtained from the Soil Survey now show that these areas are not as large as was hoped at first. Administrative and technical difficulties make any immediate development impracticable, and much experimental work will be necessary before sound
methods of growing cocoa in Sarawak can be determined. Many of the great cocoa-producing areas of the world are seriously diseased, and the greatest care will be needed to ensure that only clean seed is brought into this country. The opinion of the experts is that it will probably be ten years before Sarawak cap produce cocoa in any quantity.
We are unfortunately still short of trained agricultural staff, though the Colonial Office is doing its best to find officers for us. Refresher courses for our local technical staff have been started at Batu Lintang, and it is hoped gradually to extend their scope.
In July four students returned from the Rubber Research Institute in Malaya; they are now engaged in advising small-holders in better methods of manufacture, working in conjunction with the staff of the Department of Agriculture. There has been a marked improvement in the quality of sheet rubber sold for export during the past year, but it still leaves much to be desired. There is, I fear, little sign of improvement in the care and main- tenance of small-holders’ rubber gardens : although the Agricultural Department is now in a position to supply small quantities of budwood only from some Dayaks in the Kalaka have any requests for this been received.
To turn now to the Social Services—
One more medical officer has recently arrived, and a local nurse has been promoted to the post of nursing sister. There are now seven medical officers and assistant medical officers, apart from the Director, and two nursing sisters in addition to the Matron, a greater professional strength than has ever been available in Sarawak before and we are hoping that more medical officers will arrive. We are also trying to recruit a Sister Tutor, who will take charge of the training of dressers and nurses; an additional nursing sister, to enable one to be posted to Sibu hospital; a Health Visitor, who will train our girls in the important work of health visiting; and a Sanitary Superintendent for the purpose of training our health inspectors.
One of our locally-recruited senior staff nurses has been sent to London, where, with the help of a scholarship awarded from the Colonial Develop- ment and Welfare Fund, she will attend a full nurse’s training course. A young Chinese from Kuching has been awarded a Government scholar- ship to the King Edward VII College of Medicine in Singapore to attend the course in dentistry.
The second travelling dispensary, which I mentioned at your last meeting, is now operating in the Kuching and Samarahan Rivers as far inland as the Serian road. In Kuching the out- patient department has been centralised in the middle of the town, and the dispensary service has been extented by road to the 34 th Mile on the Serian road. An additional experienced medical officer has been posted to Sibu, and as many additional nurses and dressers as were available have been sent there. In Binatang a new tem- porary dispensary has been opened, and it is hoped to provide a permanent one next year with ten rest beds. A similar ten-bedded dispensary is being built in Sarikei.
The Education Department is still inadequately staffed, and the Colonial Office has been asked to recruit two more Education Officers.
43 schools, including 4 night schools, have been
registered since the beginning of the year, and there has also been a marked increase in enrol- ments in all sections of the school system; the number of pupils in Mission schools has increased by about 20% in recent months, and in Chinese schools by more than 12%. The newly-formed Local Authorities are showing a keen and practical interest in education development and have already undertaken responsibility for 12% vernacular primary schools. Another encouraging development has been the establishment of private schools by groups of the indigenous peoples; there are now 28 schools of this type, and a number of these have already qualified for assistance under the grant-in-aid scheme.
The Batu Lintang Teacher-Training Centre and School was opened on the 1st July and is making very satisfactory progress. The number of student-teachers has now increased to 60. and it is proposed to recruit at least two more teacher- training classes at the beginning of next year. A system of personal and family allowances has been introduced, which will enable promising students to join irrespective of the financial status of them- selves or their parents. A good corporate spirit is being developed amongst the students, who are of many different races, and a sense of Sarawak citizenship is being fostered. It is intended to establish in 1949 post-primary academic classes for younger pupils; it should be possible to form a Malay speaking class next year, but, as a result of the English schools being closed during the enemy occupation, it may be some time before a corres- ponding English-speaking group can be recruited.
At the Kanowit Rural Improvement School there are now 25 couples in training, with 19 children. They come from all parts of Sarawak, though the response from the Upper and Lower Rejang areas has been a little disappointing. Two types of accommodation are provided, one demonstrating an improved type of long-house, the other giving pupils the experience of living in individual homes for a part of the course. The affairs of the school are conducted by a committee consisting of the staff and four elected representatives of the pupils.
An Iban student from the Batu Lintang Centre has been appointed to the post of Assistant in the study of the Iban language at the School of Oriental Studies in London.
An increased number of Sarawak Government scholarships has been awarded during the year, and Sarawak students from the Agricultural, Forestry, Education, Land and Survey and Medical Depart- ments are now attending courses of training in Malaya and Singapore.
The Kuching Boys’ Home has been transferred to the control of the Education Department, and the appointment of a warden-teacher has made it possible to organise it more on the lines of a normal boarding-school; the scope of the academic classes has been extended and the teaching of handwork has been introduced. The warden is also responsible for finding suitable employment and accommodation for the boys when they leave the home.
I turn now to the other departments of Govern- ment—
Forestry.
An additional area of 170,000 acres has been pro- claimed protected forest during the year.
Proposals have been formulated for a ten-year forest development plan, to begin in 1950. The principal objects of the plan are to protect catch- ment areas and to ensure the sustained production of accessible forest by demarcating a forest estate with an area of not less than 25% of the total area of the Colony.
There has been increased activity in the timber trade; certain swamp species, previously considered of little value, have proved suitable for the manu- facture of plywood, and one company is now investigating the possibility of setting up a plywood factory in Sarawak.
Fisheries.
Considerable progress has been made in survey- ing the fishery resources of the seas off the coasts of Sarawak, and it is estimated that this year’s catch of fresh fish will be between 2,000 and 2,500 tons. The Fisheries Survey Officer, with the assistance of the Master Fisherman, has fitted out a 50-foot motor fishing vessel for working Danish seine nets. Results so far indicate that the fish caught will pay the running expenses and crew's wages, but may not bring sufficient profit to encourage this form of fishing. Experiments with other forms, such as the “ring-net” which operates from the surface to a depth of 40 fathoms, are shortly to be started.
Lands and Surveys.
A Bill providing for the classification of all lands is being brought before you at this session. This will enable proper delineation to be made of Mixed Zones, Native areas and Interior areas and will greatly assist administration.
Two new areas have been opened for the settle- ment of landless Chinese, one near Sarikei, the other in the Samarahan area. Preliminary surveys have been carried out for a large irrigation project near the 25th mile Simanggang Road.
Relief has been extended to the gold mining industry by remission of rent and royalty, under certain conditions, in order to help the mines to begin production again after the damage caused by the war.
The Secretary of State has approved a scheme under the Colonial Development and Welfare Act for a geological survey in Sarawak. The geolo- gical mapping of the Colony is an important aspect of development, as upon this depends the discovery and proper use of our mineral resources. The scheme will be a combined one for Sarawak and North Borneo under the direction of a Chief Geologist who will have his headquarters in Kuching. There will also be two field geologists working in Sarawak. One of their first tasks will probably be a detailed survey of the Selantik coal- field.
Public Works.
The site of the new Kuching airstrip has now been cleared and it will soon be possible to pro- ceed with the actual construction of the run-ways.
The construction of the Serian-Tebakang and Lidong-Betong secondary roads has been started and is making good progress. The Public Works Department has been primarily employed on the re-construction and replacement of buildings, wharves and bridges and on the repair of roads. Only a small proportion of the pipes required for
the rehabilitation of the Sibu Waterworks has arrived. The preparation of the scheme for the Mukah water supply is nearing completion.
I now propose to touch upon a few matters of a less concrete nature but none the less important in the contribution they can make to the happi- ness and well-being of the people. First of all —Co-operation. The Registrar of Co-operative Societies has spent three months in England and Cyprus studying co-operative methods and is now in Ceylon completing his course. The two Native Officers who are to be his chief assistants will shortly return from their course in Malaya, and the new Department will come into being early in 1949. It is not necessary for me to describe to you the many ways in which properly established Co-operative Societies can bring increased pros- perity to large sections of the community.
A Bill designed to replace the existing Co-operative Societies Ordinance is being submitted for your consideration at this Meeting.
In my address in May I informed Members of Council that in his preliminary report Dr. Leach had recommended several projects for a Socio- Economic Survey. A grant of $69,000 has been made from Colonial Development and Welfare Funds for carrying out research work among the Iban, Land Dayak, Melanau and Chinese peoples. Two of the officers who are to undertake this work have already arrived, and the other two are expected shortly. These research projects will be directed to the study of the interaction between social and economic forces and will provide the Government with data for gauging the probable local response to the various schemes for development now under consideration. They may also suggest new lines of approach to various types of administrative problems.
The Curator of the Museum, Mr. Harrisson, returned to Kuching in August, after spending nearly a year on the Kelabit Plateau. He has brought back with him much valuable information regarding the customs, crafts and economy of the upland tribes, and a large collection of exhibits to enrich the Museum. These include stone imple- ments, antique pottery, porcelain and beads; and many natural history specimens some of which are said to be new to science.
The Sarawak Museum Journal is being revived after a lapse of several years and will no doubt serve once more, as in the past, to interpret Sarawak to the scientific and educational world.
The Social Welfare Adviser to the Secretary of State has paid us a visit since your last meeting and has given us advice, as a result of which we have recently sent a young Chinese from Kuching to Singapore to be trained as a Probation Officer. The Salvation Army have unfortunately decided that, for the present, they cannot extend their activities to Sarawak, but we are formulating plans for the establishment of a Youths' Hostel and a Girls’ Home. A Bill designed to give protection to women and girls is on the agenda of your present meeting.
Supply Department.
There has been a marked decrease in the demand for imported rice, as compared with previous years, but it is imperative that our efforts to grow more rice and other foodstuffs should not be relaxed, especially in view of the disturbed conditions in some of the principal rice-producing countries of
Asia. The basic rice ration has been maintained at 20 lbs. per person, with a supplementary 10 lbs. per person to heavy and special workers. We have exceeded our target for purchase of Midi this year by buying rather over 5,000 tons, and have decided to continue to offer the same price for a further period. The results of this buying scheme, by way of the increase in planted acreage, have been most gratifying.
Trade and Customs.
The new Customs Ordinance was brought into force on the 1st June, and has been of great benefit to the work of the Customs Department. Exports of rubber and sago have continued at the same high level, but exports of jelutong have decreased considerably and the price is low; pepper exports have also been negligible. Nevertheless, revenue from customs duties has been considerably greater than was estimated, and trade in general shows a steady increase.
Justice.
The Circuit Courts Ordinance was brought into operation towards the end of September, and two Circuit Courts have now come into existence. A large part of the work of the Residents’ Courts has been or will be transferred to these new Courts. This has the advantage of setting the Residents free for their real and important work of adminis- tration; while the employment of full-time and fully qualified Circuit Judges will undoubtedly lead to an improvement in the general level of the work of all the lower Courts.
Municipal.
Steps are being taken towards the conversion of Kuching Municipality into a local self-governing body, and it is hoped to grant it full municipal status before very long. A Bill is being placed before Council to provide for a more effective system of Rent Control, as the existing Ordinance has been found by experience to be in many respects unsatisfactory.
Labour.
We have been fortunately free of labour troubles throughout the year, all disputes having been satisfactorily settled without recourse being had to strikes, lock-outs or other violent action.
The formation of Trade Unions has begun, and the Kuching Wharf Labourers Union is proving a vocal body. A Bill is on the agenda of this Council for the amendment of the Trade Unions and Trade Disputes Ordinance, designed to ensure that Trade Union activity is directed to its proper purpose of improving conditions of employment.
We have recently had a visit from the Director of Information Services in the Colonial Office, and it has been decided to appoint an officer in the Secretariat as Information Officer. The purpose of a Government Information Department is to help the public by keeping them informed of the policies, actions and achievements of the Govern- ment; it also assiste with the machinery for com- munity education and mass literacy and is in a position to supply information about a Colony which can be used in foreign and Commonwealth countries, often to the benefit of the people of the Colony.
The Army sent a Bomb Disposal Unit to Sarawak in October, 1947. It spent the best part
of the year in the Borneo territories, and has rendered harmless over 600 bombs that were brought to ite notice in Sarawak. We owe a debt of gratitude to the brave men who have brought this to a successful conclusion.
As members of Council will be aware, we agreed to allow a party of Dayaks to go to Malaya to assist the authorities there in their campaign against the lawless elements which have recently been disturbing the peace. Nearly 200 of our men have been in Malaya, and they have had with them a Sarawak Administrative Officer and a Dayak Native Officer. They have now completed their work and are returning to Sarawak. About half the total have already arrived. The Civil and Military authorities in Malaya have expressed their appreciation and thanks for the work which these Dayaks have done. The regular forces are now trained in jungle work and the need for the Sarawak Dayaks has ceased to exist but we are informed that they performed a useful task in filling the gap when men versed in such work were most needed.
I am glad to say that conditions in Sarawak are at present peaceful and there is no reason to expect that they will be otherwise. We must, however, be prepared for action, should any state of emergen- cy arise. Certain powers are given to Government, in such contingency, under the emergency Regulat- ions Ordinance, which you passed at your last meeting, and there will be no hesitation in the use of these powers should the need arise. Government must, however, also have the active support of able- bodied members of the public. The Constabulary Bill, which will be brought up for your consideration during the course of this meeting, makes provision, among other things, for the raising of a special constabulary force, on a voluntary baste, and I hope that many of the citizens of Sarawak will decide to fit themselves to assist the forces of law and order in case of emergency by joining this new corps.
In conclusion let me quote a passage from a document about Colonial development, which aptly summarises what Government is trying to achieve in this Colony :—
“The increase in production which is planned is part of a wider development programme, which will require corresponding investment in social services, such as education and health, which will by improving the health, increasing the skill and technical knowledge of the inhabitants of the Colony and by fitting them for the duties and responsibilities of citizenship, promote political stability, without which orderly progress is im- possible, and lay the foundations for further economic development."
Sarawak is still and will be for the next year or two in the preliminary stage of its development programme, the stage of survey and experi- ment, of making good the damage done in war, of organising, strengthening and equipping the various departments of Government and training the necessary staff to carry out their allotted tasks and of fostering a sense of common citizenship. It is to these unspectacular but essent- ial tasks that we are devoting our energies and the funds available to us, both from the Colonial Development and Welfare Fund and from our own revenues, in the confident expectation that they will yield ample dividends in the future in the increasing prosperity and well-being of the people.
His Excellency the Governor’s tour to the Coast and Lower Rejang Districts.
His Excellency the Governor, accompanied by the Private Secretary, left Kuching in the "La Follette" early on Thursday, November 4th, and after a somewhat uncomfortable crossing reached Sibu shortly after dark.
Next morning the party, joined by the Resident, 3rd Division, left Sibu by the "La Follette” at dawn. Arriving at Kampong Kut they transferred to a fleet of small perahus for the journey through the Kut. Although the water was rather low the boats were able to force their way through the shallows, only the Res:dent, who was sharing His Excellency's boat, being obliged to wade for a short distance.
At Kampong Kekan the District Officer. Mukah, Mr. Morris, met the party, which then proceeded by outboard to Oya, pausing for only a few minutes at Dalat while His Excellency was greeted by local notables at the landing stage and a very necessary cargo of cold beer was taken aboard.
At Oya the party again changed transport and hud a pleasant drive by jeep along the beach, reacliing Mukah at half past three.
It had been projxjsed originally to make the journey from Kuching to Mukah direct, but adverse weather reports, together with the size of the waves seen breaking on Mukah bar, confirmed the wisdom of the long detour via Sibu and the Kut.
A tea party held in the District Officer’s bungalow was attended by members of the Government staff and representatives of all communities. Later the Penghulus and theif followers paid the customary call.
Next morning, at the Government offices, Hie Excellency inspected the Constabulary Guard of Honour, school children of the Malay, R.C. Mission and Chinese schools, and was greeted by local notables. The National Anthem was excellently sung by the children of the Chinese school. All communities had combined to erect arches of welcome.
After requests His Excellency had a discussion with representatives of the proposed Melanau/Is- lam and Melanau/Liko Ijocal Authorities. This was followed by a tea party given by all communities in honour of His Excellency’s visit.
The state of the tide made it necessary to leave for Oya by jeep soon after lunch. At Oya His Excellency and party were the guests of the Chinese community to dinner, at which they were entertained with songs bv the school children.
The return journey to Sibu was made by the same route as the outward one. This time there was more water in the Kut, but so also was there in the sky, and the trip was made in unremitting rain.
At Sibu there were no official engagements, but His Excellency and the Private Secretary were initiated into the game of bowling at the Island Club and had beginners' luck.
On Monday morning the party proceeded to Binatang, where they were met by the District Officer, Lower Rejang, Mr. Snelus, and the Assist- ant District Officer, Binatang, Mr. Urquhart. After being greeted by representatives of all com- munities and school children, His Excellency heard requests in Court.
The trip to the Assistant District Officer’s bunga- low by jeep was somewhat hazardous since the road was still in course of construction. The party pre- ferred to walk part of the way.
In the afternoon His Excellency walked through the Malay Kampong and inspected the new bazaar. Then, after taking tea at the Chinese Chamber of Commerce, the party left for Sarikei.
At Sarikei, after inspecting the Guard of Honour, and being greeted by local notables and school children, His Excellency proceeded to the District Officer’s bungalow. Later, the Penghulus, Tuai Rumah and followers called.
Next morning His Excellency heard requests in Court, then visited the Colonial Timber Company's sawmill, being shown round by Messrs. Minchin and Bartle.
After lunch His Excellency held a discussion with the Penghulus over their proposed Local Authority, and was then entertained to tea by the Chinese Chamber of Commerce.
Unfortunately, owing to an attack of fever, His Excellency was most reluctantly forced to cancel his visit to Rumah Penghulu Nyambar. The Resident and the District Officer proceeded as plan- ned, taking with them a letter from His Excellency to Penghulu Nyambar, conveying his apologies for the disappointment caused.
A day’s rest at Sarikei fortunately enabled His Excellency to recover from his indisposition, and he returned to Kuching by “La Follette” on Thurs- day, November 11th.—(Contributed.)
Colonial Affairs in Parliament.
The annual review of Colonial Affairs in Parlia- ment has produced a repetition of the criticism that Members are not interested in the subject. That may seem to be so to occasional occupants of the public gallery who judge merely by the number of Members who happen to be in the Chamber at a particular time. Such criticism shows a misconcept- ion of the parliamentary machinery and of the work of Members. A parliamentary debate is not like a lecture or a meeting of a local government body. It may run for at least six or seven hours (3.30 p.m. till 10. p.m.) without interruption. It is preceded by an hour during which Ministers may be questioned on any matter, and one day each week many of the questions are on Colonial Affairs. There is usually a full attendance of Members dur- ing this hour. Any colonial debate is usually opened by the Secretary of State who may relate what is being done in the Colonies or make a state- ment on the Government position on the particular matter to be debated. After this introductory speech it is, as a rule, mainly the Members wish- ing to speak who remain in the Chamber unless matters of controversy or important principles have been announced by the Minister.
M.P.s have scores of other important preoccupat- ions in connection with public business which take them away from the Chamber.
The debate is then open to any Member who can catch the Speaker’s eye and may run continuously till 10 p.m. or 11 p.m. or even all night when there is acute controversy. At the close of the debate a Minister replies to any criticisms and questions which have been raised during the debate.
It is always difficult to understand why the attendance at a colonial debate should be the sub- ject of press comment when debates on other sub- jects—even subjects of domestic interest to M.P.s— are often no better attended. Attendance is high when there is to be a division or sharp political clash. In any case M.P.s have so many other dut- ies to attend to. The work of Parliament is, in these days, very heavy and M.P.s are all hard pressed.
There are frequent debates on urgent special colonial questions, generally of a somewhat con- troversial nature, as well as the annual debate on the colonial estimates in which the Secretary of State gives a general review of colonial affairs. Mirny of these debates range over a wide field. During the present Session there have been forty debates on colonial affairs (including the Overseas Resources Development Act), tlurteen of which have been in the House of Lords, and nearly 800 parliamentary questions have been answered by the Secretary of State. In addition to this a large number of Members have been regularly supplied, on request, with information on current colonial affairs by the Information Department of the Colonial Office.
The attendance during the recent debates on the Colonial Estimates (8th and 22nd July, 1948) were quite normal for a non-controversial subject. This is the first time for many years that two Supply days have been given to Colonial affairs; the first day was a general debate and the second on economic matters. The attendance at both debates followed the usual course with Members coming and going, the Chamber being well filled .at the beginning and the end, dropping to eighty, then forty and, during the dinner hour, to the fifteen or so who were trying hard to catch the Speaker’s eye. On the first day some thirty Members indicated their desire to speak and, at the end of the second day, twelve to fifteen were still standing in their places, hoping to be called as each speech ended. Some had submitted themselves to the great strain of sitting for hours tlirough the debate hoping to be called, only to go away disappointed at the end of the day. The debate maintained a high level of useful and constructive speeches from both sides of the House, contributed by Members who had either direct experience of the Colonies or had taken considerable trouble in obtaining and studying the facte. The British people have a sound practical interest in the colonial peoples as was evident in the debate on the 1945 Colonial Development and Welfare Act, which provided £120 millions, and in the unanimous welcome given to it by the British tax-payer as reflected in the Press at that time; the same welcome was recently given to the Overseas Resources Development Act, 1948, which provided £100 millions for colonial development. These things are practical evidence of interest and good-will.
Frequent opportunities for Members of both Houses of Parliament to study colonial matters are provided by the Empire Parliamentary Association Colonial Affairs Study Group, meetings of which are addressed by colonial officers and members of colonial legislatures visiting this Country, from whom Members ask questions in the discussions which always follow. They are non-Party meet- ings confined to Members of Parliament. Visitors are sometimes invited also to address Party meetings of Members. The Empire Parliamentary Associat-
ion also arranges delegations of Members to visit various Colonies. This opportunity is valued by . Members as it enables them to perform their parlia- mentary duties towards the colonial peoples more effectively. A new form of contact between the House of Commons and the Colonies was establish- ed with the visit to Nigeria, in April last, of Sub-Committee B of the Select Committee on the Estimates.
It has been said that Parliament cannot deal pro- perly with all the affairs of over sixty million people in the time at its disposal. The fact is that Parlia- ment does not attempt more than a general super- vision over the broad lines of Colonial Policy and a watching brief in the interests of the colonial peoples; the day to day business of administration is the concern of some forty separate Colonial Govern- ments who are taking an ever greater share of the work as the policy of devolution and self- government progresses. With this expansion the spirit of public service in the Colonies must grow, following the example of the people in Britain who carry out voluntarily the whole local govern- ment of the country and most of the administration of justice. There are welcome signs of the growth of this spirit of public service in the Colonies and that the people are realising the need for self-help.
Notes and Comments.
At 9.14 on the evening of the 14th November a son was born to Her Royal Highness Princess Elizabeth. By Royal Decree, the infant son assumes the titles of Prince and His Royal Highness.
On receipt of the news in Sarawak, the following telegram was sent from His Excellency the Governor of Sarawak and High Commissioner for Brunei to the Secretary of State :—
Grateful if you would convey to Her Royal Highness Princess Elizabeth the respectful felicitations of the Governments and peoples of Sarawak and Brunei on the birth of a future heir to the throne.”
The Secretary of State replied :—
"Her Royal Highness the Princess Elizabeth desires me to convey to you and the Governments and peoples of Sarawak and Brunei an expression of her deep appreciation of the message of con- gratulations contained in your telegram.” The Sarawak Gazette respectfully offers loyal congratulations to Their Royal Highnesses Princess Elizabeth and Prince Philip.
The reception of the news was the signal for an outburst of rejoicings throughout the Common- wealth. In Sarawak a public holiday was pro- claimed and a Royal Salute of twenty-one guns was fired: flags were flown and ships in harbour dressed. His Excellency the Governor held a reception at the Astana to which thousands flocked.
The Members of the Sarawak Club entertained a cosmopolitan gathering to cocktails on the evening of the 16th November as part of the celebrations. The Club premises were crowded by the time the toast to the Royal Baby was drunk.
The Batu Lintang training vessel, the Lang
Laut, dressed, and manned by Sea Scouts sailed up and down the river firing occasional salutes from her miniature cannon.
The Sarawak Union Club celebrated with a dance in the evening; the dance was well attended by members of all communities.
The Mufti of Sarawak was present at the recital of Doa Salamat at the club bouse of the Young Malay Association. After prayers for the Baby Prince, the members celebrated with the firing of crackers.
The Chinese community in Kuching started celebrations at an early hour; business premises were be-decked with flags and crackers were fired intermittently during the morning. Hundreds of Chinese school children went across river to the Astana. The Foochow Association finished the day with a reception.
The Royal Tour to Australia and New Zealand which was to have taken place next year is to be postponed indefinitely. His Majesty the King is suffering from obstruction to the circulation through the arteries of the legs and his medical advisers have advised a complete rest.
The House of Commons passed a unanimous resolution to convey a message of sympathy to His Majesty. In the House of Lords a similar motion was moved and carried.
The news of the cancellation will have been a keen disappointment to the peoples of the two Dominions.
On the 2nd November His Highness the Sultan of Brunei was able to pay his first courtesy call on His Excellency the Governor. His Highness has been in Kuching some short time for the benefit of his health.
On the 18th and 19th November a conference of United Kingdom Diplomatic and Administrative representatives in countries in South East Asia was held at Bukit Serene in Johore Bahru, under the chairmanship of the Commissioner-General, Mr. Malcolm MacDonald. The purpose of the con- ference is an exchange of information and views on affairs in the area.
His Excellency the Governor of Sarawak left Kuching on the 16th November to attend the Conference.
The Native Women of Sarawak held a procession to coincide with the arrival at Kuching of Her Highness the Dayang Muda. The long and orderly procession was headed by a brass band.
This is the third visit of Her Highness to Sarawak since the State became a Crown Colony.
For the modest sum of ten cents for each bird, poultry owners may have their flocks inoculated by the Department of Agriculture against the Penyakit Bulan Tujoh (Ranikhet Disease). Although the supply of vaccine is limited a supply sufficient to inoculate some 2,500 birds has been imported.
The disease can be extremely serious in South East Asia. Readers may recall a report from Mukah which estimated that ninety per cent of the poultry in the vicinity of Mukah had died from sickness by the end of the first week in July of this year; it is suspected that an attack of Ranikhet disease was the cause of the trouble.
The term of service of Dayak Volunteers in Malaya was for a period of three months. That term is now up and the Dayaks will be returning home; some have already arrived.
The High Commissioner, Federation of Malaya, has informed His Excellency the Governor that the men have been of the utmost value and can return to Sarawak in the knowledge that they have filled an urgent need when security forces were not yet fully trained.
The men were attached as part of “Ferret Force” to troops in Malaya. All troops have since under- gone jungle training and the Dayaks are therefore no longer required.
The High Commissioner has expressed his Government’s sincere thanks for the assistance which was rendered by the Dayaks at a time when Malaya was in urgent need of men accustomed to work in the jungle.
On November 17th the students of Batu Lintang Training Centre and School were at Home to about 150 guests who, after tea, were given an opport- unity to look round the huts and grounds. Some of them watched a demonstration of physical exercises. including tumbling and wrestling. Handwork done by the students was displayed in one of the huts. The work consisted of coloured baskets of various designs, tables, chests and other examples of woodwork, some fishing nets, violins, sapehs, drums and a gambus, some woodwork decorated with Iban and Kenyah designs, several beautifully decorated parangs, woodcuts, wood engravings, lino-cuts, drawings and watercolour paintings, and some attractive designs printed on fabric . The guests were afterwards entertained to a short concert held in one of the huts. The students had built a stage boldly decorated with Dayak designs and surmounted by a painting of a hombill. The concert consisted of examples of the songs, instrumental music and dances of ten of the indigenous groups of Sarawak who are represented at Batu Lintang. Outstanding items were some Kayan melodies on the sapeh, a Kenyah war dance, songs by the Kelabit students and a performance on the gambus by a Bisaya student.
The s.s. “Amelia Earhart,” an American vessel of seven thousand tons, ran ashore in November on the Djaring Reef, south of the Natuna Islands. Within a very short time of the news reaching Kuching a labour force of about one hundred men had been recruited and they left by the s.s. “Angby” on the 15th November to help with the salvage work.
A supply of cupro-nickel coins, in five, ten and twenty cent pieces, has been put into circulation and will circulate with the Sarawak and Malayan coins already in use. The coins now in circulation are :—
Malayan—one, five, ten and twenty cents.
Sarawak— cent, one, five, ten and fifty cents.
Low denomination notes in circulation will not be recalled but it is unlikely that any more will be issued.
Notes and coins now in circulation total $15,258,619 of which $10,574,781 has been issued by the Board of Currency Commissioners, Malaya; part of this may have filtered back to Malaya.
Since the re-occupation, Sarawak notes valued at over $4 1/2 million have been destroyed as unfit for further circulation.
In the World Digest for October, 1948, the following note appears; it is written about the author of the ‘Star Selection’ contribution of the month, ‘The Destruction of a Demi-God’ :—
“Forty years ago John Marks, who is a journalist by profession, was born in Sarawak of Swiss and English parents. His childhood was spent in Spain, and he was taken to see his first bullfight in Madrid when he was twelve. Schooling and work in England followed, but at intervals he has returned to Spain for as long at a time as possible. When he has seen five hundred bullfights he expects to write a book about them................’’
On November 26th a woman attended the First Circuit Court in the capacity of assessor. .The action was one in which a declaration that a certain purported marriage by Chinese custom was null and void was prayed. The point on which the opinion of the assessors, Madam Sun Chung Min and her male colleague, was sought was whether or not the two litigants had been validly married according to Chinese custom. It is thought that this is the first occasion on which any Court, other than a Native Court, has obtained such assistance. It would appear that matrimonial disputes in which questions of Chinese custom are involved are matters in which the advice of female assessors may be partially useful.
Rainfall has been heavy during November and the number of days suitable for tapping on rubber estates has been less than usual at this time of the year. During the twenty-four hours ending at 7.30 a.m. on the 21st November 10.6 inches of rain fell in Kuching. This, however, is not a record rainfall for the district; other high record- ings are 9.25 inches in Kuching on 1st January, 1942, and 10.58 inches in the Matang area on 2nd January, 1948.
With regret we report the death of Abang Nona bin Datu Haji Azhari. At the time of his death, he was in charge of the Turtle Islands egg industry.
Council Negri met in Kuching during the week- starting 29th November, when His Excellency the Governor made the opening address. The Council had a very heavy programme; bills to be con- sidered included the delayed Debtor-Creditor (Occupation Period) Bill, and the Co-operative Societies Bill.
Law Report.
Rainfall has been heavy during November and the number of days suitable for tapping on rubber estates has been less than usual at this time of the year. During the twenty-four hours ending at 7.30 a.m. on the 21st November 10.6 inches of rain fell in Kuching. This, however, is not a record rainfall for the district; other high record- ings are 9.25 inches in Kuching on 1st January, 1942, and 10.58 inches in the Matang area on 2nd January, 1948.
Council Negri met in Kuching during the week- starting 29th November, when His Excellency the Governor made the opening address. The Council had a very heavy programme; bills to be con- sidered included the delayed Debtor-Creditor (Occupation Period) Bill, and the Co-operative Societies Bill.
With regret we report the death of Abang Nona bin Datu Haji Azhari. At the time of his death, he was in charge of the Turtle Islands egg industry.
State of Brunei.
In the Court of the Judge of Appeal.
(The Honourable Mr. Justice R. Y. Hedges).
Appeal No. 1 of 1948.
Brunei Civil Suit No. 1 of 1948.
(1)
Bertram Willes Daybell Brooke And
(2)
Anthony Walter Dayrell Brooke Against
(1)
Sir Charles Vyner Brooke, g.c.m.g.
(2)
Charles James Vyner Craig Brooke
(3)
Ralph Evelyn Stuart Johnson And
(4)
The Honourable Arthur George Villiers Peel.
This is an appeal against an Order made by the Honourable the Resident in Chambers on 21st July, 1948, refusing the application of the plaintiffs for an Order that the summons to each of the defendants be issued for service outside the juris- diction.
The main purpose of the proceedings, as disclosed in the plaint, is twofold.
In the first place the plaintiffs seek a declaration that on the true construction of the Deed of His late Highness the Sultan Omar Ali, dated 2nd August, 1846, and confirmed by the Deed of His late Highness the Sultan Abdul Mumin dated 24th August, 1853, and of provisions made pursuant to such Deeds in the last will and testament of Sir James Brooke dated 15th April, 1867—
(a) after the death of Sir James Brooke, and on payment by Sir Charles Johnson Brooke to His Highness the Sultan of tribute of $4,000 and on Sir Charles Johnson Brooke taking the Oath of Accession as Rajah of Sarawak, the sovereignty of the province of Sarawak vested inalienably in Sir Charles Johnson Brooke for his life;
(b) the heir male of Sir Charles Johnson Brooke is the defendant Sir Charles Vyner Brooke, g.c.m.g., and after the death of the said Sir Charles Johnson Brooke, and on payment by the defendant Sir Charles Vyner Brooke, g.c.m.g., to His Highness the Sultan of tribute of $4,000 and on the defendant Sir Charles Vyner Brooke, g.c.m.g., taking the Oath of Accession as Rajah of Sarawak, the sovereignty of the province of Sarawak vested inalienably in the said Sir Charles Vyner Brooke, g.c.m.g., for his life;
(c) in default of an heir entitled to succeed to the Raj of the province of Sarawak under the entails created by the Will dated 15th April, 1867, and willing to pay to His Highness the Sultan tribute of $4,000 and to take the Oath of Accession, the sovereignty of the province of Sarawak and the State funds and other assets thereunto appertaining revert to His Highness the Sultan ;
(d) the plaintiff Bertram Willes Dayrell Brooke is, after the defendant Sir Charles Vyner Brooke, g.c.m.g., the next heir male of the said Sir Charles Vyner Brooke, g.c.m.g. ;
(e) the plaintiff Anthony Walter Dayrell Brooke is the heir-apparent of the said Bertram Willes Dayrell Brooke;
(f) on the accession, after the death of the said Sir James Brooke, of each succeeding Rajah of Sarawak, there vested in him aforesaid the sovereignty of the said Raj, and the State funds and other assets thereunto appertaining so vested in him as Rajah and not for his private account.
Secondly, the plaintiffs seek an account by the defendant Sir Charles Vyner Brooke, G.C.M.G., of all moneys (other than the normal personal emolu- ments of the said defendant as Rajah of Sarawak) transferred from State funds to his private account prior to 21st May, 1946, and of the disposal thereof.
The learned Resident relied on section 66 of the Federated Malay States Civil Procedure Code and held that this Code, subject to such formal alter- ations and amendments as may be necessary to make the same applicable to the circumstances of the State, has effect in the State of Brunei by virtue of section 2 of the Federated Malay States Laws Adoption Enactment, 1939 (Enactment No. 2 of 1939). It has been represented to me, and it is one of the grounds of appeal set out in the amended petition of appeal, that if the Federated Malay States Civil Procedure Code was applicable at all, it should have been applied with such alterations as might be required to suit the circumstances of the State of Brunei, by virtue of section 19 of the Courts Enactment, 1908 (Enactment No. 1 of 1908), as amended by section 7 of the Courts (Amendment) Enactment, 1941 (Enactment No. 5 of 1941). Section 19 as amended provides as follows :—
“The procedure to be followed in civil actions and proceedings in the Court of the Resident and in Magistrates’ Courts and the procedure to be followed in prosecuting an appeal from any Magis- trate’s Court to the Court of the Resident shall be that prescribed by the Civil Procedure Code of the Federated Malay States in force from time to time in the Federated Malay States with respect to Magistrates’ Courts and the mode of appeal therefrom with such alterations as may be required to suit the circumstances of the State.’’
I am prepared to accept this contention, but with the conclusions which it is claimed must be deduced therefrom I propose to deal later.
It is desirable that I should set out in full the provisions of section 66 of the Federated Malay States Civil Procedure Code. It will be observed that this section follows, with formal amendments, the wording of Order XI, rule 1, of the Rules of the Supreme Court made and issued pursuant to the Judicature Act, 1873, now the Supreme Court of Judicature (Consolidation) Act, 1925. Section 66 provides as follows :—
“66.—(i) Service out of the Federated Malay States may be allowed by the Supreme Court or a Judge thereof whenever—
(a) the whole subject-matter of the suit is immovable property situate within the Federated Malay States (with or without rents or profits); or
(b) any act, instrument, will, contract, obligation, or liability affecting immovable property situate within the Federated Malay States is sought to be construed, rectified, set aside, or enforced in the suit; or
(c)
any relief is sought against any person domiciled or ordinarily resident within the Federated Malay States; or
(d)
the action is for the administration of the estate of any deceased person, who, at the time of his death, was domiciled, or ordinarily resided, or carried on business, within the Federated Malay States, or for the execution (as to property situate within the Federated Malay States) of the trusts of any written instrument ; of which the person to be served is a trustee, which ought to be executed according to the law of the Federated Malay States; or
(e) the action is founded on the breach or alleged breach, within the Federated Malay States of any contract wherever made, which according to the terms thereof ought to be per- formed within the Federated Malay States even though such breach was preceded or accompanied by a breach out of the Federated Malay States which rendered impossible the performance of the part of the contract which ought to have been performed within the Federated Malay States; or
(f) the action is founded on a tort com- mitted within the Federated Malay States; or
(g) any injunction is sought as to anything to be done within the Federated Malay States, or any nuisance within the Federated Malay States is sought to be prevented or removed, whether damages are or are not also sought in respect thereof; or
(h) any person out of the Federated Malay States is a necessary or proper party to a suit properly brought against some other person duly served within the Federated Malay States.
(ii) Any order giving leave to effect such service shall, unless the mode of service be prescribed by this Code, direct in what mode service is to be effected, and the reasonable expenses of such service shall be allowed."
It was argued forcefully by Dr. Withers-Payne, who appeared as counsel for the appellants, that jurisdiction of the English Courts and jurisdiction of the Brunei Courts are governed by very different principles.
I propose to state briefly the position so far as jurisdiction of the English Courts is concerned, although this means covering familiar ground. At common law the jurisdiction of the High Court depended on the service of a writ upon a defendant personally present in England (in pacem domini reqis). If the defendant was out of the realm there was no means of securing a judgment against him. The remedy was to follow the wrongdoer to his place of residence according to the maxim actor sequitur forum rei. A new kind of juris- diction, often called "assumed jurisdiction," was introduced by the Common Law Procedure Act, 1852, which gave the courts a discretionary power to summon absent defendants, and it is this assumed jurisdiction that is now governed by Order XI, rule 1.
In English law the exercise of civil jurisdiction, in the absence of statutory provision, must he founded on one or other of two principles, the principle of effectiveness or the principle of sub- mission. With the latter we are not concerned.
So far as the principle of effectiveness is concerned, the statement of Holmes, J., in the United States Supreme Court that “the foundation of jurisdiction is physical power” has often been quoted. Generally speaking, an English Court does not consider itself competent to adjudicate upon a claim unless the property which is the subject-matter of the suit is in England or the defendant is present at the time of service of the writ in England. I quote now from the Privy Council case of Sirdar Gurdyal Singh V. Rajah of Faridkote (1894) A.C. 670
“All jurisdiction is properly territorial, and extra territorium ius dicenti, impune non paretur. Territorial jurisdiction attaches (with special exceptions) upon all persons either permanently or temporarily resident within the territory while they are within it ; but it does not follow them after they have withdrawn from it, and when they are living in another independent country. It exists always as to land within the territory, and it may be exercised over movables within the territory, and, in questions of status or succession governed by domicile, it may exist as to persons domiciled, or who when living were domiciled, within the territory.”
Counsel cited the judgment of Lord Dunedin in Johnson v. Taylor, (1920) A.C. 144, at p. 154, in which after stating that jurisdiction, according to English law, is based on the act of personal service, continued : “It is far otherwise in other systems where service is in no sense a foundation of jurisdiction, but merely a sine qua non before effective action is allowed. Now service being the foundation of jurisdiction, it follows that that service naturally and normally would be service within the jurisdiction. But there is an exception to this normal rule, and that is service out of the juris- diction. This, however, is not allowed as a right, but is granted in the discretion of the Judge as a privilege, and the rule in question here prescribes the limits within which that discretion should be exercised.”
The principles, which I have endeavoured to state briefly, governing jurisdiction of the English Courts, are of course elementary, but it is necessary to consider whether the principles which underlie the exercise of jurisdiction by the Brunei Courts are so essentially different as has been claimed in the argument for the appellants. It was argued that in Brunei the jurisdiction of the Resident’s Court is complete by virtue of section 5 (ii) of the Courts Enactment, 1908 (No. 1 of 1908). If I have followed the argument correctly, there is no need for any assumed jurisdiction ; an application under Order XI, rule 1, is in essence an application to the Court to extend its jurisdiction, but in an application to a Brunei Court there is no need to extend the jurisdiction as the jurisdiction is already complete.
Section 5 of the Courts Enactment, 1908, is as follows :—
”5.—(i) The said Court shall subject to the provisions of this and of all other Enactments for the time being in force have jurisdiction in all suits, matters and questions of a civil nature, excepting only that nothing herein contained shall be deemed to authorize any Court in the State to dissolve or annul a marriage lawfully solemnised between Christians in the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland or in any
British Colony, Protectorate or Possession.
(ii) In amplification and not in derogation of the generality of the foregoing powers the said Court may try all suits by and against all persons and bodies corporate, in all cases where the persons who are defendants are present in the State, or the corporate body which is defendant has an establishment or place of business in the State; and also in the following cases although the defendant is not present, or has not its establish- ment as aforesaid in the State, that is to say if the defendant has property in the State or if the whole or any part of the subject matter of the suit is land or stock or other property situate within the State; or where any act, deed, will or thing affecting such land, stock or property was done, executed or made within the State ; and whenever the contract which is sought to be enforced or rescinded, dissolved, annulled or otherwise affected in any such suit, or for the breach whereof damages or other relief are or is demanded in such suit, was made or entered into, or was to be performed or partly performed within the State : and whenever there has been a breach within the State of any contract wherever made; and whenever any act or thing sought to be restrained or removed, or for which damages are sought to be recovered, was or is to be done or is situate, within the State, or if the cause of action arose in the State, or if the subject of the proceeding otherwise falls, on general principles of international law or comity, to be determined by the law of the State. In suits founded on contract ‘cause of action’ as used in this section shall not necessarily mean the whole cause of action ; but a cause of action shall be deemed to have arisen within the jurisdiction, if the contract was made therein, though the breach may have occurred elsewhere, and also if the breach occurred within the jurisdiction, though the contract may have been made else- where.”
I am asked to hold that by virtue of this section, jurisdiction in the Brunei Courts is not a territorially restricted jurisdiction as in England. The Feder- ated Malay States Civil Procedure Code must be applied ‘‘with such alterations as might be required to suit the circumstances”; the purpose of an application in Brunei under section 66 is not to extend the jurisdiction of the Court, as an application under Order XT, rule 1, in England would be, or as an application under section 66 in Malaya would be. The legislation in Singapore and in Malaya, it was argued, is based on the principle of a territorially restricted jurisdiction as in England. Section 11 of the Courts Ordinance, 1907, of Singapore, as re-enacted by section 11 of the Courts Ordinance, 1935, and section 49 of the Courts Enactment of the Federated Malay States were quoted.
Section 5 of the Courts Enactment, 1908, is by no means happily framed. It employs the term jurisdiction in two distinct senses. In subsection (i) it uses the term in its proper sense, meaning the right or authority of the Court. In the final sentence of subsection (ii) it employs the term as though it means the area of territory over which the Court has jurisdiction. In my view section 5 must be read in conjunction with section 19; the effect is that by section 5 (ii) the Court has authority in certain cases to try a case although
the defendant is not present in the State, but the exercise of this authority is dependent on service outside the State in accordance with section 66 of the Federated Malay States Civil Procedure Code.
Holding this view, as I do, I have come to the conclusion that this appeal can only succeed if the case is a proper one for service outside the State of Brunei within the terms of section 66 of the Federated Malay States Civil Procedure Code. In the amended petition of appeal, however, it is claimed that the learned Resident was wrong in law in holding that in the application of this Code, the word “Brunei” should be read for the words ‘‘Federated Malay States.” because in so far as this Code was applicable it should have been con- strued. in its application to the State of Brunei, not as though Brunei were the Federated Malay States but as though Brunei were one of the States which formed part of the Federated Malay States.
The reason for this curious proposition was not at once apparent but it became clearer in the course of argument. The various States which comprised the Federated Malay States each had their own Courts, as is now the case in the Federation of Malaya. If a plaintiff in Perak applies for service outside the Federation of Malaya (or, formerly, outside the Federated Malay States), the fact that the subject-matter of the proceedings is land in Kedah would be sufficient to bring the matter within section 66. The startling suggestion was made that on this analogy, if a plaintiff applies in Brunei, the fact that the subject-matter of the proceedings is land in Sarawak will bring the matter within section 66. The Governor of Sarawak, it was pointed out, is High Com- missioner for Brunei; the Chief Justice of Sarawak is Judge of Appeal in Brunei; and by virtue of section 4 of the Courts Enactment, 1908 (No. 5 of 1908), as amended by section 3 of the Courts (Amendment) Enactment, 1948 (No. 5 of 1948), a Circuit Judge of one of the Circuit Courts of the Colony of Sarawak may constitute the Court of the Resident when he is appointed to hold such Court by the High Commissioner with the concurrence of His Highness the Sultan. With the adminis- trative and other arrangements between this State and the neighbouring Colony of Sarawak I need not deal, but I have no hesitation in saying that so far as this State is concerned, for the purposes of private international law, the Colony of Sarawak is a foreign country.
I agree with the learned Resident that the subject-matter of this suit does not fall within either paragraphs (b) or (d) of section 66 (i) of the Federated Malay States Civil Procedure Code. The property affected is not now within the State of Brunei. It was argued that the case might even come within paragraph (h) as His Highness the Sultan would have been made a defendant but for his immunity. I reject this argument as being without substance.
In the result the appeal is dismissed. I direct that this judgment be read in the Resident’s Court. Brunei, and that a copy be furnished to the appellants’ solicitors.
The Large Mammals of Borneo.
Apart from the only too common and often pestiferous Sambhur Deer (Rusa unicolor), we know remarkably little in Borneo of our other large wild mammals, of which there are—
1.
The Asiatic Elephant (Elephas indicus)
2.
Sumatran Rhinoceros (Rhinoceros Sumatra- nus)
3.
Wild Ox or Banteng (Bos sondaicus lowi)
4.
Honey Bear (Ursus malayanus)
5.
Clouded Leopard (Fel s nebulosa)
6.
Orang Utan (Sim a satyrus)
In particular, little has been published on these in the past decade. The following information, collected 1945-8, in all four territories of the island, Will help to bring the picture up to date. Informat- ion to 1931 has been fully dealt with by Mr. E. Banks (Journ. Malay. Br. Royal Asiat c Soc. IX, 1931, pt. Il), and only new or additional data is here included. Mr. Banks’ paper is an invaluable source of information for all interested in this sub- ject, and the present writer is much indebted to him.
1. The Asiatic Elephant.
It is usually said that the elephants now ferile in North Borneo were orginally a gift to the Sultan of Sulu from the East India Company about 1750; the Sultan parked these more-than-white (to him) elephants on the mainland. Elephants were cer- tainly present earlier than that, however, for Pigafetti has left a fascinating account of his 1521 visit to the court of Brunei :
‘‘When we reached the city, we had to wait two hours in a prau, until there had arrived two elephants, caparisoned in silk-cloth, and twelve men, each furnished with a porcelain vase, cover- ed with silk, to receive and to cover our presents. We mounted the elephants, the twelve men going before .......”
In answer to enquiries, Mr. R. E. Parry, Direc- tor of Education, British North Borneo, has forwarded information mainly obtained from Mr. H. G. Keith, Conservator of Forests. There are probably over 1,000 elephants in North Borneo, ranging from the Paitan River to the north, west to the Sapulut, and south going well over the Dutch border. They are certainly still scarce in Dutch territory however, and do not come south of the Sembakong River. The animal is protected, but illegal trapping is believed to take place on a considerable scale. Nevertheless, there appears to have been a considerable increase since 1931.
(Continued on page 261)
THE ROYAL BIRTH
The royal Wedding
On the 14th November, 1948, the birth of a son
to Her Royal Highness Princess Elizabeth has
marked an occasion for rejoicing not only throughout
the British Commonwealth of Nations but
among persons of goodwill and good sense throughout
the world. For in this doubting time of history
our Throne is the very symbol of continuity and
security. The Royal baby is one more link in the
long, long line of the proud House of Windsor,
which goes back direct to the first “King of Wessex
and all England” Egbert (827), Alfred the Great,
William the Conquerer and the Emperor Charlemagne.
Our present Sovereign, His Majesty King George
VI, was bom at Sandringham in 1895, as second
son of King George V and Queen Mary. In 1923
His Majesty (then Duke of York) married the
daughter of the 14th Earl of Strathmore and King
horne,
the present Queen Elizabeth, who was born
in 1900. The elder of Their Majesties’ two
children. Princess Elizabeth, was born at No. 12,
Bruton Street, in the heart of Mayfair, on 21st
April, 1926. Soon afterwards the family moved to
145, Piccadilly, “the Palace with a number.”
And ten years later, on the abdication of his elder
brother, King Edward VIII, the Duke of York
became King, and his elder daughter Heiress
Presumptive to the Throne.
In the years since 1936 crowns have toppled.
Europe, once a continent of Kingdoms, has now
hut seven, of whom six (Norway, Sweden,
Holland, Denmark, Belgium and Britain) are in
the smaller lands of the north-west comer, where
climates are cooler—and political tempers too. Of
these Thrones, that which we link in our minds
with Buckingham Palace and Balmoral is surely
the steadiest. It has had its great shocks—the
executions of Queen Jane (after a reign of 14 days)
and Charles I, the Cromwell dictatorship and the
1936 Abdication. But to-day the Crown holds a
place higher than ever, as the touchstone of unity,
dignity and the decent democratic way of life. No
sane citizen in the British Commonwealth would
wish it otherwise. Whatever other lands may
wish, we look forward to Princess Elizabeth as
Queen and perhaps to the baby of to-day as her
successor to that high title “His Most Excellent
Majesty, by the Grace of God, of Great Britain,
Ireland, and of the British Dominions beyond the
Seas King.............”
To-day there is a perfectly understood relationship
between the Crown and common-folk. The
days of conflict are long past, and the respective
powers of the Sovereign and his Parliament well
defined. George III made the last attempt to
revive the personal authority of the Monarch.
Only as late as the reign of Edward VII the King’s
right to veto any person for the ministry was
abolished. But apart from legal or codified
matters, the real power of the Throne is as
supreme example, leader, above the party struggle
and the biased view, interested only in the common
good. It is in this way that the House of Windsor
has contributed inestimably. Lord Balfour once
aptly phrased the true role of our Sovereign : “He
is Everybody's King.”
His Majesty King George VI is very much
“Everybody’s King”, and the Heiress Presumptive
is very much “Everybody’s Princess”. Her husband—
the marriage was on 20th November, 1947—
comes himself from the great line of English royalty,
and is, like the Princess, a great-great-grandchild of
Queen Victoria. But in the veins of Prince
Philip, Duke of Edinburgh, Earl of Merioneth and
Baron Greenwich, flows the royal blood of
Europe’s seventh and most troubled monarchy,
that of Greece. Prince Philip's mother, who is the
elder sister of Earl Mountbatten, married Prince
Andrew of Greece, brother of King Constantine.
Prince Philip was born on the exquisitely beautiful
island of Corfu, off the Greek coast, in 1921. He
was early introduced to Greek politics, for a
revolution soon broke out, the family being
besieged by the mob. Rescue came from a detachment
of British sailors off a warship from that
Navy in which he was to serve, twenty years later,
with distinction.
Thus the Royal baby brings together again some
of the threads of great tradition, running back more
than a thousand years into the history of both ends
of Europe. This child may, we hope, one day rule
in a kindlier and less tormented world than that in
which we live to-day. For he is second in
succession to the Throne.
The Order of Succession to the Throne is interesting
and unusual, especially to a country like Sarawak,
where other systems prevail. The Bill of Rights
(1689) prevented a Catholic from becoming King or
Queen. The Act of Settlement (1701) further
restricted succession to "the Princess Sophia and
the heirs of her body being Protestant”, the Royal
line which does in fact continue to this day. Sons
always take precedence over daughters. If Princess
Elizabeth should have several children, all her
sons, of whatever age, would be placed before the
daughters. But any child of Princess Elizabeth
takes precedence over her sister, Princess Margaret
Rose, who has until now been second in succession.
She now becomes third in line, His Majesty the
King's younger brother—the Duke of Gloucester
being fourth, and his small sons, the Princes
William and Richard fifth and sixth. Then comes
the 13-year-old Duke of Kent and his brother
Prince Michael, followed by their sister, Princess
Alexandra, who is six years older than Prince
Michael. The King’s sister, the Princess Royal—
who is three years older than the Duke of
Gloucester—follows Princess Alexandra, and after
her come her two grown-up sons, the Earl of
Harewood and the Honourable Gerald Lascelles.
This is the British system, clear-cut, defined and
definite. So many monarchies have collapsed or
been scattered through doubts and disagreements
over the succession. This is not possible in the
House of Windsor. It was partly in order to avoid
such uncertainties that in 1917 King George V
formally proclaimed, by letters patent, who could
and could not-bear certain titles. ‘‘Prince” and
“Royal Highness” were restricted to the Sovereign’s
own children, the children of the Sovereign’s sons
and the eldest living son of the Prince of Wales.
It was by special dispensation that His Majesty
King George VI relaxed this rule to make Lieut.
Philip Mountbatten “Prince”.
His Majesty the King has decreed that the son
of Princess Elizabeth shall bear the titles of Prince
and His Royal Highness. Only the Heir
Apparent can be Prince of Wales. The Heir
Apparent is the direct male heir to the throne.
There is now none. But so long as His Majesty
King George VI lives, Princess Elizabeth remains
Heiress Presumptive. When she succeeds to the
throne, her first-born son would become Heir
Apparent and Prince of Wales. Princess of Wales
is a title reserved for the Prince’s wife only.
This is the proud heritage of tradition in which
the infant child now follows, and to which the
Royal event adds new lustre. May God in His
mercy bring this baby to grow up into a British
Commonwealth and a world where he and the
whole House of Windsor will preserve their beloved
place in the hearts of many millions, unshaken and
unshakeable.
Royal Children in History
The baby born to Princess Elizabeth and the
Duke of Edinburgh is likely to be reared in simplyfurnished
nurseries and be subject to the same
practical hygienic regulations which are the lot of
all Britain's babies nowadays. Princess Elizabeth
and Princess Margaret themselves had the happiest,
simplest kind of upbringing. Much of their time
was spent in the grounds of the Royal Lodge,
Windsor, the week-end residence of King George
VI and Queen Elizabeth. Here, surrounded by
their pets, the princesses, cultivated their individual
gardens and played in the “Little House,” the
Welsh model cottage presented to Princess Elizabeth
on her sixth birthday by the Welsh people.
It was complete with running water, electric light
and every accessory of grown-up life. The
princesses used it until they grew too big to stand
upright inside it, but doubtless it will afford much
pleasure in days to come to the new addition to
Britain's Royal Family.
Visitors who go to Osborne in the Isle of Wight,
off the south coast of England, one of Queen
Victoria’s favourite homes, see a little Swiss chalet
in the grounds. Its function in bygone days was
much that of the Welsh cottage. It was built for
Queen Victoria’s children, and the furniture they
used and their small gardening implements are to
be seen there, arranged as they were in the days
of their childhood. Queen Victoria herself, cultivated
a tiny garden in Kensington Palace when
she was a small girl and every day she could be
seen watering her plants. Her father, the Duke
of Kent and his brothers and sisters were also
taught to be interested in horticulture at Kew,
where their father George HI cultivated the famous
grounds known now as Kew Gardens. The King
and his wife, Queen Charlotte, lived in the Dutch
House which can be explored in Kew Gardens and
the Royal children were accommodated in different
Imuses round old Kew Green.
The simple life that these later generations of
Royal children have enjoyed in Britain contrast
greatly to that their predecessors experienced in
bygone centuries. From medieval times it became
usual either for the Royal infants to be boarded out
with the nobility or to have comprehensive,
expensive establishments of their own. These
were known as “nursery palaces.” The five lovely
daughters of Edward IV (1442-1483) for example,
had their own chamberlain, chaplain, steward, cook
and minstrel and each girl her individual tailor.
While the eldest princess was being rocked in her
gilt cradle adorned with the Royal Arms, her tailor
was making her silk robe finished with many bands
of expensive fur. The clothes of these Royal
infants were very splendid indeed; scarlet and grey
cloth, cloth of gold with silver thread, gold buttons
and fine red wool sha kings were given them from
infancy. When they were a little older they
supped off silver plates and their mattresses and
quilts were covered with green silk.
The Tudors continued to maintain this custom of
“nursery palaces.” At the head of the nursery
palace was a great noble-woman who was termed
the State Governess. Then came the Lady Mistress
whose duty it was to superintend the Royal
infant’s meals. After that came the wet nurse
(followed in due course by the dry nurse) and four
or six rockers whose duty it was to rock the Royal
cradle. The term “lady mistress” can be connected
to-day with the tradition observed in modem
Royal nurseries that the head nurse bears the title
of “Mrs.” whether she is a married woman or a
spinster. This “Mrs.”, of course, is a curtailment
of the term “Mistress” which in bygone times was
applied to all women, married or single. Lady
Margaret Bryan was a noted “lady mistress” of
Tudor times and posterity owes much to the
descriptive letters she wrote about her Royal
charges.
One of the most famous nurses in history was
Mistress Sybil Penn who cared for Henry VIII’s
children. Princess Elizabeth and Prince Edward.
King Henry VIII gave her a manor for her
devotion to his infants and she was regarded
always with great affection by his daughters who
permitted her to live at Hampton Court.
Most of the Kings of England showed gratitude
in after life to the women who nursed them as
infants. Henry V (1387-1422) remembered the
Welsh woman, Johanna Waring who rocked his
fluted oak cradle near Monmouth, and as soon as
he ascended the Throne he gave her a pension;
similarly Henry VIII rewarded his first nurse,
Anne Luke. Records show that the nurses and
rockers of Royal charges always received fine
presents from the family and sponsors. The nurse
who attended that prince of varied fortune, Charles
II, received a chain of rubies from one of his
sponsors and each rocker received a gilt spoon.
The infant prince himself had a jewel bestowed
on him worth a great fortune in those days—from
£7,000 to £8,000.
This attendance which nowadays is, of
course, merely a traditional observance, is
due to a famous constitutional crisis
Which occurred in Britain 260 years ago.
Queen Mary of Modena, second wife of
King James II, whose previous babies
had died in infancy, gave birth prematurely
to the child who was known later
as “The Old Pretender”. Although when
this baby was born at St. James’s Palace
the Queen’s apartments were thronged
with Royal adherents, no Minister or responsible
dignitary such as the Archbishop
of Canterbury, was present. The Whigs,
a political party who opposed James II
and wished to see his son-in-law William
of Orange and his Protestant wife Mary
on the Throne of Britain, maintained that
the new prince was an inconspicuous
infant who had been smuggled into the
Royal bed-chamber in a warming-pan,
and that he was not the legal heir to the
Throne.
After that occasion it became usual for a Minister
who was constitutionally representative of the
Government to be present in the palace or in the
mansion where the birth was imminent.
Thus, for the birth on November 9, 1841 of the
eldest son of Queen Victoria (afterwards Edward
VII) the infant’s father, Prince Albert, summoned
for the event the Prime Minister, the Archbishop
of Canterbury and the Duke of Wellington. Mr.
Asquith, who was later Lord Oxford and Asquith,
Home Secretary of Britain in 1894, hurried to
White Lodge, Richmond Park, when Prince
Edward of York (now Duke of Windsor) was born.
Similarly on April 21, 1926, Sir William Johnson-
Hicks (Britain's Home Secretary at the time) went
in the early hours of the morning to 17, Bruton
Street, London, to be present in the house when
Princess Elizabeth was born.
In olden times much pomp and ceremony
preceded a Royal Birth. It was the custom to
prepare the Royal bedchamber by hanging arras
(tapestry) on the walls of the Queen’s apartment.
This usually had a design of fleur-de-lys on a blue
ground; no tapestry with figures woven into it
was permitted, as it was feared this might possibly
frighten the Royal mother. The confinement
pallet of Queen Elizabeth (Henry VII's wife) had
a canopy of velvet of many colours, and was striped
with gold and garnished with red roses. Some
days before the birth of her child this Queen bade
farewell to the courtiers and retreated to her own
apartments, where no man was allowed to enter.
Her women acted as stewards and butlers.
Britain’s present Princess Elizabeth was
christened five weeks after her birth in the Chapel
Royal, Buckingham Palace. The occasion was a
family one, and only her relations were present in
the chapel (which had been built for Queen
Victoria). This chapel which was converted from
a conservatory has a flat coppered ceiling and is
supported by 16 white columns. At the west is
the altar and at the east a gallery containing a
Royal pew. The
gold vessel known
as the Lily Font,
designed in 1840
for Queen Victoria’s
children, was brought
from Windsor
for the occasion.
According to an old
custom it was filled
with water brought
from the river Jordan.
This tradition
has been adhered to
in the British Royal
Family from the
days of the Crusaders,
who first
brought this water
to Britain from Palestine.
The Princess
was baptised
Elizabeth Alexander
Mary by the late
Dr. Lang, Archbishop
of Canterbury.
The first Royal
child to be christened
in this chapel
was the Princess
Royal, Queen Victoria's
eldest daughter,
and on this
occasion the furniture
and plate had to be brought for the ceremony
from the Chapel Royal, St. James’s Palace, London.
In this old palace for many years Royal christenings
had always taken place and the order of ceremonial
preserved on such occasions was impressive.
Nevertheless in 1842, the Princess Royal’s new
brother and heir to the Throne (Edward VII) was
christened at St. George's Chapel, Windsor. The
old Duke of Wellington, hero of the Battle of
Waterloo in 1815, earned the Sword of State. The
Princess Royal wore a blue velvet infant’s robe
trimmed with ermine at her christening; Queen
Victoria's other children were attired in crimson
velvet.
Nearly 600 years before the christening of the
future Edward VII another English Prince Edward,
who was to become Edward III and found that
great Order of chivalry known as the Order of
the Garter, was baptised at Windsor in the old
chapel of St. Edwards.
It is interesting to compare the simplicity which
surrounds the christening of modern Royal children
with that great ceremonial which was emphasised
centuries ago. Let us consider the baptism of that
other Princess Elizabeth, second daughter of Henry
VIII, which took place four days after her birth
at Greenwich Palace in 1534. The Lord Mayor
of London and the Council were commanded to row
in state down the
Thames to Greenwich
for the event.
The walls between
Greenwich Palace
and Grey Friars
Church where the
ceremony was to
be held, were hung
with tapestries and
the streets strewn
with rushes.
In the church,
noblemen with aprons
and towels
round their necks
guarded the font.
This was of silver
and over it was a
square gold-fringed
satin canopy. Between
the chancel
and the choir a
closet had been prepared
with a fire to
prevent the infant
from taking-cold.
Citizens who were
debarred from the
church led the
Royal procession.
The Earl of Essex
bore gilt-covered
basins and the Marquess
of Exeter
carried a taper of virgin wax.
Lastly the Royal infant appeared in the arms of
her great-grand-mother, the Dowager Duchess of
Norfolk. Her kinsmen held a canopy over her
head. The baby was wrapped in a purple velvet
and ermine mantle, her train of regal length held
by important noblemen. A flourish of trumpets
sounded as the Royal infant was borne to the altar.
The Bishop of London conducted the ceremony.
And that high official, the Garter King of Arms,
cried aloud, "God of his infinite goodness send a
prosperous life and long to the high and mighty
Princess of England, Elizabeth”.
His Excellency the Goverhor’s
“At Home” at the Astana.
It had been announced in advance that on the
Public Holiday in celebration of the birth of a
child to H.R.H. The Princess Elizabeth, His
Excellency the Governor would be “at home” at
the Astana to all who cared to call between the
hours of ten o’clock and twelve noon.
Any doubt as to the extent to which this news
had reached the local populace was quickly dispelled
early on Tuesday, November 16th. Whilst the 21
gun salute was still being fired from the Depot
grounds people could be seen gathering on Pangkalan
Batu, and by eight o’clock numbers of children
were gathered around the bridge to the Astana
grounds over Sungei Bedil Kechil, where their
enthusiasm was restrained by police. By nine
o’clock, others however, adults and children, and
including many Malay women in their brightest
and best clothes, had entered the grounds from the
various Kampong Astana entrances and were taking
a preliminary tour round the grounds to admire the
beauty of the scene, which included themselves.
Instructions were then given that although the
Astana was not yet ready to receive callers, the
police guard on the front bridge was to allow access
to the garden.
After the preliminary rush of small boys had spent
itself, the front lawn quickly became a colourful
scene; lines of bunting stretched from the landing
stage to the building and everybody was in hobday
clothes. There was a slight contretemps when it
was discovered that while people were being allowed
into the grounds by the front entrances some constables
in an excess of zeal were trying to usher
them out again at the rear. ' One enterprising
Chinese ice-cream hawker who started to do business
on the Astana lawn was firmly escorted to the Sungei
Bedil bridge, where he had to compete with
several of his compatriots. Another gentleman in
the same line of business was later to be observed
in the grounds, but as he kept moving, by the time
the police constables had been put on his track he
had disappeared.
Shortly before 10 a.m. the Constabulary Band
marched onto the lawn, whilst the changing of the
Astana Guard took place in the midst of a “rush
hour” crowd.
At 10 a.m. His Excellency the Governor took up
his position at the front entrance, and shook hands
with the hundreds who were now arriving from
across river by every type of transport ranging from
Marine Department launches and tambangs to the
Public Works Department landing-craft lighter.
Refreshments were served both upstairs and downstairs
in the Astana, and again the school boy element
presented a problem. On several occasions
the area round the serving tables had to be cleared
of juvenile raiders in an attempt to allow their
elders a chance to get near the refreshments.
Shortly after eleven o’clock His Excellency had
to leave for Pending to catch a plane to Singapore
for a conference, so the Honourable the Chief Secretary,
Mr. Dawson, then deputised. His Excellency’s
departure, however, in no way curtailed the
arrivals, and it was not until after 12.30 that the
last guests departed.
Despite the unavoidable crush and consequent
heat, everybody thoroughly enjoyed themselves.
Considering the absence of any information as to how
many would avail themselves of the invitation, the
arrangements worked well, thanks to the excellent
preliminary work that had been put in by voluntary
helpers.
Finally, please don't ask how many people came—
nobody knows how many thousands. I don’t even
know just how many “dropped in" at a nearby
bungalow on the way home.—(Contributed).
Celebrations in Sibu.
At 11 a.m. on the 16th November, 1948, Capt.
Edmeades, M.C., Sarawak Constabulary, gave the
command “Royal Salute, Present Arms" and the
first gun was fired of the twenty-one gun salute in
honour of the birth of H.R.H. the Prince of Edinburgh.
Present at the parade were the Honourable
the Resident, Third Division and the Principal
members of all Sibu communities including several
Penghulus and the Junior Service.
After the salute, a contingent of the Sarawak
Constabulary marched through the streets of Sibu
led by the band of the Sibu Malay Union. The
streets were gaily decorated with flags for the occasion
and all ships in port were dressed overall.
Meanwhile the Government servants, Penghulus
and representatives of all local communities repaired
to the Recreation Club where the health of the
newly born Prince was proposed by the Honourable
the. Resident. After the toast the Ibans, several of
whom were dressed in full regalia of swords,
and hornbill feathers, started an impromptu dance,
clapped hands and beaten trays taking the place
of enkromong and tawak.
Several thousand school children, including a
contingent from the Native Treasury School at
Bawang Assan will remember the day as the occasion
of a free cinema show given to four packed
houses by the kindness of the managements of the
Cathay and Rex Cinemas.
A considerable amount of hard work and
organisation on the part of members of the committee
of the Recreation Club transformed the Club
grounds into the scene of a fun fair where children
of young and mature age enjoyed themselves at
games of skill and chance and painlessly contributed
at the same time to the funds of the Sibu
Benevolent Society.
2. The Rhinoceros.
In 1931 Mr. Banks wrote:
‘‘There can at the moment be no fear of Rhinoceros
becoming scarce for as many as 36 trophies
were brought into Belaga in two years not so
long ago, and I have met men who have claimed
to have shot over 30 in the course of their life
time, but it must be evident that such a slow
breeding animal cannot stand destruction for
long at that rate so that the matter will one day
have to be attended to.”
Alas, that one day came some days too late,—
and it was precisely such slaughter which, within
a few years, virtually exterminated this fine beast
in Sarawak. Since 1947 it has been fully protected,
but the western side of the island can only hope to
recoup its position if the small surviving stocks in
north-west B.N.B. and in inner Dutch Borneo
multiply, or migrate. There are now almost
certainly no rhinoceros left in Sarawak, except
possibly in the innermost section of the Third
Division. Once abundant in the Upper Baram and
Limbang, noticeably around Mt. Batu Lawi, there
are now definitely none in these great areas. In
1934 Banks saw fresh tracks of one at over 6,000
feet on Multi (Sarawak Museum Journ. HI, 1935,
p. 329), but extensive search of this area has revealed
no trace of rhino since 1945, though old wallows
and hunters’ trails are still identifiable over a good
deal of the interior. Old people in some places say
that at one time rhino were so unshy they would
come down quite close to villages, and in late 1945
one was reported at the edge of a rice-clearing on
the Raya river in northern Dutch Border (near the
North Borneo border).
There are still some in Dutch Borneo, and the
recent tracks of one were seen (by the author) near
the top of the high pass between the Poedjoengan
tributary of the Bahau and Nahkramo on the
Batang Kayan in October, 1945. In North Borneo,
where full protection has long been in force, a
considerable number are now believed to survive,
mainly in the north-east, according to information
from Mr. H. G. Keith. A single animal was reported
in the Upper Padas in early 1946, and was
later said to have moved back east.
The slaughter of this interesting mammal has
been largely the work of the indefatigable Sarawak
Ibans, especially those of the Rejang, who have
hunted far into Dutch territory and in violation of
Dutch law. As the animal became scarcer, the
value rose and rose, until the impedimenta of a
carcase totalled some $300 or more in value. Hard
to approach, owing to its extremely sensitive hearing,
the rhino (almost blind) was no easy kill.
Most were shot at close range with muzzle loaders,
but there are several good records of Punans blowpiping
them, and a man from Belawit in Dutch
Borneo speared and killed one many years ago—an
act immortalised in a stirring song.
In view of the many hundred that must have been
slain in Sarawak during this century, it is somewhat
ironic that the Sarawak Museum has no
specimen of the Rhinoceros.
3. The Wild Ox.
Evidently this species was once much more
common than now. St. John met many all up the
Limbang in the middle of the last century, but today
they are exceedingly scarce in that area. In
the upper Baram they are also much scarcer than
previously. As with the rhinoceros, the widescale
introduction of firearms has had its effect, and in
this case also perhaps the spread and increase of
Sea Dayaks (Ibans) in Northern Sarawak. Banks
in 1931 wrote of them also in the Upper Trusan,
but there has been no sign of any there for some
years past now.
As the species does not occur south of the Rejang
system, this decrease must be a matter for concern.
The only place in the interior where it is now
known to be numerous is in the great grass lands
of the Bahau headwaters. Here the sparse population
and remote topography has acted as protection
in some degree, and this area is literally teeming
with game—I have watched sambhur deer feeding
at the salt licks openly across the valley, and groups
of Banteng grazing, more remotely, the beautiful
pale green hillsides, usually keeping near the forest
edge. A particularly odd experience in September
1945 was to float down by parachute with a
magnificent ox unknowingly below. Several seen
in this area appeared to be crossed with the varicoloured
domestic cattle which the Saban Kelabits
of this area imported from the Upper Baram (they
originally came up from Brunei Bay via the
Limbang and Trusan Rivers about 50-60 years ago,
and have now reached the Upper Kenyah houses
further down the Bahau, and a few of the riverine
houses on the Baram). But the position is uncertain,
since a number of domestic cattle have also
gone wild in this area.
Occasionally the Bahau animals wander long
distances, and in early 1948 the tracks of one were
seen in the Upper Libbun (the Baram’s furthermost
tributary). A determined pursuit by the people
was unsuccessful, for the animal was moving alone
and fast—back towards the Bahau.
It would seem that protection is desirable for this
fine and harmless beast in all areas. Its flesh is not
attractive, and it has no other economic value. It
plays, moreover, a proud part in Borneo history.
It was in pursuit of the “Temadau” (one Malay
name) that Simau’un, brother of Wang Alak ber
Tata, later “first Sultan of Brunei,” made his
famous journey into the interior and brought it under
Brunei control. The ox kept always ahead of
him, and he followed its blood trail, stopping off
long enough in each river system to have a son.
The animal, eventually cornered in the Padas, proved
to have golden horns (Rangau spoken legend;
recorded September 1947).
A word should be said about the supposed Wild
Buffalo, Babulus b. hosei, since it is given full status
as distinct, wild and indigenous in “Northwestern
Borneo” in the recent and authoritative
“Mammals of the Pacific World” by T. D. Carter,
J. E. Hill and G. H. Tate (New York, 1945, p.
140). Ferile buffalos are common in coastal and
upland Borneo, and some of the upland people have
to spend days hunting their own (marked) beasts
when the meat is required for a feast. But there
has not been any reliable confirmation of the
supposedly distinct local race described from a single
Kuala Baram specimen (in the British Museum).
(To be continued.)
TOM HARRISSON.
Meluan Ka-ngau.
Meluan is a familiar name but not Ka-ngau,
which in Iban means calling. It sounds as if I am
going to catch the boat. It is not to the
s.s. “Meluan” I am alluding but the district from
which the steamer adopts her name.
My second visit prompts me to write about
Meluan, for I feel each visit enhances further my
liking for Meluan. It has that “something”
which makes one incline to know more about it.
I presume that though this district is not wellknown,
the officers who have established and
shaped it still harbour a great interest for it.
I wish to warn readers that they will not find
anything exotic or spectacular or “like the tourists
writing about South-sea Islands" in this article. I
do not pretend that I know Meluan intimately, for
I admit frankly that my total stay during the two
visits is only five days. Well there are tit-bits I
gleaned during those short visits. I fear it is too
much to hope that they will prompt anyone who
knows more of its early history to write something.
If they do so, I consider that my humble effort is
well worth-while.
I know little about Meluan beyond the print
“A.D. 1936” on the concrete foundation of the
Kubu entrance steps and the gossip of Ibans. The
Station is built of belian wood from the Kubu.
Junior Service quarters, Police barracks to the
Native Officer’s safe. It is an all-belian affair. It
gives one the impression that the pioneer officers
who established it have been enthused with the
“spirit of belian," and that it agrees admirably well
with its natural surrounding. Even a Meluan
friend of mine somehow or other got infected with
the “will of belian,” for when he decides to stop
smoking, he stops smoking.
Meluan is the same as it was originally when
the Station was started. It will remain the same
for a good number of years, if one knows how long
the belian wood would last. Though it makes no
material progress since then, one will realise the
lasting benefit the natives derive from the
establishment of the administrative station there.
It marks the end of the chaotic days of the Ibans,
who can now live their life in peace.
It is a great surprise indeed when one hears
hymns being sung from the Kubu on a quiet
Sunday morning and the rippling stream over the
“kerangan” helps to conjure up the serene and
peaceful atmosphere. I could not help feeling that
one could find better peace here than Lake Success.
In such atmosphere, one may be exonerated for
imagining that he is a bit nearer to heaven and the
way to it is up and up ulu. The Sunday service is
initiated by another Meluan friend of mine and the
congregation comprises of families of Government
servants and some native Police. They too got
infused with the spirit of belian !
In Meluan, I also have the opportunity to see
the practical demonstration of one of the Iban
brain teasers which I enjoyed during my previous
excursion. It is: "Dalam kena pandak, langkang
kena panjai, nama utai de kena?” Literally translated,
it means: "Deep, use short; shallow, use
long; what is the thing used?” The answer is
paddling in deep water and poling in shallow water.
Some young men of a few Dayak houses that we
visited, displayed an interesting assortment of
readers and exercise books they attempted to learn
to read and write at one time or another. In one
long house, I was asked to read to them in
Romanized Malay and translate into Iban on
“Sangkanchil dengan Buaya,’’ “Sangkanchil
dengan Kambing," “Long dan Kachang,"
“Awang Kenit," etc. To note the enjoyment and
amusement the young and old got out of it made
me feel that I have passed a very pleasurable
evening.
One must bring a good supply of ink and a cheap
fountain pen, if one cares to enjoy tattooing as they
do. Once it gets started, one would be invaded by
a group of boys clamouring him to print their
names on their arms. Eventually it would end up
with writing the “indu daras’ ” names on a piece
of paper for them to copy and tattoo onto their
hands. Then one would appreciate what lovely
names they have and enjoy the satisfaction that
his printing would be tattooed for life on their
fair hands. One would also know their names very
quickly in this way to the obvious satisfaction of
everyone in the longhouse. I would discourage
this little game to those who are not used to their
smell and are afraid of flea and ringworm.
We passed through a dry patch of kerangan
with a casting net spread distinctly over the scanty
undergrowth. A young Iban has just died and
been buried nearby. It was learned that he was
the man who was ill and delirious in the house that
we visited the other day, and suspected of ST
malaria by the Dresser. The casting net belonged
to him and is for his departed spirit to catch fish.
Anyone who halts there may use it also but is
tabooed from taking possession of it. The longhouse
where the deceased stayed and others close
by have observed three days' holidays on account
of his death. Not only the occupants of the same
longhouse are tabooed for sometime from singing,
dancing, adorning or exposing anything of silver or
gold, but also the visitors, as a token of mourning.
Such honour goes to only a few living in towns,
but to the Ibans, everyone, rich or poor, young or
old, relative or not, is entitled.
Meluan has rippling streams flowing over
kerangan beds, natural surroundings, painters'
dreams, belian wood, Sunday services, peace,
tattoo, taboo and whatnots. I arn unable to convey
to the readers what the Steamship Agencies
could do about Bali and Tahiti. There are also
ST (not SAINT, I am sure!) malaria, rice famine
and other inconveniences. Visitors may come and
be welcomed. The “keringit” will have a wonderful
time !
TINGGI.
Birds in a Bornean Garden—III.
Very characteristic were the Wren-Warblers hopping
about the wires, in the long grass, among
the beans, cape gooseberries, egg plants and changkok
manis, being entirely insectivorous with a most
cheerful trilling note and a jerky, cocked-up wrenlike
but long tail. They nested frequently, so much
so that some may even have been cock-nests. On
a few occasions the Eastern Willow-Warbler was
seen among the beans, passing through on migration.
Raffles Sun-Bird, carmine in the cock and green
and yellow in the hen, visited canna beds, large
somewhat iris-like gaudy flowers; the cock always going
for the red flowers only, the hen on yellow as well
as red ones—they settled on the outside stem below
the flower, drove in their beaks with a slightly
downcurved, pick-axe movement, not straight in
but on an arc. The punctures were plainly visible
outside at the base of the flower after the birds had
left, and the particular flower died as a result. The
purple and yellow Yellow-Breasted Sun-Bird also
visited the canna beds in the same way, even entering
the houses, both cock and hen hovering under
the topmost beams among the cobwebs in search of
spiders or possibly seeking nest building material.
Very prominent in cultivation and swamp was
the White-Breasted Moorhen, which nested freely,
feeding on insects, grass and other seeds; the bubbling
call from which they get their name "kru-ark”
was made by two birds facing each other with outstretched
neck raised and lowered, the feathers
ruffled as they bowed up and down to each other.
Other cultivation birds were an occasional Brain-
Fever Cuckoo, whose notes the Robins imitated
very well, often before dawn; the Nightjar, a speckled
Philippine Shrike, flocks of the Sharp-Tailed
Munia and the Black-Headed Munia, finch-like
little sparrows who nested around in such numbers
as to be a pest.
Fruit groves attracted all the usual birds, among
the most remarkable being a flock of five Black
Hornbills. On one occasion the Malayan Piculet
was observed, the Number-One Dayak omen bird,
a tiny Nuthatch-like species hopping about on fallen
logs in the undergrowth, sometimes perching breast
to stump like a woodpecker and sometimes perching
crosswise in the ordinary wav.
Of swamp birds, the Pintail Snipe was very common
but only came into cultivation very occasionally
and then when the workers had left, the earliest
seen was on 20th August. Golden Plover were
similarly distributed but visited freshly dug earth
in the evenings regularly and stayed as late as May.
Common Sandpipers appeared singly, also flocks of
both the Large and the Small Sand-Plovers more
usually associated with the sea-shore, twenty miles
away. One pair of White-Rumped Thick-Headed
Wood-Sandpipers also arrived, and at one time
there was a flock of Pratincoles or Swallow Plovers
feeding on the newly dug swamp land, their
swallow-like flight and general shape in the air being
quite distinctive. A flock of sixteen to twenty
White Cattle-Egrets hung about during the monsoon,
their number remaining constant; they were
prominent feeding on freshly dug swamp land, in
attendance on cattle or resting in trees; by the time
they disappeared during May many had assumed
buff plumage on the head, neck and back.—(To be
continued.)
The Countryside.
The Australian speaks of his sunshine, the best in
the world, he says and I wish we had some of it
here. The South African tells of his veldt and if
you have the luck to see it, where the air is wine
made from diamonds, you will probaby never feel
so fit again in this life. The Canadian sighs for
his lakes and the fire—and the snow—he can have
it, though it sounds very pleasant in parts. And
some have visited the deserts of Libya, miles and
miles of damn-all though not unattractive if you
have transport. And some have seen the jungles
of Burma, green, dark and damp, nearly as empty
as the desert itself.
And when they return to England, seven or eight
years gone by, what does it seem like, after all these
wonders of the world ?—the best of all! For in
England grass is green at last, hedges thick and
trees right height, open parkland, scattered spinneys,
dotted trees more restful than any jungle or
desert grandeur. Away from towns and suburbs
there is no change, the houses, fields and trees and
woods they knew as boys are still there just the
same—vet are they just the same?
For if you have lived on the spot day to day,
the eye contrasts no change in scenery, the same
old trees and woods, full of rabbits and a few scared
cock pheasants. But to others they are not quite
the same old woods after all, the trees have come
down and perhaps some more gone up. Everywhere
the woods are bare, pale empty gaps, dark
long ridges of brushwood and bramble, new trees
growing, all will be right in time.
But this country once was forest, covered with
trees like jungle but not so wet, though that is
sometimes hard to believe. As our forefathers felled
the trees and grubbed up stumps to make our
pleasant fields, superstition and a sound common
sense of beauty made them leave here and there
a tree or two, some in midfield, some in hedgerow,
some in corners, all to give that priceless park-like
broken view and jumbled scenery far more restful
than the majesty of any jungle desert. Now these
scattered trees come down, maybe age, maybe wind,
maybe timber, maybe fuel, other woods are cut and
stumped, leaving just a few outiers as our forefathers
did, marking once the woodland scenes soon
no longer known, save in sanctuary. For the stayat-
home does not see it, seeing it every day, only
the exile ill at ease notes what is new, may and
blackthorn, holly, yew gone from hedge, even
hedge itself grubbed up, not in normal hedging,
ditching, soon to blossom forth again. In wooded
districts it is not so bad. in others, hedges gapped
and gone, remains the ditch—you can’t burn that—
for there is where our hedgerows go, fuel for
the hearth and home, since there is none other!—
(Contributed.)
Sarawak Association.
The Annual Dinner was held at the Trocadero
Restaurant on 1st September when fifty-two members
and guests attended. Before the dinner, cocktails
were provided by the Association, members paying
for the dinner at 17/6d. a head. Considering the
restrictions in force, the Trocadero is to be congratulated
on the excellent dinner provided and for
the arrangements made for the party.
Mr. A. B. Ward, who had been elected as
President for the year at the General Meeting held
before the dinner, proposed the Toasts ‘‘The King’’
and ‘‘Sarawak, coupled with the name of the Brooke
family to whom it owes its existence.” Before
proposing the toast of "Sarawak” the President
said "It is not customary to make speeches on these
occasions but we have members in Sarawak and
perhaps you will permit me, as one of the ‘Old
Brigade,’ to voice a greeting to those now residing
in Sarawak and I would say to them ‘Good Luck!
Good Cheer! and may the grand traditions of the
past be your help in the future’ After dinner the
guests renewed old acquaintanceships and the bar
did a brisk trade. All agreed that it had been a very
successful evening. We were very sorry that Mr.
and Mrs. R. L. Daubeny were not able to attend
at the last moment.
New Books in the Library.
Thia is a rather light selection as befits the
Christmas mood. Once again, books one had ordered
or hoped to get proved unobtainable.
NOVELS.
"Joy and Josephine" by Monica Dickens.
Nice, light, witty, understanding fiction.
"Eight for Eternity" by Cecil Roberts.
In my view the best book so far by a popular
writer who seldom attracts me. Inspired by the
terrible destruction of Monte Cassino.
“Shannon’s Way" by A. J. Cronin.
Another doctor’s dilemma, this time in reverse
to "The Citadel"—for this hero puts research
before self.
“Joy" by Georges Bernanos.
A curious and absorbing composition of moral
drama and religious (Catholic) conflict in novel
form.
“Paradise Gate” by Ann Stafford.
Neat romance around rich girl—poor boy
marriage theme.
"Pirouette" by Susan Scarlett.
A love story set against background of ballet.
"The Flivver King" by Upton Sinclair.
Full of interest and irony, like all Sinclair’s
pageants of American life. This combines fact
and fiction in the weird world of the late Henry
Ford, as seen through the eyes of the employee.
"The Conan Doyle Historical Romances"
1,644 pages, four novels.
"The Bulwark" by Theodore Dreiser.
The last, and not the best, of the novels by this
late, great American.
"The Borgia Testament” by Nigel Balchin.
This brilliant writer not at his (“The Small
Back Room”) best, but vividly set in Renaissance
Italy; hard to put down once you’ve gotten into it.
"This Side of Innocence" by Taylor Caldwell.
Another of those great big American historical
novels of “conflicting wills and unbridled passions.”
Good reading value in the outstation
package.
SHORT STORIES.
“The Survivors" by John Sommerfield.
A leftist young writer in some vivid, harsh
stories—largely R.A.F.
“John Barleycorn" by Allison Uttley.
Racy short stories, easy, enjoyable, cool.
“Penguin Parade" 1948.
A refreshing little arty magazine.
FOUL MURDER. ,
"Lord Edgware Dies” by Agatha Christie.
One of her best; M. Poirot super-enigmatic.
"Mr. Priestley's Problem" by Anthony Berkeley.
A charming take-off of crime life; good reading.
"The Pit Prop Syndicate" by Freeman Wills
Crofts.
Almost the only thriller writer who starts at
the beginning and ends at the end, all square.
First-rate reading.
"Bullets for the Bridegroom” by David Dodge.
One of the slick F.B.I and espionage shoot-tokillers,
easier to believe than Cheyney and competently
written.
"New Graves at Great Norne" by Henry Wade.
Competent detective fiction, though for myself
I like the crimes less thick upon the ground.
"Died in the Wool" by Ngaio Marsh.
Ingenious murder; most suitable for the Lands
and Surveys Department, as it all happens (?)
in New Zealand.
"Detection Mystery Horror" ed. by Dorothy
Sayers.
An anthology of everything from Sax Rohmer
to Michael Arlen.
"Fell Murder" by E. C. Lorac.
A Crime Club creeper.
"East of Picadilly" by Stephen Maddock.
I prefer to keep west, where it is apparently
safer, if less exciting.
"Black Castle" and "The Oval Table" by J.
Jefferson Fairjeon.
Two well-written thrillers by one of the best.
FUN AND GAMES.
“ Ballet-Hoo” by Nicholas Bentley.
A new and re-written version of this scream.
But you need to know something of ballet to
realise what is irony and what is serious and what
is bell. The drawings are tops.
"How to Scrape Skies" by George Mikes.
Amiably an Englishman takes the mike out of
Americans. Delicious drawings by Nicholas
Bentley.
"Men, Women and Dogs" by James Thurber.
200 cartoons, funny as funny, including the
marvellous series “Masculine Approach” and
“The War of the Sexes.”
“The Pick of Punch, 1947.“
As usual. The style of Punch seems unvarying.
This is all the odder because the subject
matter is so up-to-date. Only from modern
England could most of these jokes come. For
instance, on successive pages, pictures of:
1. A crowded restaurant. Furious waitress
screams at weary customer :
“ .......... And when it does come,
please hurry—we close in ten minutes.”
2. Dumb blonde in bath, blushing. Radio
on stool alongside, announces :
“We're now taking you over to
the Albert Hall.”
3. Inside an electrical works. Huge generators.
One amiable mechanic says to the
other :
“How about cutting it off for
twenty minutes and popping out for a
coffee?”
“Dr. Sam Johnson, Detector” by Lillian de la
Dorre.
A rather odd “reconstruction” of Boswell
“records,” revealing the Doctor as a detective.
O.K. if you’re not literary purist.
“Olympic Story” by Ernest Bland.
A very thorough compendium of ail Olympics
up to the latest: well illustrated and arranged.
“The Nine Bad Shots of Golf” by Jim Dante &
Leo Diegel.
If you’ve that few, this book is the remedy!
BIOGRAPHY AND LETTERS.
“Ego 9” by James Agate.
A few days after finislung this ninth volume
of his stagey autobiography, James Agate died.
The marks of death are upon the book, but it still
has the strange and irritating fascination which
has made the series something on its own. It is
also encouraging to know that there is still so
much champagne available in W.l.
“The Trials of Oscar Wilde” by H. Montgomery
Hyde.
Full text of these three extraordinary trials
at the Old Bailey, with a thoughtful introduction
and appendices. A case book of conflict between
justice and prejudice.
“Crusts and Crusades” by W. H. Hughes.
Australia’s famous ex-Prime Minister (Labour)
tells of his early life, as waiter, drover, tramp,
oven-maker. Wittily written, and a remarkable
effort of non-conceit by a man who has been more
than half-a-century in parliament.
“The Sony in the Green Thorn Tree” by James
Barke.
Part of Robert Burn’s strange life treated
imaginatively as a sort of novel.
“In the Path of Mahatma Gandhi” by George
Catlin.
Though one sometimes feels Professor Catlin
actually in the position implied by his title, this
is an informed and able, if somewhat wandering
book.
“Plain Words” by Sir Ernest Gowers.
A delightful booklet on English abusage, already
officially circulated to department heads and
other memo writers, but advisable reading even
for business managers.
“Words at War, Words at Peace” by Eric
Partridge.
One more of these interesting studies of the
growth of slang, changes in word meanings
“gatherations,” nicknames for Jews, the language
of palmistry, etc., etc.
“Major Critical Essays” by Bernard Shaw.
Famous G.B.S. diatribes on Ibsen, Wagner and
the Sanity of Art.
“Economics for the Exasperated” by G. R.
Taylor.
Mr. Taylor is far and away the best exponent
of the intricacies (and absurdities) of modern
politico—economic theory, and he writes with
clarity and wit.
Books have been kindly presented by Mrs. C. W.
Dawson, Dr. E. Marjoribanks, Mr. W. Witt and
A. N. Other. Most have been purchased.
T. H.
Sarawak Museum.
The Museum says sad farewell to Miss Roma
Reseigh, who after a visit here has returned to
Melbourne. She voluntarily gave some weeks to
sorting out the reference library of books on Borneo
and South East Asia generally, reducing them from
chaos into catalogued order. Having completed
that formidable task, she proceeded to index the
Sarawak Gazette over twenty years. It is hoped
to make this index generally available shortly.
Mrs. J. Bettison and Miss P. Auld have continued
to help the Museum in many ways.
It has regretfully been decided that it is no
longer possible for persons to take out books from
the reference section except on the direct authority
of the Curator under special circumstances. So
many invaluable books were lost in the war, and
the inadequate relics are usually irreplaceable if
lost. Though most borrowers are scrupulously
careful, several important volumes have been mislaid
in the past 18 months. It is hoped, however,
to build up gradually a set of duplicates of the
main reference books for loan to bona fide
students, etc. Gifts of reference books will be very
much appreciated. (Notes on the Lending Library
will be found on another page of this issue).
A number of copies of Moulton’s “Guide
to Bornean Birds” are still available, at $1.00 a
copy. Though very out of date, this booklet is
still a handy one for reference if used with one of
the modern bird books like Delacour's “Birds of
Malaysia”—which never give much local Borneo
information.
New acquisitions this month include a Malayan
type stone axe from the Raffles Museum (by
exchange); a specimen of the rare Frogmouth
Batrachostomus javensis presented by Mr. A. R. G.
Morrison (A.D.O., Binatang); a blue and white
lidded Chinese bowl given by Mr. W. Geikie (Sibu);
a piece of very early pottery found in the upper
Sadong by Mr. Alexander Bolang; some rare fish
and other marine specimens from Mr. E. Banks and
Mr. R. I. Hughes; three botanical specimens of an
interesting new variety of tuba given by Mr. Ong
Kwan Hin; two snakes including a very much alive
King Cobra from Mr. M. G. Dickson and the boys
of Batu Lintang; photographs from Mr. George
Jamuh, Mr. Alan Dant and Mr. A. J. N. Richards,
and two fine studies of women weaving by Mr. K.
F. Wong, Anna Studios.
We regret to announce the death of Abang Nona
bin Datu Haji Azhari, who as Officer-in-Charge of
the Turtle Islands did much to improve the standard
of the staff and the turtle egg industry generally.
He will be difficult to replace, and his death is a
very real loss. All who knew him esteemed him
as a kindly, honest, intelligent and able man.
Through the kindness of Mr. F. W. M. Tweedie,
Director of the Raffles Museum, Singapore, a splendid
set of photographs of the recent important
find of gold figures at Sambas (just over the border
in Dutch Borneo) has been made available, and will
presently be on display. While in Singapore
recently the Curator had the pleasure of meeting
Mr. Y. S. Tan, who was so fortunate as to purchase
these remarkable Hindu objects, found accidentally
by Chinese labourers. It is hoped that Mr. Tan
may presently pay a visit to Kuching. In general,
a closer co-operation between archaeologists and
other scientists in Malaya and Borneo is to be
hoped for in the near future, all the more so since
the opportunities for fieldwork in Malaya are now
extremely restricted for political reasons. It is
expected that Dr. Tweedie himself will come over
to do some work in conjunction with the Sarawak
Museum during December.—(Contributed.)
“Doggerell.”
DEDICATED TO THE DOO-CATCHER'S DAUGHTER.
Did you ever stop to ponder?
Did you ever cease to wonder
How so many dogs and bitches
Could be born with so few hitches
In the precincts of the city of Kuching?
In ever increasing packs
They roam the streets and tracks.
They accumulate and multiply;
They procreate; they vilefy
The railway track and roads around Kuching.
Streets once cloaked in virgin calm,
When Rajahs first lowered kingly palm
To bless the town’s first noble hound,
(And kindly shouted "drinks all round”!)
Are now a festering sore
With canines at the core.
The parks and roads of pride and joy
To a patriotic homeside boy,
Are marred by a ghastly long-eared bitch,
Or a cur like Hecate the witch,
Who trample down the flowers
And annoy the Tamil mowers.
They meander down the Main Bazaar.
And loiter at the Lilian Bar.
They yowl at night and bark at dawn;
With tortured mind we groan and yawn;
We pray and softly cuss
For gentle Morpheus.
And now I must avow
That, to this awful row,
We ought to put a stop
And try and stop the rot
Before they run us out of Kuching town.
TAI PENG YEO.
(We offered this bone of contention to one of our
few canine contributors who promptly barked
back.)
A Dog Barks Back.
Ah, fatal is the ‘wit’ of man
Who curses curs throughout his span.
They come upon us in their wheeled hordes,
They squish and squash us on the minor roads.
They swear at ns and even sometimes fire—
To heap vile canine calumnies they never tire.
We, peaceful harmless amiable dogs,
Who like to lie on tarmac,quiet as logs—
Why should these ugly two-legged angry men
Attack us thus by tongue and gun and pen?
We, graceful kindly estimable bitches,
Who only claim the right to count our stitches—
Why should those lean intolerant white ladies
Abominate us like the worst of shadies?
And if perchance on moonlight nights we yowl—
Why, so before the dawn does the damn fowl!
And if maybe we sometime snarl and bicker—
At least we never quarrel over liquor!
How dare they say we fester? We object!
If in their proud conceit they would reflect,
They'd realise that we are man’s best friend
And rude remarks are really round the bend.
If they insist on blasting us like hell,
Proclaiming loudly that all canines smell,
Then, if by such abuse our minds are twisted
We’ll maybe end up super-communisted.
Too late, too late, then will they offer biscuit.
We’ll tell them simply: "Take it, chum, and
frisk it.”
Proudly we fine, upstanding, honourable pi
Will dot that human blind unseeing I.
Ah, fatal man’s morality,
Which pulls the tail what wags at he!
PI-I.
Fifty Years Ago.
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, THURSDAY,
DECEMBER 1, 1898.
It is not very often that disparaging remarks,
reflecting discredit on the Sarawak Government,
are made in the Singapore papers, and the few that
have hitherto appeared have been of an irresponsible
nature, carrying but little weight, and therefore
scarcely worthy of any official notice or contradiction.
Recently, however, on the 15th October last,
the Honourable J. M. Allinson speaking in the
Legislative Council stated “................. if the Japanese
Government, in its anxiety to get rid of the large
surplus of Yen in hand were to offer it at a considerable
discount, such as was offered by the
Sarawak and British North Borneo Governments in
their anxiety to get rid of their copper coinage
Now this statement with respect to Sarawak
Government copper coin has been made by an
Official, in an official capacity, and will therefore,
presumably, be received with credit by all readers
of the reports of the business of the Straits Legislative
Council, and as the statement is absolutely
untrue and exceedingly damaging, we are justified
in giving it a distinct contradition.
At no time since the Sarawak Government took
to supplying the Country with copper coins have
such coins been issued by the Treasury at a discount,
and no further profits have been made on
these coins than has been made by the Straits
Government upon their own copper coinage. The
Sarawak Government has never had on hand any
large surplus of copper coin to get rid of, and orders
for such coin have invariably been given to meet
local demands only.
This Sarawak.
(WITH APOLOGIES TO THE NEW STATESMAN
AND NATION.)
...............He was better after receiving a
medical treat......................—A letter.
One prominent feature of the evening was the
very essence of complicity which gave an atmosphere
of informal cordiality.......................... —Sarawak
Tribune.
In this particular case, any Mariners received
must be paid into the treasury.—An instruction.
However the presence of supposed antu has in
the past deterred willing workers—coolies will have
to be employed.—A report.
Calling of Occupation.................................................
(ev of husband).—A questionnaire.
Mr. and Miss.....................—Cabin Cards.
And please favour me all your help.
With kind condolences.
Yours faithfully,
A letter.
(The Editor is unable to follow the example of
our illustrious contemporary and offer a prize for
the best entry in this column. Contributions from
all parts of “This Sarawak" will, however, be
warmly appreciated and the most favoured will be
given pride of place.)
Island Club, Sibu.
BOWLING AVERAGES FOR OCTOBER, 1948.
News from Far and Near.
FIRST DIVISION.
The following is an extract from the October
report of the District Officer, Kuching, (Mr.
Outram) : “The Senior Native Officer reports as
follows on his visit to the Samarahan : —
‘Signs of co-operation among the villagers at
Tambirat were marked with interest. The kampong
path was raised by the kampong people by
dumping earth above the tide level. This was
further improved by a Chinese resident there who
built bridges along the path. As a result the upcountry
planters were much eased in their movements
overland to the bazaar.
Similar steps were taken by other villagers at
Tanjong Bondong. Kampong Baharu too was
showing some improvement.
It was interesting to hear words of appreciation
spoken by the villagers on the advantages they
were receiving from the regular calls of the
travelling dispensary. They recalled how bread
winners in the past had to stop fishing or farming
whenever they were taken by illness in order to
get treatment from the godang obat at Kuching.
Local medicine in the kampong proved to be of
very little help and is now not so popular.
Relapses were frequent when local medicine were
resorted to, these would cost them considerable
breaks in their work and in most cases would
reduce their usual earnings to the lowest level !’ ”
The District Officer, Bau. (Mr. Richards) writes :
“Many Dayaks have cleared for farming as early as
last May and have waited till now to burn. They
are planting as best they can amidst unburned
timber.
Birds' nest caves at Jambusan (Jawang) and
Kawa (east of Bidi) were inspected by the District
Officer and Native Officers. It was found that
hatching was over and young birds had mostly
flown. Leave to collect was given at the end of
the month and it is proposed to hold an auction at
Bau on 10th November.”
The District Officer, Serian, (Mr. Roberts)
reports that an Than named Labau was tried and
found guilty of collecting money from local Dayaks
on the pretence that he was authorised to collect
for and on behalf of the Government. Labau was
sentenced to four months rigorous imprisonment.
SECOND DIVISION.
The District Officer, Simanggang, (Mr. Morgan)
reports that “the news of the Revised Scale of
Salaries coming into force from 1st October, has
caused great jubilation amongst Government staff
in the district.”
The District Officer, Saribas, (Mr. Bruen) reports
“A meeting of the Saribas Local Treasury and
Native Authority was held in Betong on 20th, 21st
and 22nd, and on each of the three days the attendance
of the public was estimated at over 100
persons. It was not possible to count accurately.
The Treasury building was crowded out and many
people could not be admitted.”
The following is extracted from the monthly
report of the District Officer, Kalaka, (Mr. Wilson)
: “Dayaks began to appear in Saratok towards
the end of the month after six weeks quiet.
Visitors were concerned with civil disputes mainly
over sago garden boundaries and hill farming land.
Farming occupied the kampong’s attention
throughout the month; varied by a well attended
sports meeting in Saratok on 10th October.
In Kabong, Malays expressed satisfaction at the
good price of Nipah sugar ($5.50 a tin); unfortunately
the price has since fallen sharply ($3.50).
A side light on the prosperity of the bazaar is
shown by the desire of the more prosperous shopkeepers
to buy airguns and bicycles. While opinion
may differ which of the two is the more useless
here, the latter are certainly the more dangerous.”
The District Officer, Kalaka, writes : “October
was rather a black month. The Gqvernment wharf
finally tumbled; a few days later a vote of
$2,695.00 was approved to reconstruct it in Sungei
Parit Haji Bujang, a safer site; but the elements
were soon two laps ahead. A heavy river bank fall
at Roban will necessitate strengthening the Roban
wharf and the first storm of the landas blew down
the Saratok boat shed and lobbed a tree through
to Saratok fort dapor roof.”
THIRD DIVISION.
The District Officer, Sibu, (Mr. Dilks) reports
that on the 15th September a very high wind
travelling up the Igan blew twelve Dayak farming
huts flat at Rantau Panjang.
The same wind demolished a Malay house in
Kampong Pulau, Sibu, and blew large branches of
a tree across Island Road cutting off electricity and
telephone communication.
The District Officer, Sibu, writes that “work is
progressing satisfactorily on the new office wing
but the pile-driver and concrete mixer have at
times made normal conversation in the office
impossible.
The Courts also on occasion have resembled
informal meetings with the litigants grouped as
close to the Magistrate as possible."
The District Officer, Mukah, (Mr. Morris) comments
upon the continued theft of sago trees. In
one instance, trees worth over $1,000.00 were
involved.
The following is extracted from the September
report of the District Officer, Mukah : “Sago exports
from the district showed no unusual fluctuation
but considerable quantities of wet sago were
sent to Igan, Sibu and Kuching. Rice imports
were high, much of the rice being of a very good
quality and very similar to 'Siam'.”
The following is an extract from the monthly
report of the District Officer, Kapit, (Mr. Rennick) :
“The Senior Native Officer (Abang Indih) reported
that when he visited Rumah Ibong, Sungei Sut he
witnessed a Dayak bagawai in Rumah Ibong. He
asked why they were holding a begawai and Tuai
Rumah Ibong replied that the ladder of the house
(tangga) was possessed by a devil and had caused
four men to die in the house. They had therefore
thrown the old ladder into the Sul river and built
a new one. The Senior Native Officer lectured to
the Dayaks to the effect if they got sick they should
consult the Government Dresser and that the ladder
had nothing to do with the death of the four
men."
A whirlwind in Ulu Sut blew many trees down
and tore away the branches of many others. The
area over which the damage was sustained was about
ten acres. No injury to the houses or people was
reported. This is the second time that the Sungei
Sut area has experienced this phenomenom. On
the first occasion the damage was much heavier.
The following paragraphs are extracted from the
monthly report of the Native Officer, Kanowit,
(Abang Zainudin); the comments relate to the
Rural Improvement School :—
“Symptoms of malnutrition which persisted in
some students until August have entirely disappeared.
The destruction of thousands of
intestinal and body parasites has no doubt assisted
to this end, and 680 lbs. of fresh wild pig meat
and venison consumed this month while game
was plentiful kept everybody happy while working
hard in the fields.
A $30 Indian bicycle was twice damaged by
over-enthusiastic would-be cyclists, but it is
thought to be a legitimate expense in so far as an
acquaintance with simple wheeled vehicles may
encourage earth roads in native areas—and the
repairing of the machine is all education to the
pupils.
Two footballs have been kicked to pieces in
four months despite the fondest care while off the
field.”
FOURTH DIVISION.
The District Officer, Miri, (Mr. Shaw) writes
that Penghulu Barat wishes to retire; his intention
is to do so gradually while training his successor
to take over. The Honourable the Resident (Mr.
Gilbert), commenting upon this, says “Penghulu
Barat is an ex Sergeant-Major from the Rangers
He still runs his house on military lines. This
proves exceedingly successful in respect of his own
house, which is always prosperous and consists
mostly of ex-Rangers, but does not work so well
with the other houses under his control. His padi
reserve, approximately 300 tons, is the result of
the diligence of all concerned.”
Dayaks and Malays in the Niah and Sibuti area
report a poor fruit crop this year. This, they
claim, is responsible for more severe depredations
than usual of padi fields by pigs.
The District Officer, Baram, (Mr. Griffin) reports
that attendance at upriver schools is. not good as,
on account of a shortage of padi, the children are
busy tapping rubber or collecting food.
The District Officer, Bintulu, (Mr. Jacks) reports
that the sudden increase in the price of belian
timbers and attaps provides a satisfactory livelihood
for the natives.
FIFTH DIVISION.
August, 1948.
The Honourable the Resident (Mr. Anderson)
comments that, as a result of a campaign to clean
up Kampong areas in and around Limbang, the
Kampong peoples are taking a new pride in clean
and tidy compounds.
The following is extracted from the monthly
report of the Honourable the Resident, Fifth
Division : “Hari Raya, this year, was back to its
pre-war standard and many visits were exchanged.
In the evening the jollifications were marred by
heavy rain, as they were this time last year, in
spite of which many brightly apparalled Malays circulated
round the Kampongs in a colourful stream
intent on sampling the vast arrays of even more
rnulti-coloured confections. One wonders who,
eventually, finishes off these apparently inexhaustable
supplies of kaleidoscopic cakes.”
The following is an extract from the monthly
report of the Cadet Officer, Limbang, (Mr. Harper) :
"At a series of meetings held during the month by
the Heads of communities it was decided to seek
approval for the establishment of an inter racial
local authority in the lower Limbang area. This
authority would consist of Malays, Kedayans
and Chinese—the three main races—with a few
Muruts and Indians and one European. The total
population in the area concerned, which comprises
the coastal belt and the Limbang and Panderuan
rivers up to Bumbun and Kubong respectively, is
a little over 9,000. Some apprehension was felt by
the Chinese community, who number some 700 persons
only, that they would be heavily exploited by
the majorities, Malays and Kedayans. This fear has
been overcome. Once the native peoples had realised
that it was not a Government scheme to increase
taxation they were, apart from a modest fear of
their own inability to cope with any form of local
Government, fully in favour of the project and on
no occasion was any objection to the inclusion of
the Chinese heard. Both natives and Chinese have
at various times during these discussions spontaneously
suggested an increase in taxation in various
forms. "
The Assistant District Officer, Lawas, (Mr.
Smith) reports that a new Shipping Line is now
running between Singapore and the Fifth Division
and Brunei on a schedule of one trip each three
weeks. He comments that this service will be a
great help and will serve to cut out the excessive
handling charges previously incurred in Labuan.
September, 1948.
The Honourable the Resident (Mr. Anderson)
reports that the first of a series of lectures on
elementary agriculture and health matters, held
each Saturday afternoon, was started at the Agricultural
Station. There were attendances of about
a dozen, consisting of the agricultural trainees and
the more senior boys from the Malay School.
In his September report, the Cadet Officer, Limbang,
(Mr. Harper) writes : “Some upriver people,
including a party of Kelabits from the Medihit came
down during the month, the ulu natives being well
ahead of the lowlanders in their padi planting as
usual. Good burns are reported generally from
upriver and the first of the padi obstacles has therefore
been passed.”
The following is extracted from the monthly
report of the Cadet Officer, Limbang: “The value
of imports has increased slightly but the quantity
imported has probably increased considerably owing
to the new twice monthly direct shipment to
Singapore. The profit to exporters has risen for
the same reason.”
Mention of the new shipping service has been
made in the August report.
The following is an extract from the September
report of the Assistant District Officer, Lawas : “A
fair number of Muruts, some from Dutch Borneo,
visited Lawas during the month. Most of them
sold damar in the bazaar and bought cloth with
their profits. One Murut was seen returning upriver
carrying a decorated and rather flimsy ladies
umbrella."
It is reported that ‘Simah Laut’ (a sea offering
ceremony) was performed by kampong Awat Awat
during the month. This consisted of scattering
rice and cakes into the sea, after which no launch
or perahu was supposed to go out of the kuala for
a period of three days; the object of the ceremony
was to attract fish, which have become very scarce
round Awat Awat during the last two months.
CORRESPONDENCE.
LIFE IN SARAWAK.
KUCHING,
11th November, 1948.
The Editor,
Sarawak Gazette,
Kuching.
DEAR SIR,
I have read with some interest the difference
of opinion between Messrs. Morse and Kay and Mr.
Sagar which appeared in the Gazette correspondence
columns under 'Life in Sarawak.’ I would like to
mention that Tom Harrisson, after his recent talk
to Singapore Rotary, was reported as living given
a talk on the KALEBITS. Further, that Mr.
Harrisson stated the Kelabits kept their wealth in
the form of pearls, and that they were skilled in the
manufacture of earthernware jars ! After subtracting
a few other less interesting errors in the report,
nothing was left.
In fact I was present at this particular Botary
Luncheon, and in the press report found nothing
at all which Mr. Harrisson had actually said—only
lots of things which he did not say. If Mr. Southwell
had read this press report I feel sure he would
have thought the speaker had been most unobservant
during his sojourn in the Kelabit country—to say
the least of it.
So whatever the rights and wrongs of a case
might be, I do not think we should criticize anyone
too sharply over what the local press in Singapore
or Malaya may have reported a speaker as saying.
Yours faithfully,
WALTER K. WITT.
BINATANG.
DISTRICT OFFICE,
BAU,
16th November, 1948.
The Editor,
Sarawak Gazette,
Kuching.
Sir,
I was most interested to read Mr. Urquhart’s
article in your last issue and agree most heartily
with his letter. The following scraps may be useful
to him and of interest to others. He is in a better
position than I am to check my statements.
The people inhabiting Binatang before either
Malays or Chinese were Blions or Segalangs.
These were not Mohammedan and they have now
practically disappeared by intermarriage with
Malays and Dayaks. There are a few Blions left
at Sugai in Ulu Julau, and one or two Segalangs
near Tanjong Blatok. The leader of the Binatang
group was Apik Batang, an opium-smoker with a
very long beard. I believe he was alive about 1910
because he is said to have invited small boys, who
are now grandfathers, to share his fruit. His
groves are still to be seen at Sungai Pulau (sabrang
Sungei Buloh) and in the Meradong. A daughter
of his married one of the first Malay settlers, Haji
Munang.
Baring-Gould and Bampfylde describe how a
Melanau called Atoh succeeded in outwitting and
killing some pirates off Paloh in 1862 and say,
“He is perhaps better known to the present
generation as Haji Abdul Rahman’’ (1909). The
Gazette of February, 1934, has an obituary notice
of Abang Haji Metair bin Haji Abdulrahman who
died at Binatang on New Year's Day, 1934. He
had taken part in the Gat Expeditions, was made
Native Officer, and on his retirement, Tua Kampong.
He was decorated for long service in 1925.
Kong Sang is. I think, the man who was described
in an old case-book as having been a retired
perompak who was given $40 by the Rajah to
settle in Binatang and work belian (tras). He
worked in Sungai Stras and Lasi where his half-
Dayak descendants still live.
I understand that the first four Chinese to come
to Binatang (perhaps other than boat-hawkers)
were Ah Soon ( Ah Sang?) who planted coffee at
Sungai Pulau. Ah Kok who opened a shop, Ah
Poon and Ah Meng. Ah Poon and his nephews (?)
Ah Chi and Ah Tat, with Ah Meng, worked belian
at Rejang, Sarik, and up and down the Binatang.
They provided building materials for Sibu and
even sent some to China.
Rekaya Luyoh and Rekaya Naming surrendered
to Government forces at the foot of Sadok when
the third and successful attempt was being made
against Rentap’s stronghold there in 1861. I don’t
think Rentap put the big gun up there : a large
iron gun used to be in Betong Fort after removal
from Sadok, and the real “Bujang Sadok,’’ cast in
brass in Kuching, is to be seen in the Museum.
These were lugged up the mountain by the Rajah’s
forces, Sergeant Lees and “Sauh Besi’’ commanding
artillery!
Rekaya is short for “Orang Kaya" and the
Gazette Almanac tells us that Orang Kaya
Pemancha Nanang of Saribas died on 14 th
September, 1901. Rekaya Insul is probably an
ancestor of Sub. Juing (Juing Insoll). Rentap
himself died in the Entabai, but his name did not
perish. Penghulu Simon of Bawan and Pidai,
Kanowit, Umpi anak Rantai of Bukit Lima, Sibu,
and others claim descent from him.
There was a young man called Kari in Ulu
Binatang in 1941. adopted by one Tibang, who
claimed descent from the old Kari of Saribas. Ah
Soon was a Chinese working belian who felled a
tree and accidentally killed a Dayak: whether
Penghulu Busang was dismissed for accusing the
Chinese of murder, or whether the Ah Soon
referred to is really Manang Adong, Asun, Penghulu
in Lower Entabai, whom Busang joined in
1930. I do not know. Penghulu Ajah died on his
return from cockfighting in Balingian; it is said
that the Balingian losers killed him by witchcraft.
Bantan married a daughter of his, an elder sister
of Penghulu Tigong. He and Indit joined Asun
(1930-2?) and their names appear on lists in Meluan
Fort. Indit has since died of sickness.
Brinau probably moved from the Skrang with
Chaung to Merbai, just below Nanga Julau, and
thence to Assan. Ulu Mador was under Assan in
those days. There is still a Brinau in Assan and
a Kendawang, cousins of Ligoh of Assan and to
Gani of Bawang Assan. They all claim descent
from Lintong Storm-Cloud (Moa Ari) who was a
contemporary of Rentap, Saji and Linggir, pirates
of Saribas and Skrang. Lintong is noted for his
unsuccessful attack on Sibu Fort in 1870.
These people are connected with the Bong Kap
crowd of Meluan and Ulu Kanowit. Mantok, the
leader, had a cousin called Manggik who moved
into the Tulai after 1904. Another Manggik was
till 1943 Penghulu at Nanga Mujong in Ulu
Kanowit. There is a young man called Empalieng
at Merbai now who is cousin of Brinau of Assam
The Skrang people came from Nanga Remujan
in middle Skrang after Sungai Lang and Sadok:
Merbai was the next centre for dispersal. Saribas
and Krian people seem to have kept further north
but there was a great mingling. Munan of
Saratok who later became Penghulu Dalam and
lived at Pulau Kerto married Krandang who was a
woman of Remujan
A very old lady now living in Binatang
residential area might be able to give much more
information. She is from Remujan and is related
to Penghulu Lani, Krandang and others.
Yours, etc.,
A. J. N. RICHARDS.
THE NEW TERMS.
SIBU,
24th November, 1948.
The Editor,
Sarawak Gazette,
Kuching.
SIR,
In the penultimate paragraph of your Leading
Article on the New Terms of Service you state “In
a wholesale revision of this nature, anomalies can
readily be found; but such anomalies are not
major ones and the benefits of the revision are.”
They may appear ‘minor’ judged by the size of
the whole scheme, but they certainly are ‘major’
to the individuals concerned. Why spoil the ship
for a ha’porth of tar? If it is agreed that these
anomalies are not major ones, then equally the
cost of righting them cannot be large.
In an earlier paragraph you point out that, as a
class, the Officers who have received the worst deals
are those who by hard work have climbed to the
top Grade, but for whom there are no Superscale
posts available. With this I entirely agree, but
with your justification of it I cannot. Surely it is
just this class of Officers whose long and successful
service entitles them to at least equal benefits with
their Juniors. Further, if they are to feel inequitably
treated, their influence on the Morale of the
Junior Service, of which they are senior members,
may be adversely felt.
Your columns are, of course, not the proper place
to express views on which of the many individual
complaints, which are being received are justifiable
and rectifiable. I would, however, like to
draw attention to a typical example to illustrate
the position in which Officers, of the class referred
to in my previous paragraph, now find themselves.
An Officer in Grade 1 on a salary of $170 p.m. is
now offered a salary personal to himself of $215
p.m. If he remains on the old scale, after three
years his salary will have risen by annual increments
to $200 p.m. which, when combined with
Special Allowance, will give him $15 p.m. more
than he would be earning under the new scheme
in which his salary is not subject to increments.
His arrears of pay would be smaller than those of
the majority of his juniors and his commitments
probably larger. It may be said that he need not
transfer, but the prospect of receiving a cash payment
of arrears, however little, is a powerful
persuasive under present conditions.
Yours, etc.
H. H.
Kuching Market Price List.
Monthly Average Market Price from 20th
October, 1948, to 20th November, 1948.
