Vol. LXXIV.
No. 1086.
Sarawak Gazette
PRICE
KUCHING, Wednesday, September 1st, 1948.
50 CENTS
Contents.
The Sarawak Gazette.
WEDNESDAY, SEPT. 1st, 1948.
A Blue Trip Slip.
Almost overnight, Borneo seems to have estab- lished itself as a local tourist centre. It is difficult to estimate the total number of visitors but the European population in Kuching is probably increased by some ten per cent with the fortnightly sailings from Singapore. It may be suggested that one good reason for the sudden increase in that in these troubled times there is nowhere else to go for local leave, but if there is scant inducement to go abroad, the better course would be to stay at home. Certain elements abroad have chosen to hang primitive and misleading labels on parts of Borneo which may have served as a sinister enticement to visit the island. Alternatively, it may be that Borneo happens to lie at the end of a pleasant sea trip.
Apart from a harassed Rest House manager, one of the earliest observers of the tourist trend was a local entrepreneur who quietly but firmly estab- lished himself at the main exit from the quay side with a modest assortment of local objets d’art. Whether profits justified his enterprise is uncertain
since many of his prospective clients would be acquainted with the Suez routine and those who were not might possibly find embarrassment in owning a seven foot blow-pipe complete with darts. The business should be secure enough with more experience of supplying demand; the ‘Kuching hat' has been on sale in Singapore for long enough but there is no inore facination in buying a trindak bintulu in Singapore than in buying Brighton rock from the local confectioner.
Apart from the landas season, overheads in the quay side traffic are light enough and with searching enquiry into probable demand the supply is sufficiently assured. Local brass ware alone is intriguing both as to design and place of origin; product of Brunei or Timbuctoo would no doubt be available at reasonable notice. Other local arts and crafts could be in assured supply to meet an assured demand.
It is assumed that the local tourist may require other than local trophies to ensnare him. Bacon admirably exhorts the traveller that “the things to be seen and observed are the courts of princes .....................and...so of consistories eccleaiastic; ...............the walls and fortifications of cities and towns;..............exchanges, burses, wherehouses;
..............comedies, whereunto the better sort of person do resort...........” but happily we fall short
of these notable attractions. Our major claim to merit is. that Sarawak is a place where peoples of many races and diverse needs live reasonably with- out rude dispute.
Notes and Comments.
Mr. Grunsin anak Lembat, a young Sea-Dayak from the Second Division, has been appointed Assistant at the School of Oriental and African Studies at the University of London where the authorities intend to carry out a study of the Dayak language. He is to assist with research into his own language, and the appointment is for one year in the first instance.
Mr. Grunsin was educated at St. Augustine’s School, Betong, where he subsequently taught for a year. After the war he worked in the Census Department and then entered the Batu Lintang Training Centre as a student-teacher. It is anti- cipated that he will be sailing from Singapore for England about the middle of September.
The rainfall for July and August has been more consistent this year than for some time, a reflection
of the abnormal climatic conditions which have been experienced elsewhere during the last two years; England has had the longest drought for fifty years and the worst floods for seventy, the coldest weather recorded there for a century and the hottest days since regular recordings were taken.
Atomic bombs and wireless transmission compete for pride of place as malevolent agent but it may just as likely be Oberon up to his tricks again.
In 1902, a Sarawak born Malay, Wan Mohammed bin Wan Salleh, left Kuching to journey to Singapore; at that time he was seventeen years of age. Before returning, he elected to see some- thing of the world and signed on as a seaman, eventually landing up in America where he worked for some years in a cotton factory.
A few days before the outbreak of war he again signed on as a scaman and on the first voyage, his ship was sunk off Yalparaiso by the German raider “Emden." He made his way to England via Chile and the United States and his ship was again sunk off the mouth of the Loire. For three months he was penned up in the German raider under conditions that must have paralleled those on board the “Altmark.” On release, and after being chased by a German submarine, Wan Mohammed seems to have had a surfeit of wander- ing and established himself as a boarding house keeper in Swansea.
Here he acquired a wife and family and during the second World War joined the duties of fire- watching to those of boarding house keeping. In 1941, whilst he was absent on fire-watching duties, his wife and family were killed in an air-raid.
This month, some forty-six years after his departure, Wan Mohammed returned to Sarawak to visit his brother and sisters. He intends to return to England at the end of six months.
A correspondent forwards the following extract which is taken from a short article appearing in an Australian Newspaper : ‘‘Thanks to the good work of missionaries in Borneo, the natives are completely reformed. They would rather read the Bible than drink beer.
Before they learned the Christian way of life they used to brew their beer in huge vats. Men, women and children used to sit around these vats sucking up the beer through long straws.
Like leeches, they used to suck and suck at their straws until they couldn't hold another drop.
Now, instead of brewing beer, they sing hymns and leara handicrafts. They say they are very glad they are reformed.”
After reading this, it comes as no surprise to find correspondents referring to Borneo as ‘this fabulous part of the world.'
By a Resolution of the Directors of the Borneo Company Limited passed on 7th July, 1948, it was decided to pay the 1 1/2 years’ arrears to 4th February, 1948, of Dividend on the 7 1/2 Cumulative Preference Shares, plus the Dividend for the half- year ended 4th August, 1948; this Dividend. less tax at 9/-, being payable on 4th August.
Information has been received from the Colonial Office that arrangements have been made for the issue of Campaign Stars and Medals for services rendered during the late war.
Ex-members of the United Kingdom forces who are now resident overseas should apply by letter, giving full service particulars, to the headquarters of their respective services.
Claims in respect of service in Colonial local forces not administered by the War Office, Admiralty or Air Ministry, and in Civil defence organisations will be dealt with by the appropriate authorities in the territories concerned.
The next number of the Sarawak Museum Journal is now in course of preparation. Further articles, letters, notes, illustrations and photographs are still required. These will be accepted in Malay or Dayak just as readily as English. All subjects of human, artistic, and scientific interest can be considered.
The Federation of Malaya have asked for a limited number of Dayak Volunteers to be sent from Sarawak to assist in operations against bandits. Some have already arrived in Malaya and it is expected that a further small party will be asked for shortly.
The first party left Kuching for Malaya by air on Sunday the 8th August. They were accom- panied by Mr. F. Drake, m.b.e., a Sarawak Government officer who has been appointed Liaison Officer to the Dayak Volunteers.
This is not the first time that Dayak volunteers have served in Malaya. Some twelve years ago a ferocious ape terrorised the Weld Hill district near Kuala Lumpur. The ape, a ‘broh,’ made a nuisance of itself by attacking and biting children and adults and all attempts to destroy the animal failed. Shortly after the arrival of the Dayaks (thought to be two in number) the ape was captured and its stuffed remains exhibited in the Kuala Lumpur Museum.
The Curator of the Sarawak Museum has had a letter from the Director of the British Museum, and he asks us to insert the following passage:—
“Dr. Parker is very anxious to get a lizard, Lanthonotus borneensis, of which there are only about three known specimens and we have none. It is about 42 mm., reddish-brown in colour above, lower parts with the exception of the head, yellow, with brown band-like marblings. Its back and tail are tubercular with rows of wart-like tubercles, each of which has a horny keeled scale.”
If anyone comes across such a lizard, and can put it into some sort of preservative. and can forward it to the Sarawak Museum, the Curator will take care of it and send it on to London.
A Trip to the Uplands.
I had left Kuching early in September, 1947, with half an “Ingleburn” full of cloth and trade goods. I returned early this August with an “Ingleburn” full of pots and jars, plates and bowls, spears and stone axes, birds and mammals, bottled snakes, soil samples, mats, one parrot, nine
Kelabits and a general urge towards iced-beer. Now, I’ve had the beer, and I’m left with the collections, flooding over my office and my dreams. Thanks to goodness, a kindly fate has sent Mrs. Bettison generously to help unpack, sort-out, wash up and arrange the crockery, Ming, Ching, Binningham and all.
I think I have got some rather interesting stuff. The pottery is a weird collection—nearly three hundred pieces of all shapes, sizes, styles and times. One of the earliest may prove to be (if we’ro in luck) Han dynasty, about 2nd century A.D.—a painted earthenware duck of a mortuary type found in Chinese excavations. This, like most of the collection, was found upon the Kelabit Plateau at 3,000 feet, about the remotest area of Sarawak. Although Mr. E. Banks had made two previous visits to the uplands, he did not do a lot of collecting as he was on other work. There are several other earthenware pieces which look very early, and then lots of stoneware and porcelain, including several lovely Ming plates and a whole series of the well-known Swatow Export type of Ming, seldom previously recorded in Borneo. There’s a quantity of the lovely bluey-green ware which is, so to speak, a bit of Sung, a bit of Chun, and a lot of Canton; very difficult to identify with certainty, but with some nice things among it, in- cluding a fine head-rest. There are two jars parallel to the famous Tradescent jar in the Ashmolean Museum at Oxford which was donated there before 1630. And four absolute brothers to a fine 13th Century Siamese pot in the Victoria and Albert Museum which they obtained from Persia ! Persia-Kelabit Plateau-Swankhalok.................some
triangle! There are also three brothere of a well- known Ming jarlet in the British Museum, which shows two dragons “pursuing” a pearl!
I deliberately collected some of everything— “junk” as well. For I want to work out, partly from the ceramics, the whole complex of influences on the area. It’s as well I did. For a little dull- looking saucer I almost didn’t bother with, turns out to be a mate to one Dr. Liston collected in East Africa, where they are regarded as quite old and valued.
I got one hundred and fifty stone implements, a big addition to Borneo knowledge—the Museum had only a couple of dozen before. Some are tine specimens in themselves, but a conical type is of special interest to me, because it seems very close to a familiar type of ritual stone used by some of the inland tribes of Australia aborigines. It will be of special interest to see what the geological composition of these implements proves to be. It should give other clues of the migrations into central Borneo.
I’m inclined to think iron is of comparatively recent introduction in upland Borneo, and I found very little iron in numerous excavations of Kelabit stone-sites. I found nearly one hundred new stone- works, including two remarkable “forts,” largely in areas uninhabited for many decades, and some with great urns, seven feet deep, hollowed and shaped out of solid rock.
The collection of recent and present day crafts and objects is fairly complete, and includes the equipment for their special way of making pottery, and an unusual type of loom (from which they still weave cloth out of S.R.D. parachute cords). The
Kelabit and other upland people make nice sunhats, baskets, bark clothes, mats, tobacco boxes, blow- pipes, parangs, curved bamboos, bead coats, shell sarongs, and so on, and there are examples of each type in our new collections.
We got about 900 birds and roughly 200 mam- mals, as well as reptiles and other things. Insects and plants I left over for another trip. The idea of the bird and mammal collecting was to see how much the great mountain basin in the extreme headwaters of the Baram (Kelabit Plateau) had segregated and bred out a fauna of its own, or how much it remained identical with that of the low- lands and other middle-height areas. Without going into it in scientific detail here, the results should illuminate several quite significant zoolo- gical and geological problems, as well as having reference to human conditions. It is too early yet to say anything for sure, but in odd moments around the place I’ve had a quick look at sets of these Kelabit bird-skins alongside their parallels from elsewhere, such as Kuching. Some of them are definitely going to be different: “new to science” as the somewhat stilted saying goes.
But here. as with the whole collection, it would be stupid to be definite in advance. A great deal of work must be done to sort, identify. catalogue; stuff must be sent to other museums, universities and experts for analysis or check. These things take years, not weeks.
I hope, however, that we can put on a small preliminary show .of the past years “bag,” or the best of it, in the near future. And I hope those who favour the Museum by taking an interest in it will appreciate that seventy-six men travelled fourteen days with specially packed loads over the border mountains and across Dutch Borneo to do the long hard trip down the Trusan to Lawas while sixty others walked eleven days and then paddled four big canoes for weeks, manhandling with care at every rapid. to bring the more fragile stuff the safest way down the Baram (via Lio Matu). I felt then the ever present shadow of a previous Curator, Major J. C. Moulton, who lost all his Kelabit collections in the Baram rapids; I had my tin of sociological note books permanently strapped to the canoe and me!
During all the move, done by Kelabits and their Dutch Murut cousins, only one piece was broken (not seriously) and a bit of a bear's skin was chewed by a dog (rats had previously damaged the finest of my four leopards). Anyone who has tried to walk the Tamabo Mountains will realise the astonishing reliability and care that this breakage record shows. And anyone who hasn’t walked them only has to ask my friends (?) how much weight I’ve lost!
During the whole trip Sliman bin Salleh, who has been with the Museum twenty-seven years and was with me on Dulit in 1932, led the bird and mammal collecting,—a wonderful effort for a man of his age in that rough country. The trainee collector, a Lundu Dayak, and the photographer. Johari bin Denoh, stayed up all the time too and got many photographs of value. None of the party had one day's sickness, from start to finish. Alas, for Kuching and jaundice—for I write from hospital!.....................
Tom Harrisson
Agriculture.
[Some time ago, in Notes and Comments, we referred to a series of lectures to be given at thc Sarawak Union Club. The following is the text of a lecture given by Mr. Ong Kee Hui, formerly of the Agricultural Deparhnent, on Agriculture. —Ed.]
When we speak of agriculture in this country we are apt to think of the Dayak cutting down a bit of jungle and dibbling in padi, or of a Chinese, Malay or Dayak small-holder tapping his rubber, or of the Chinese market gardener carefully tilling his small plot of land.
Agriculture means more than all this. It is defined in the “Principles of Agriculture” as “the controlled production from the soil of plant and animal products which are useful to mankind.” Agriculture therefore includes not merely planting generally but also such industries as the breeding of cattle, horses, pigs, goats, sheep, poultry etc., the rearing of fish, bee-keeping and other allied activities of mankind. That section of agriculture which deals with plants is called Field Husbandry or Agronomy. and that which concerns animals is called Animal Husbandry.
These two sections are further sub-divided into branches such as Horticulture which deals with the cultivation of fruits, vegetables and flowers; Dairy Farming, Poultry Husbandry, etc. Forestry which is concerned with the extraction of plant products such as timber, gums, resins, etc., from natural vegetation is usually regarded as a separate subject, although in certain countries, for instance the Philippines, the Government Agriculture and Forest Department are combined.
Agriculture is one of the oldest if not the oldest of human industries. Looking over the distant ages one can only conjecture at the way agriculture first began. Like many other animals on the face of the earth primitive man had two primary needs, namely food and shelter. The food was obtained by picking whatever there was in Nature and man behaved in very much the same way as our distant cousins the monkeys and apes do to-day, wandering about and foraging for food.
Man was however, a more observant and intelli- gent creature and he must have observed that food is abundant in certain areas where the animals or plants on which he depended existed in large numbers. It was convenient for him to confine his wanderings to such areas and to live more or less permanently in some caves close to these-areas.
Man probably took the first step towards agricul- ture when he started to protect animals such as cattle from attack by their enemies. These animals in the course of time got used to man’s presence and became tame. In this humble way Animal Husbandry probably began. Man must also have observed at the satne time how the wild plants which are useful to him reproduce themselves by fruiting and seeding.
Having discovered this it was then only one step forward to the collection of these seeds and putting them in the ground to grow at a place which he found convenient. Man had probably by that time also discovered the use of fire. He might also have learnt by such natural or accidental occur- rences as forest fires, the effective way in which fire can clear the ground of jungle growth. A very primitive system of agriculture is thus evolved. The natural vegetation is cleared of jungle growth by means of Man’s primitive tools assisted
by buming, the seeds are distributed over the land and when the crop is ready it is harvested. The tertility of newly cleared jungle is well known. This is due to the accumulated plant nutrients stored up in the soil under jungle conditions. When the land is cleared, burnt and cropped in this primitive manner it deteriorates rapidly in fertility.
After one or two crops primitive man found that he had to go on to a fresh spot. This system of cultivation may be seen to-day in Sarawak in the hill padi cultivation by Dayaks. It depends entirely on the natural lertility of the soil and the natural ability of the soil to regenerate itself if left to grow up into jungle again. For its success the populat- ion must be small and the area available large so that a sufficient length of time is available for the soil to regenerate itself.
The next stage in the development of agriculture occurred when the use of implements for digging or cultivating the soil was discovered. This made it possible to use the land over a longer period with- out allowing it to revert to jungle, because cultivat- ion improves the texture of the soil, makes condition more favourable for plant growth and helps the control or weeds, etc.
Further advances were made when Man learnt to harness his animals and draught animals were used to help him cultivate the ground. In certain areas of the earth, for instance in the valley of the Nile in Egypt, Man discovered he could till the land year after year owing to the annual flooding of the land by the river and deposition of silt on the land when the water receded. In such places man settled permanently and prospered. Such places became centres of civilisation. Civilisation began when Man found that he had leisure for other things instead of having to spend all his time and energy on finding food for himself and his family.
The discovery of the fact that the application of certain substances such as animal dung, wood ash, etc., increases the yield of crops in the next important advance. The use of. these manures, as these substances are generally called, made it possible to cultivate the land continuously and therefore a settled population became possible. In this painfully slow manner, agriculture has evolved over the ages. To-day when we see the Chinese market gardener carefully working his small plot of land we must realise that he is using the skill and accumulated knowledge of countless generations of agriculturists.
(To be continued.)
Tuan Poggy Dan Itu Api Perchobaan.
It was the morning on which the two very senior Malay officers, recently seconded to Sarawak, joined the first car-load in the “cross-river” sarnpan. As they stepped into the boat, diffidently but nimbly, Mr. Poggy. who was already sprawl- ing in the stem, greeted thern. “Tabek! anak tua meriam!” he said. “Good morning, sir,” replied the Malays in unison and Mr. Poggy was off.
“Itu betol,” be began in his usual racy vein. “Saya tidak boleh bersatuju dengan kita lebeh. Memang kami semua kawan sini. Bukan saya atau lain tuan sini superior dalam itu jeraya. Jangan pikir saya merah. Saya tidak panggil semua macham orang saya punya adek, tetapi jikalau orang sudah pergi sekolah seperti saya, sudah ada saya punya education dan saya punya
experience, dan trima gaji beaar macham saya, saya hetong dia sudah sampai saya punya tempat dalam dunia dan saya panggil nya saya punya equal. Jangan takut. Jangan pikir sini ada orang yang mashor sekali—kami mesti jaga bagaimana kami chakap kapada nya. Semua orang yang ada education memang sama sama, makan sama sama, minum sama sama, tidur sama sama. Tidak susah saya turun kapada kita. Barangkali saya dapat ajar sama kita satu barang atau dua, tetapi saya tidak diam dalam ini negri sebab saya mahu ajar sama saya punya kawan. Saya dan semua lain tuan diam sini sebab kami mahu ajar sama orang miskin, dan sama orang bodoh. Kami tidak per- duli pasal gaji, atau rumah, atau permisi, atau pension; kami mahu tolong orang sahaja. Dalam dua puloh lima tahun saya sudah diam dalam ini negri Sarawak saya sudah ajar banyak barang ka- pada banyak orang. Ini hari saya mahu cherita pasal itu kali saya ajar orang Melayu padam api.
Pada masa saya diam Simanggang saya kerja officer in charge of sago plantations. Mcmang tiada mulong di-Simanggang tetapi itu jam peren- tah harap dapat mulong sana dudi hari dan saya trima hukum sedir dahulu sebab perentah mahu saya terus tangkap itu mulong bila jadi. Ada D.O. sana yang banyak pandai jadi engine telinga. Tiada lalak di-atas nya. Jikalau dia tengok engine jalan dia mahu buka itu engine pereksa apa sebab dia pandai jalan dan jikalau dia tengok engine tidak jalan dia mahu buka itu engirie pereksa apa sebab dia tidak pandai jalan. Sekarang, dalam ini tem- pat Simanggang ada lapan belas barang padam api, bernama ‘Minimax,’ dalam semua rumah perentah. Itu D.O. chakap sama saya: ‘Sekarang Poggy, kita tiada kerja sampai itu mulong bernang sini dari Mukah. Ini pagi towsah kita main fan tan. Saya mahu kita pereksa semua itu barang padam api dan ajar sama orang mata mata bagaimana pakai itu. Rupa sama saya itu barang tidak pandai jalan.’ ‘Memang pandai jalan,’saya jawab. ‘Jika- lau pandai jalan apa sebab tidak jalan?’ tanya itu perempuan tua. ‘Sebab belum ada api,’ kata saya, tetapi perchaya saya atau perchaya saya tidak itu harap kurang. Dia tentu itu barang sudah rusak dan dia kuat mahu orang mata mata padam api, tetapi bagaimana dia pikir dia dapat ajar orang pakai barang rusak, atau apa guna buka barang yang chukup baik pereksa jikalau ada rusak, saya tentu saya tidak tahu. Tanya saya satu lain!
‘Panggil semua mata mata dan semua orang salah dan buat satu api besar dekat pangkallan peremah,’ kata itu chelaka nomber satu punya D.O. ‘Hell!’ saya bilang, dan saya chakap sedikit lagi di-bawah saya punya udara tetapi saya tidak lawan sebab itu Resident sana seblah D.O. sebab dia tidak suka makan mulong. Saya pikir itu D.O. tengok saya punya jantong bukan dalam itu sebab bila saya pergi suroh mata mata dan orang salah buat api dia sendiri pergi ambil tiga barang padam. Baik, dalam sedikit jam ada api besar dekat pang- kallan. Banyak mata mata dan orang salah ada sana dan semua orang China keluar daripada dia punya kedai lihat ini orang perentah yang sudah pergi giln. Dalam itu mata mata ada dua lance- corporal Melayu. Bukan sama sama kita gentle- men,” and here Mr. Poggy bowed graciously to the visitors. “sebab dia bodoh seperti semua orang Simanggang. Itu D.O. chakap, ‘Sekarang saya pakai satu barang padam api tunjok kita orang. Tetapi saya tidak padam itu api sebab saya mahu kita dua orang belajar padam sendiri. Tengok apa saya buat.’ Terus dia pukul dia punya barang di-
atas tanah dan terus ayer kuat keluar. Dia pusing dia punya barang ka-pada sungei dan itu ayer masok sungei. ‘Memang bagus,’ saya bilang. Dia ambil tidak notice sama saya tetapi chakap sama itu dua lance-corporal, ‘Tiru saya, tetapi jangan buang ayer dalam sungei; pakai kita punya ayer padam api.’
Terus itu dua lance-corporal pukul dia punya barang di-atas tanah dan terus ayer keluar tetapi itu jam ayer keluar ada binatang tupai lari melin- tang tanah. Itu lance-corporal terus tengok nya dan buru nya dengan dia punya ayer. Dia pakai barang padam api seperti senapang. Itu tnpai banyak laju; torus dia naik pokok dan terus itu ayer ikut sama nya. Tupai naik tinggi lagi totapi selalu ayer ikut. “Whoosh ! Whoosh ! Whoosh!” pergi itu ayer. ‘Oi! Oi! Oi!’ bilang semua orang China. ‘Wah ! Wah ! Wah!’ bilang semna orang mata mata. ‘Hooray! Hooray! Hooray!’ bilang semua orang salah (sebab itu macham orang bukan main educatod). Itu D.O. maseh berdiri di-atas pangkallan muka ka-sungei sebab dia punya ayer belum habis. Dia mahu maki sama itu lance- corporal dan dia stengah mahu buru itu tupai; belakang dia punya telinga memang jadi merah. Ujong-ujong api mati sendiri, ayer sudah habis, dan itu tupai maseh hidup dudok di-atas daun yang tinggi sekali chuchi dia punya tanggan. Sudah saya tertawa atau sudah saya tertawa! Benar saya tidak boleh perduli kurang.”
The sampan was slowing up as it reached Pang- kallan Batu and one of the paddlers prepared to clamber out. It was time for Mr. Poggy to bring his remarks to a close. “Hari-hari saya cherita ini macham kapada orang yang diam seberang,” he remarked affably. ‘‘Itu tolong lepas jam. Dulu saya selalu chakap Inggeris tetapi sekarang kita orang sudah sambong kami saya mahu chakap Melayu sebab saya pikir kita dua orang tidak chukup mengerti bahasa Inggeris.” The sampan was now fast. The Europeans disembarked. The two Malays followed, stepping diffidently but nimbly onto the steps of the Pangkallan. There they paused for a moment, swayed gently from side to side as if dazed by finding themselves suddenly on dry land, and then fell quietly backwards into the wator from whence they have never emerged again.
G.
Some Malay Adat.
The following is part of a lengthy and interest- ing article in the latost number of the Journal of the Malayan Branch, Royal Asiatic Society, in which John E. Kempe and R. O. Winstedt trans- late two old Malay manuscripts (from Perak). Information of this type from Sarawak would be extremely valuable, since our literary and scientific knowledge even of Sarawak Malay adat is very poor. The tollowing are rules number 87 to 92 from this translated manuscript:
87.
If a debtor die without property. his children may not be sold to defray the debt.
88.
If a man becomes indebtod without the knowledge of his wife and children, they are not responsible.
89.
If a person enters a mine bringing a familiar spirit and the miner loses his ore, the offender is iined a bahara (or? he has to pay for the damage).
If a sieve is smashed or a spade broken, they must be replaced. If a furnace is damaged, the fine is a measure of rice, a chicken, a gantang of spirits; a slave is (?) beaten. For other things the penalty is to replace them.
90.
If a man molest a bird at a cock-fight, the arbitrator decides the number of mains that would have been fought and imposes a fine accordingly. If a pullet wins and is molested, the bender has to pay double the value of the bird.
91.
For ordeal by diving 107 1/2 bidor must be staked. Fees are paid to the Bendahara, the Temenggong, the workmen, to the successful diver, to the master of ceremonies, for the wager, for the life-line, to the herald, to the defeated diver, to the holder of the pole, and for the missive the diver carries.
92.
There is no retaliation (kisas) for head- wounds, except for those that expose the bone (muziha). For a head-wound that cracks a bone (hashima), the penalty is five camels; if the bone is exposed (?) deeply, the penalty is a fine; if the skull is fractured (munaqqila), the penalty is five camels; if the wound reaches the dura mater, the penalty is trebled; and so too if the brain is pierced (damgh). —(Contributed.)
The Curator’s Letter Bag.
[Mr. Tom Harrisson has just retumed to Kuching after a long stay upcountry. Here are just half-a- dozen of the specimens he found waiting for him in the Museum K.I.V. tray :—]
1.
A letter from Vienna.
“You may be interested to transmit your experiences, doubles, etc. to other collectors and exchange friends by mediation of the “Infornat- ion,” in order to enrich our procure respectiveli, your collections, supply of material, and literature of every description, by way of exchange. After all, these informations are essential for correct execution of our entomological activities after along time. You may appreciate the importance of that fact yourself, since your participation in exchange facilities is based on public utility an will be by way of communication for entomo- logists, and those who should like to become such.......... We should be very pleased to salute
you as a near partner of our work for public interests, and beg to remain with best entomo- logical regards........................”
2.
From Praha, Czechoslovakia.
“Will you excuse that I allow to ask you for the assistance, help and informations.......... As
we do not know the scientifical and publishing situation also for the propaganda purposes in your country I allow to wish know the Department of Agriculture in Sarawak the mycologist?, entomo- logist? plant pathologist? and its report and bulletins, and I am asking you to be so kind to inform me or to procure directly something of this matter. We are glad to wish write some reviews in our press, then for the bibliographical purposes.
And now I have also second request. As I am very interested with all concerning nature, ethno- graphy, old art, and collections in your asiatic countries, I should be very glad to know some
person also in the whole island of Borneo? who would correspond with me in this matter, especially, who are also interested a few native art.......... Excuse me that I turn in this matter
to you, but we are wishing to continue in our relations with your countries to study this fabulous parts of the world.”
3.
From Geneva, Switzerland.
“I have a very keen interest for butterflies of your region and I would be very glad to bind relations with your honourable Museum for obtain such lepidoptera from Borneo.
I hope you are able to give me a good answer and eventually a list.”
4.
From Giesen, Germany.
“I am charged to make on colored picture- work of the important Coleopteres (beetle) of all country on the earth, to interest our youth again for the wonderful nature.
In the work have to be only 10-15 of the important and nice colored pieces of each country. Our collections be burnt by bombs and we have no more exotic material, therefore I beg you kindly for 10-15 different important and nice colored pieces of Sarawak.
The pieces can be defect.
You get a work if it is finished.”
5.
From a Professor in Holland.
“For a comparative geographical and phylo- genetical study on the beetles (Coleoptera) of different tropical and subtropical countries, I should like to receive some dried specimens of: Dynastinae, Cetoniinae, Buprestidae and Ceram- bycidae of your country.
If possible you should oblige me very much with some addresses.”
6.
A price List
Price list of Czechoslovakian Electric Meat- Mincing Machines for Butcher’s Shops, Hotels, Hospitals and other Institutions.
These machines are a well and accurately made job from the Works which first produced the Bren gun. Output of meat per hour is 100 to 150 kgs. (220/330 Ibs)
Delivery: Prompt.
Price : £40 each, f.o.b. Rotterdam.
Locusts: 2.
(Reprinted from the Monthly Economic Bulletin, March, 1948.)
As far back as B.C. 125 , 800,000 people died of famine in the once fertile province of Cyrenaica because of the depredations of locusts which con- sumed their crops. Before that time and since then many millions of people have died of starvation and many more millions have suffered because of invas- ions of locusts.
As recently as 1928-1932 a great outbreak of the migratory locust in Africa invaded nearly all territories in that Continent destroying immense areas of crops. In Tanganyika, for instance, more than 75 per cent of the standing native crops were destroyed in one year. In Kenya, a quarter of a
million pounds was spent to control the pest and in famine relief.
In South East Asia the most severe outbreaks of which information is available, have been in India and the Philippines. The 1926-1931 outbreak in India caused a loss of crops and livestock estimated at ten crore of rupees while there is no information regarding the cost of control measures. The 1932- 37 outbreak in the Philippines caused crop damage estimated at 16,000,000 pesos despite the applicat- ion of control measures.
Minor sporadic outbreaks of locusts have been recorded in Borneo, Sarawak, Indonesia, Ceylon and Malaya but there is no information of outbreaks in Burma, Siam or Hong Kong and little of the periodic outbreaks in China. Thus, these regions are fortunate in being comparatively free of the pest though slight damage to crops is frequently reported. The region is particularly fortunate that no out- breaks appear to be recorded in the large exporting countries which play such an important part in the economic situation of South East Asia.
The foundation of modern locust control was laid in 1921, when Uvarov first propounded his fund- amental phase theory as a working hypothesis. Until then, intensive antilocust campaigns were waged in the more advanced countries liable to periodic attack, but since that date, and especially since 1938, campaigns have been planned intel- ligently with the purpose of preventing locust invasions of rich agricultural lands rather than as a last minute defence of the crops.
This fundamental change of policy from defence to aggression became accentuated during the last war years when the vital importance of protecting foodstuffs stimulated antilocust efforts very mater- ially.
In the past it has been accepted that locust out- breaks occur at more or less regular periods but many years of reliable observations do not sub- stantiate any mathematical sequence.
As indicated in the previous note, locust invas- ious do not usually arise in the territory invaded but in limited localities called outbreak areas, where favourable conditions may cause a concentration leading to gregariousness and the introduction of the swarming phase.
Thus, it is now known that the original transition of the solitary phase into the gregarious phase of the migratory locust in West Africa in 1928, took place within an area of 7,000 square miles, among the swamps of the Niger river in the French Sudan and that from this single focus, swarms spread, in the following nine years, to cover some ten million square miles in West and East Africa. Though costly campaigns were organised to deal with the hoppers. this plague continued until 1937 and caused terrific crop losses.
With the discovery of the middle Niger as the outbreak area, the basic policy for control became clear even though that area may not have been the only potential danger spot.
Similarly, a team of entomologists—in the period 1930-1938—tracked down the outbreak areas of the Red Locust (Nomadaeris septemfasciata) to the restricted areas around Lake Rukiva in Tanganyika and the Miveru marshes bordering North Rhodesia.
An Anglo-Belgian control service was set up in 1941 and some 18 countries south of the equator benefited from the localised preventive policy.
The permanent prevention of invasions by the
Desert Locust (Schistocerca gregaria) is a more complex problem because it is the most widely dis- tributed locust ranging from Senegal to Central India, and from Tanganyika through Arabia to South Russia. Some outbreak areas have been demarcated and others are suspected and it is clear that swarming may develop in several widely separated centres, while irregular rainfalls and adjoining different climatic systems further com- plicate the problem.
Though the establishment of an international pre- ventive service was recommended to tackle the pro- blem action was precluded by the war; meanwhile, in 1940, a new outbreak occurred—and still continues—hence the need for immediate positive action to save the crops distracted attention from the prevention policy.
This outbreak has invaded over thirty territories for seven years and has cost over fifteen million pounds in control measures to save crops but it has also focussed attention to the need for intemationa! action and the pursuit of a policy based on the pre- vention of swarm formation at the origin or origins.
The South American locust (Schistocerca can- cellata) is best known in the Argentine—which is said to suffer more than any other country in the world from locust plagues—but is also known in Brazil, Uruguay, Bolivia, Paraguay and Chile. Outbreaks in Pem, Colombia, Ecuador etc. may also be linked with outbreaks of this species in the South.
It is worthy of mention that international co- operation has been recognised as necessary in South America and that nine nations have already recommended the formation of a permanent Pan- American preventive organisation to tackle the pro- blem intemationally.
(To be continued.)
Cooperation—A Definition.
The July Sarawak Gazette contained a short article entitled "Co-operation.” It gave a definit- ion of Co-operation, and stated some long-accepted principles, but unless the reader has already studied the movement he will still be in some doubt regard- ing the real meaning of the term. This short article attempts to satisfy that doubt.
Misconception of the meaning often arises because of some particular type of co-operation met with by the individual in his own country. For example, retail distribution in England has proved so success- ful and has grown to such proportions that most persons living in England naturally associate Co- operation with retail stores. In Germany the Co-operative movement first succeeded in providing short-term credit to small-holding agriculturists and other poor rural workers; hence it has tended to be regarded in that country as a type of rural credit movement among poor people. In some other countries, such as Denmark and New Zealand, which produce and export primary produce on a large scale, it is usually regarded as a movement for the organised marketing of dairy and allied produce. In some of the more developed colonies of the British Empire, it has taken on a new significance, and is thought by many to be a medium of education for self-government.
Originally, the movement owed its origin to poverty and a desire for alleviation of the distress
and hardships of poverty. The people who employ- ed this new way to economic improvement had no capital, and therefore capital could not have bound them together as it does the members of any joint stock association. The only basis, therefore, of association was the human factor; that is to say, individuals guarahteed the toils of their labour to the society and undertook to behave as honest, industrious and unselfish people. Thus we find to-day that co-operation means, in the first place, that members are associated together as human persons and not as capitalists. Amongst persons with such motives, democratic control naturally follows, regardless of the wealth of the individual, or the influence which he exerts over the com- munity. It follows, also, that any act of association must be voluntary, but once having accepted association, the individual must be prepared to undertake the obligations of that associaton.
Lastly, it means that members associate to promote their own economic interests, and not the interests of other people, and so political and other extraneous interests should be excluded from the proceedings of co-operate societies.
It must never be forgotten that co-operation is a form of organisation, and primarily should be conducted on a strictly business basis, yet behind it all lies the means of the poorer people to educate themselves by meeting together, debating, discus- sing and organising. Co-operation promotes thought and interest; it admits the realisation of the power to achieve an object by combining forces; and it is a medium of teaching the individual to respect the rights of his fellow men.
Thus we find that although co-operation has many forms, the only method of achieving co- operative success is by the employment of best business methods and by conforming to tenets of behaviour along democratic and humanitarian lines. —Contributed.
Sarawak Legends.
TUGAU.
In view of the recent correspondence and dis- agreement about the Tugau monolith in the Rutus, it will be of interest to reprint from a former and now scarce volume of the Sarawak Museum Journal (Jan. 1911) an article by A. E. Lawrence, tben Resident of Bintulu. The Curator and Govern- ment Ethnologist comments that this story fits in with others recently recorded from Niah, Lawas, Limbang, the Kelabit country and Long Akar. Alak Betatar is one spelling of the name for the first Sultan of Brunei. Pateh Berbi was the brother who fought along the coast, whilst another brother, Semaun (which in Kelabit simply means the first man) took his conquests inland—accord ng to the Baram Kenya accounts some eighteen generations ago. This story would seem to reflect somewhat on the reputed power of Tugau. It also gives a pretty hearty life to Tugau’s wooden post— about five centuries.
The Sarawak Gazette would welcome other stories of a similar character.
Mr. Lawrence’s Story.
Tugau lived in the Rutus, a large tributary of the Igan. To this day many stories and legends about Tugau and his relations are told by the Milanos from Matu to Bintulu, especially in those families
which are descended from him or any of the other chiefs famous in his day—of his miraculous birth, his size and strength,—(his sago was baked into balls as big as a hen’s egg)—of his death at the hands of his own people, etc., etc. Remains of the billian post of Tugau’s house are still to be seen on the banks of the Rutus, and below them, if any man is brave enough to dig there, is hidden an enormous treasure of gold, besides the bones of the slaves sacrificed according to custom when the posts of a new house are erected.
Besiong, a near connection of Tugau, was also a famous person, and had many adventures, mira- culous and otherwise.
Besides ruling over his own people at Rutus, Tugau had great influence in many other districts along the coast. Kedahat, Chief of Oya, was related to him and acknowledged his supremacy. The Mukah chief, Busui, whose burial post is still to be seen in the Tillian river, although the urn at the top containing his bones has long since been lost. was married to a near relation of Tugau, who could count on the Mukah people following him to war if he required them.
Tutong, under its chief Beniban, and Belait, then ruled by a man named Jam, were also friendly to Tugau, so that he really had quite a large and powerful, if somewhat scattered, following.
Thinking that he was strong enough to overcome the rising Brunei power, Tugau sent a message to Alak Betatar demanding tribute and submission from him. This was refused, and Alak Betatar in return made the same demands from Tugau, with the alternative of war if he did not yield to them. The answer was prompt enough, as, without wait- ing for Brunei to take the aggressive, Tugau’s brother-in-law, Besiong, raised Tutong and Belait, and made a raid into their territory. Here they met a Brunei force under Pateh Berbi and Semaun, also said to be a brother of Alak Betatar, and were repulsed. falling back again on Tutong and Belait. There the Bruneis attacked and beat them; but Besiong, with a few followers, made his escape by boat, and sailed down coast as fast ae he could to get back to his brother-in-law at Rutus, report his failure, and raise the country. Besiong reached the Rutus safely, but before he and Tugau could collect all their followers or send word to the neighbouring districts, Pateh Berbi and Semaun, who had followed by sea from Tutong with all their people, were upon them.
Thus taken by surprise Tugau was beaten, and made full submission to Alak Betatar through his brothers, promising to pay the tribute demanded.
Having got Tugau into their power, Pateh Berbi and Semaun did not give time for any possible com- bination of the neighbouring Milano chiefs, but went straight for Mukah, the most populous Milano settlement remaining.
There they were again successful, beating the chief, Busui, and receiving his submission also.
These two decisive victories seem to have effectually cowed the surrounding country, as Kedahat of Oya and several other chiefs submitted without attempting resistance.
Alak Betatar therefore was now ruler, at least nominally, over all the coast districts from Brunei to the Igan, with the exception of Bintulu, the story of whose submission is somewhat different.
It appears that none of the Bintulu villages were very near the sea and it so happened that when
Pateh Berbi and Semaun returned to Brunei from their conquering expedition, no Bintulu people were about in their boats off the mouth of the river, so that the Brunei fleet, although, on the look-out for other settlements to conquer, did not guess that the place was inhabited.
Later on Alak Betatar sent an expedition along the coast by sea with express orders to find and subdue any settlement they might come across. Even then they would have sailed past the mouth of Bintulu river, thinking it uninhabited, but for an accident. As they passed by someone saw fresh banana leaves and stems floating out to sea, and called attention to them. The leaders decided to go up river and find out who had planted those bananas, and paddling inland for some time, came across a large Milano village, finding several more later on. The Bintulu people would seem to have been shyer and wilder than other coast Milanos, for whenever the Bruneis came near a village to land, all the inmates took to the jungle. However the Brunei people gradually coaxed them back and gained their friendship by presents and other means. finally making them subjects of Alak Betatar, and appointing a man to rule over the district, which before had been divided up among several petty chiefs, each holding his own village.
The district of Matu, from the Igan to Rejang mouth, is said to have been gained by Brunei at about this period too, but I have not yet gained any information as to the method by which it was subdued.
Tugau, Busui, Kedahat, and probably the lesser chiefs also, were allowed to go on ruling their people as dependants of Brunei, on condition that they acknowledged Alak Betatar as their supreme ruler and paid him a yearly tribute. Later on, when Brunei had become a Mohamedan state, the native Milano chiefs were replaced by Pangirans from Brunei, who very generally married into the families of the men they superseded.
Shortly before Mukah came under the Sarawak flag, the story goes that Pangiran Ursat and Pangiran Mathusin both of that place, had a serious quarrel which originated from two of these marriages.
Busui, as mentioned above, was the last native Milano ruler of Mukah. His wife was a daughter of Tugau. The first Brunei Pangiran to rule Mukah is said to have married a daughter of Busui by this wife. Pangiran Ursat was descended from this marriage. Now Busui had once made a raid on Bintulu, defeated Lungah one of the chiefs there, and taken his sister, Ilim, back to Bintulu, where she became Busui’s concubine. By Busui Ilim had six children, one of whom, a daughter, married Pangiran Mathusin’s ancestor. Pangiran Mathusin is said to have asked Pangiran Ursat for tbe hand of one his daughters in marriage, and been refused with scorn, Pangiran Ursat publicly saying that the descendant of a war captive and practically a slave was no match for any daughter of his. The insult rankled badly, and finally led, together with other causes, to the killing of Pangiran Ursat by Pangiran Mathusin’s party. Pangiran Dipa or Nipa, son of Pangiran Ursat then took up the feud, helped by Sherif Mussahor, and the disturbances began wbich led to Mukah being taken over by Sarawak at the urgent request of the people, who were being oppressed beyond all bounds by Sherif Mussahor, then head of the most powerful faction.
A Review: “The Chinese in Malaya.”
Dr. Victor Purcell, C.M.G., who visited Kuching last year, has had about twenty-five years’ experi- ence in the Malayan Civil Service, nearly all of that period as an important official dealing with Chinese in Malaya, the title of his new book (Oxford University Press, $8.00).
This book, coming as it does in the midst of a new era of Anglo-Chinese relationships in Malaya, has a special significance at the present time. Much of it is revelant to South East Asia in general. The fundamental problems, in each case are closely related. Dr. Purcell’s study, sponsored by the Royal Institute of International Affairs and Institute of Pacific Relations, falls into two main categories. First, his analysis of the Chinese set- up in Malaya, and how it has developed; second, the history of Chinese trade and settlement in the area. The first aspect is of immediate political importance, and must be considered first. The sccond, however, is also of wide and lasting interest, particularly because when it is discussed by an authority like Dr. Purcell, the views expressed may be regarded as definitive; this aspect of his study will therefore be the subject of a later article.
The War Years.
The book was completed and in the press before the recent disturbances in Malaya. The author, like many other authorities, does not appear to have expected anything so severe, although he gives a full and unusually objective account of Communist activities during the war and post-war periods. Ths account is valuable in clarifying the background to the present situation. It may be convenient to surnmarise his main points here— incidentally there is no item ‘Communism’ in the index, although we find Clothes, Coco-nuts, Con- fucianism, Coromandel and Couperus.
“During the Japanese invasion everything the Chinese community could do to assist the British cause they did,’’ says Dr. Purcell, stressing the good work they did as wardens, nurses, etc.—in Malacca of 250 wardens, five were European, ten Indian, the rest Chinese. In December 1941 the Chinese Mobilisation Committee recruited defence- work labourers and an auxiliary armed force which, though inadequately armed, fought with courage and suffered many casualties in the mangrove swamps of Singapore Island. On the arrival of the Japs, the Chinese (and above all Chinese Com- munists), were regarded as “implacable enemies.” In a series of identification parades, where informers, hooded like members of the Klu Klux Klan, picked out Communists, the number arrested was estimated variously at between 40,000 and 100,000; their mass execution lasted for days. From this golgotha, there nevertheless survived a nucleus. who formed the Malayan People’s Anti-Japanese Union, bter renamed the Malayan People’s Anti-Japanese Army (MPAJA). About the same time, small bands of Kumintang supporters were formed, largely to oppose the AJA and totalling “not more than 500” persons to AJA’s 3-4,000 by 1944 and 7,000 in mid-1945. The AJA was formally organised under Communist Party direction, into professional groups each with its leader, Dr. Purcell emphasises their ordered methods :—
“In all AJA camps where the authority of the central headquarters was properly exercised
the discipline was good, and in view of the fact that the men were kept for three years in the jungle, it was remarkably so. The respect and affection with which the country people regarded many of the guerillas is sufficient evidence of this .... they were meticulously correct in their behaviour. Every kind of food and material needed for the camps was bought and paid for in a free market, and there was no extortion or coercion of any kind.”
This despite an average age of about 19 (p. 267) —a factor of importance in later “hot-headed” developments.
AJA received a good deal of its training from a few individuals, notably Lt. Col. F. Spencer Chapman, who had remained behind the Japanese lines and survived. In early 1943 Col. J. H. Jones and Col. R. Broome (of the Malayan Civil Service) made contact on behalf of the “underground” Force 136, Malayan equivalent of S.R.D. There- after AJA was sponsored by the British, given extensive supplies of arms, ammunitions, officers (about 300) and cash (a monthly grant).
During all this period relations were “excellent,” and although the Malayan Communist Party published a political programme before the end of the war, it was not anti-British in character, though “definitely anti-imperialist.” Meanwhile, however, Chinese-Malay relations had deteriorated, largely because the Malay manned police force had been extensively engaged, under Jap orders, in suppress- ing Chinese resistance. A number of serious incidents resulted, both during and after the war.
After the liberation the AJA was, according to Dr. Purcell (p. 267) “disbanded without incident” in December 1945, though there were some difficulties with the Kumintang units, who were not finally demobilised until July 1946. The author implies that all arms were duly collected from all parties ! At the same times the left-wing elements in general were turning more and more to industrial guerrilla warfare,—demonstrations, strikes, pro- paganda, occasionally marked with bloodshed and an increasing severity of mood.
Now.
This is the background which Dr. Purcell— despite a somewhat choppy prose style—draws for us clearly and quietly. The facts hold nearly all the clues to to-days's given tragedy, and if Dr. Purcell was too near them to fit them into the right pattern of prediction, this is apparently an error he shared with many others in high places. The structure of the savage factors now in operat- ion was built up partly by the hard, harsh training of jungle guerilla life. the feel of power and tough- ness and group unity, a sense of maleness and purpose which was deflated without being re- directed after the war—leaving a dangerous vacuum. There were greater forces than any that could be controlled by one single solution, but it is odd to think now how much of it is due to our- selves, and to the policy of victory-at-any-price which justified our backing the Communists (while officially allies of the Kumintang) in Malaya, just as we backed them in Jugoslavia and many other lands.
General.
If this review stresses the topical aspect of Dr. Purcell's valuable book, this is not to say that it does not cover other facts of almost equal import- ance.
He has much to say on migration, religion, education, secret and political societies, industry and standards of living, mining, fishing and agriculture. Also a group of subjects which he classes as Chinese “social problems,” including opium, the traffic in girls, bond-servants; and the interesting Baba dialect. There is an important chapter on Anglo-Chinese relations.
“The Chinese in Malaya” thus fills a gap in existing literature. A similar survey in Borneo would no doubt be of similar value. At present, the facts available to administrator or student are too few and far between. The objective and des- criptive approach is overdue. As Dr. Purcell points out in the opening passage of his Introduction :—
“Praise of the Chinese is usually limited to a stereotyped concession to their business qualities and their industry. The fact is that without them Malaya would still be more or less as it was over most of its extent eighty years ago—a few clearings along the coasts and up the rivers, in the midst of jungle and swamp with no roads. no bridges, no public buildings, no hospitals, no schools, and no courts of law.”
These are words from a European observer of great experience. And they suggest one far from insignificant factor in causing the unrest and violence of a furious minority to-day. The book closes on the same note :
“For better or for worse, Malaya has ceased for ever to be purely Malay; it is a plural society. and the race predominant in industry, in capital and in labour, in economics and politics, is the Chinese. The Chinese in Malaya have come to stay.”
(To be concluded.)
Triad.
Cocoa in Sarawak
The prospects of growing cocoa in the Far East as a subsidiary cash crop are described as favourable in a report publisbed by His Majesty’s Stationery Office.
The report is by Dr. E. E. Cheesman, d.sc., a.r.c.s., formerly of the Imperial College of Tropi- cal Agriculture in Trinidad and now of East Malling Research Station, who travelled 10,000 iniles early this year in Malaya, Sarawak and North Borneo. Dr. Chessman estimates that Malaya could eventually produce 100,000 tons annually but that no considerable output could be expected for at least ten years even if many difficulties which he describes were overcome. Sarawak might produce 10,000 tons a year which would represent a considerable addition to the Colony’s resources. North Borneo’s potentialities would lie somewhere between those of Malaya and Sarawak but much experimental work over a period of years would be required before the contribution could be assessed.
The report points out that the present world shortage of cocoa is likely to continue and indeed to increase. It adds “there appears no likelihood that cocoa will become a major crop in Malaya rivalling either West African production or local success of rubber. What can be expected is that on a relatively small and carefully selected acreage, it may fulfil a useful function by helping to diversify the country’s agriculture products.”
Major pests and disease which affect cocoa else- where are not recorded in Malaya but squirrels which are very fond of cocoa seeds will certainly have to be controlled. Cocoa requires shade when young. One of the questions which only experi- ment can answer is whether rubber trees grown on a system of avenue planting would give the necessary shade. Although the bulk of world’s cocoa is grown by small planters the crop lends itself perfectly well to estate cultivation and would probably make speedier progress as a new crop as estate rather than small-holdes concern. Estate companies in Malaya are definitely interested in cocoa as an adjunct to rubber wishing to diversify their interests as an insurance against risks of being dependent on a single market. Only a small fraction of rubber land is suitable for cocoa and any attempt to establish cocoa under old rubber would appear foredoomed to failure or at best partial success.
Fifty Years Ago.
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, SEPTEMBER 1, 1898.
BINTULU MONTHLY REPORT.
Monday May 2nd, in Residency Court Mapang, Piok and Jalil were fined one picul each; the two former (1) for hiding from their creditors (2) for travelling on the coast from Sibuti to this town without obtaining a Port Clearance.
Jalil was fined for forbidding these men making their whereabouts known to Government until they had paid some debts to him.
On the 3rd, the Tuahs of Kampongs assembled at the Fort and were shewn a collection of broken crockery which had been picked up on the high road during a walk from end to end of the Kam- pong. This was done by my direction. The weight of this collection is half a catty of small sharp pieces of plates, cups, etc.
I informed the Tuahs that this habit of strewing the roads with the rubbish, dangerous both to man and beast, must now cease; and that it was incumbent upon them to make this known in their Kampongs, in default of attention being paid to this order, fines would be levied upon the delinquents.
4th. The p.s. Adeh called off Kidurong Point dropping mails and passengers.
The same day in Court, one Bunsu, a loafer, who has been convicted many times of various offences, was fined $5 for speaking improperly to P.C. Sukun and Private Jambul, Sarawak Rangers, when in the execution of their duty.
Another matter was brought forward.
In re, Banga, a Kadayan.
This man's name was mentioned in the sorcery (pantak) cases lately tried here, as having supplied Jaming, (one of the convicts, now undergoing a sentence of imprisonment, for malpractises, in Kuching jail) with rachun,
Banga denies this; he came from Sibuti a year ago, he will now return thither in one month's time.
I have warned the other Kadayans not to supply medicines to anyone.
Abang Galau states that several of these Kada- yans are selling love philtres(!) and charms, these are wont to cause mischief and upset the minds and bodies of the youthful purchasers of both sexes. So Banga will retum whence he came; he was inclined to answer impertinently when first brought up in Court, but I spoke a few words to him, for his good, and this soon brought him to his bearings, he is an elderly man, and lisps in his speech and of most repulsive appearance, in fact he very closely resembles a mias as to his face and the colour of his skin.
27th. Samarang, a prisoner, a Brunei carpenter and assistant mandor stole $4 Government money; for this he received an additional term of 6 rnonths imprisonment with hard labour. On the 13th of July he rnade his escape, having committed some thefts; he has no doubt gone north. I daresay we shall get him another day. I sent the necessary description, etc. to the Residents of Limbang and Trusan.
The weather during this month has been very unsettled squally and rough seas. On the moming of the 22nd two men, soi-disant distressed mariners, came up to the fort stating that they had been fishing at the mouth of the Muka river and had been caught in a squall and been blown up the coast, they had been beating about for two days without food or water and had lost all their possessions i.e. their fishing nets, wardrobes, etc., they told me their names were Palan and Kassim. 0f course I was very sorry for their misfortunes, and had them fed and comforted—they left later in the day to call on some friends before retuming to Muka. On the evening of the 24th an express boat arrived from Muka in search of two runaway thieves named Palan and Kassim; but it was too late. On the morning of the 24th they were seen sailing round Kidurong point by the Light house. keeper; no doubt on their way north. I sent on letters to Nia and Meri, in English and Malay.
This Sarawak.
(With apologies to the New Statesman AND Nation.)
The Chairman hoped that the members would propagate as much as possible................
.............This was put to the vote with the result, four were for adultery or physical or mental cruelty and one was against.—Minutes of a meeting.
“..............since the pacific war ended in 1945."
—A letter.
If such expences are absorbitant.—A letter.
To help those members or their families when in trouble such as death or marriage.............
Every member has a right to say anything in any meeting.—Societies Rules.
Since that time I have been an unemployee —A letter.
Steps to Protect Speculation on Currency Ex- change.—Headlines in the Sarawak Tribune.
(The Editor is unable to follow the example of our illustrious contemporary and offer a prize for the best entry in this column. Contributions from all parts of “This Sarawak” will, however, be warmly appreciated and the most favoured will be given pride of place.)
Films of the Month.
The film programme for August kicked off with the much discussed film ‘The Best Years of our Lives.’ It is very long film, and like other films deahng with psychological problems may not be to everyman’s taste. The problem is the topical one of the rehabilitation of ex-servicemen.
The introductory scenes arc concemed with the meeting of three ex-servicemen in a transport aeroplane when the action is so delayed and long winded that a restless audience started to wonder when the aircraft and the producer would get down to earth. Once the movement was warmed up, however, the film carried all the hall marks of an Academy Award picture. Frederic March and Myrna Loy gave a delightful representation of a married couple whose deep understanding of one another was sufficient to overcome the hazards of re-adjustrnent; Yirginia Mayo excelled as the brittle night-club habitue, complete with artificial eye-lashes; Hoagy Carmichael played the sym- pathetic bar-keeper with a sure understanding of his part. The casting of the minor roles com- manded admiration—the President of the Boom Town Bank with an outlook circumscribed by “No security, no loan,’’ the drug store attcndant so seriously enwrapped in the business of selling a cosmetic, the self assured paramour, the proudly patient parents of distracted ex-servicemen—these and other parts were played to perfection to com- plete the background for an ably produced film. The author of the novel was Mackinlay Kantor.
‘Odd Man Out,' although it got a mixed reception in Kuching, must be one of the finest dramatic fihns to be shown here for a long time. The scene is set in a town in Northern Ireland and the plot deals with activities of an unlawful association after its members have committed murder during an armed robbery. The acting throughout was restrained and in harmony with the subject and the setting of the film.
The film lasted about two hours and not once during that time was the element of suspense relaxed; incidental music adequately sustained the atmosphere of a film that was already dramatic enough. An audience grows restive with suspense long drawn out and the production may have earned more applause had it been much shorter.
In spite of the feeling of unrelieved tenseness which the film induces, it must be one of the out- standing productions of its year.
The best comedy film of the month was ‘While there’s Life there’s Hope’ starring Bob Hope, It was not a very amusing film and not a very dull one.
Sarawak Library
July, 1948.
The following books have been added to the Library :—
News from Far and Near.
FIRST DIVISION.
The following is an extract from the monthly report of the District Officer, Kuching, (Mr. Outram) : “Court work, during July, was heavy and included cases of every type. A blatant case of cheating by personation was brought against a Chinese youth and his friend, who succeeded in obtaining letters of administration of an estate by pretending to be the heir; the youth openly admitted his crime and stated in defence that the garden in question had been sold to him previously but that the transfer had not been registered and this seemed to be the simplest way of adjusting the matter.”
The District Officer, Kuching, comments that the sophistication of local Dayaks is apparent in the aversion of the Orang Kaya Pemancha to wear the old, somewhat bizarre, type of uniform sported by their predecessors. Nowadays, instead of blue uniforms with red facings and a large kind of
songkok with the letters “O.K.” prominently inscribed thereon, they insist on a quiet khaki suit with no facings and only the letters “O.K.P.” embroidered in small letters above the breast pocket.
The District Officer, Kuching, spent one night at Segitin and also paid two visits to Quop during the month. The Quop Dayaks still appear to be as much at logger-heads with each other as they always have been. No sooner have they elected a Tua Kampong and Committee than half of the village are dissatisfied with them and wish to have them replaced. The situation has now arisen when no reasonable person is willing to take on the job. The present Tua Kampong, however, has been persuaded to continue in office provided that he is paid $5.00 a month out of the village funds towards off-setting his entertainment expenses. This is a most reasonable proviso since the Tua Kampong’s house is invariably full of litigant guests to whom he is bound to show hospitality. Even so, it required a great deal of persuasion to get even a small majority of the population to con- sent to such payment, the general feeling being that the Tua Kampong should expend his money. time and patience for the good of the community without expecting either reiinbursement or grati- tude!
The District Officer, Bau, (Mr. Richards) reports that smuggling and illicit inining continue despite drastic measures. The illicit mining is apparently conducted on a small scale although in one instance, after a raid on one mine, two ‘officials’ were found to be carrying about three ounces of unrefined gold.
The District Officer, Bau, reports that four gold mining companies between them produced 53,1788 ounces of gold during the month of June.
The District Officer, Serian, (Mr. Roberts) reports that, apparently as a result of speculation by traders, local Dayak rice has disappeared from the market and the price of rice has risen by 30% in the month of June.
THIRD DIVISION.
The District Officer, Sibu, (Mr. Dilks) reports that, as a result of charges preferred against mem- bers of the crew of the s.s. “Empire Palace,” two men were found guilty of being in possession of contryband chandu each being sentenced to three months’ rigorous imprisonment and to a fine of $500.00 and $2,000.00 respectively.
Customs and Police Officers searched two houses at Sungei Merah and discovered twenty-eight boxes of Java and Siam tobacco and eighty-five tins of matches, alleged to be uncustomed goods.
The District Officer, Sibu, reports that, having rented out their land at exorbitant prices, a number of Dayaks were seeking new padi land.
The District Officer, Sibu, reports that towards the end of June, fifty Dayaks arrived from Kanowit nnd stayed at Sibu en route to Lahad Datu where they were going to work for a Tobacco Company. The District Officer adds : ‘‘Most of their time in Sibu was spent in having their hair put short and the pierced lobes of their ears stitched up.
Identification ‘before’ and ‘after’ these operations was a matter of some difficulty and when asked the
reason for their metamorphosis, they replied that with long hair and pierced ear lobes the mere male stood very little chance with the modern girl.”
When the Prisons Visiting Board met at the Sibu jail on the 29th June, the Board took the opport- unity of inspecting the prison vegetable garden which has been recently extended. The work done on this garden was most impressive. The prisoners have also cleared a fairly large area behind the jail ready for next season’s padi planting.
The District Officer, Lower Rejang, (Mr. Snelus) reports that “the wave of gambling in Binatang has been cleared up for the time being; but it is believed that several of the gambling boys have decamped to Sarikei and so we shall shortly be instituting a drive against their activities here.”
The District Officer, Lower Rejang, reports that the Dayaks down river were tapping rubber and jelutong between the two farming periods; in contrast, the Dayaks upriver were busy holding begawais and making substantial inroads into the fruits of what is described as ‘a fair harvest.’
The following is an extract from the report of the District Officer, Lower Rejang : ‘‘During a visit to Tekajong, Tanjong Sirik, I saw a magnifi- cent expanse of about 1,000 acres of adjoining padi fields all in process of being cleared. It is under- stood that Chinese will be farming one block of about 300 acres here, while the total acreage estimated to be farmed on Tanjong Sirik by Chinese this year, by arrangements with the Melanaus, will be over 900 acres—twice as many as last season.
It may be of interest to note that though this low-lying sea belt is naturally liable to occasional salt water flooding this, far from worrying the padi farmers, is actually welcomed by them. I heard the same argument put up by native farmers at Kuala Matu, Belawai and Paloh, viz. that a residue of salt left by two or three brief floodings a year acts as a fertilizer and helps to rejuvenate padi land whose yield has been decreasing owing to continual planting.”
Commenting upon the export of timber to Australia the District Officer, Lower Rejang writes : “Apparently the great demand down there is for softwood, of varieties which are regarded as practic- ally worthless in this part of the world, such as ramin, seraya. gronggang, bintangor and pelai. The whiter the better. According to the Colonial Timber Company enthusiasts perfect Sarawak ‘ramin’ is going to run the famous and now unobtainable Oregon wood a close second in popularity in Australia.”
The following is extracted from the report of the District Officer, Lower Rejang: ‘‘On the llth (June) a Chinese trading kotak from Kuching was wrecked in a sudden squall when entering Kuala Belawai. Goods to the value of over $6,000.00 were lost, but all lives saved.
The writer too had an experience at Belawai on the 16th which nearly ended in disaster. Clad only in a pair of swimming pants he was taking a stroll into the sunset along the beach and gazing up at the sky when he almost bumped into a couple of 12 ft. hamadryads having fun together. One had the other’s tail firmly clutched in its mouth and only released its hold when a Melanau passing by
with, fortunately, a spear in his hand managed to dance in and decapitate the seeming loser. He then had a more exciting chase in the course of which he had to withdraw hurriedly a couple of times when the surviving snake turned and reared at him before it too finally lost its head.
At Tanjong Sirik it was said that the land there is still making at the rate of 200 yards a year, so it is no wonder that the lighthouse is now miles inland. And the surrounding bush—a species of mangrove known as api-api—evidently thrives on the newly formed soil, for it reaches a height of 20 ft. or more in a year.”
The following is extracted from the report of the District Officer, Kanowit, (Mr. Drake) : “June the 12th was observed as a Public Holiday in honour of His Majesty the King’s Birthday. The opportunity was taken to celebrate by holding a small regatta, the proceeds of which went to the Kanowit Branch of the Benevolent Society. Boat racing was held in the morning, and land sports in the afternoon, and side-shows were held on two nights. The regatta day itself passed most success- fully, with remarkably few arguments, and a total profit of approximately $600.00 will be passed to the Benevolent Society. The only incident occur- red in one of the semi-finals of the competition, on the 7th, leading to the cancellation of the remainder of the competition. A fight occurred on the field between two players................. The crowd of
spectators immediately joined in, and a free-for-all ensued. Fortunately, no damage was done..........
The Honourable the Resident, and the Divisional Supply Officer timed their visit to include the Regatta, and gave invaluable encouragement and assistance, the former as a judge and in presenting the prices, and the latter giving most helpful advice on running the side-shows. A large and well attended, but unsuccessful, tuba fishing was held in the Kanowit River on June llth.”
Commenting upon the high wage levels prevail- ing in the coastal area during June the District Officer, Mukah, (Mr. Morris) writes: “Rubber even at present prices is not considered to be worth working, as the labour necessary is too costly to make tapping an economical undertaking.”
FOURTH DIVISION.
It is reported by the District Officer, Miri, (Mr. Lascelles) that Abang Kassim, who was arrested on a charge of attempted murder has been sentenced to seven years’ rigorous imprisonment. His appeal to the Supreme Court has been dismissed.
An earlier report of this case was published in the Sarawak Gazette for August.
The Chinese at Batu, Niah, are planting up more and more tobacco. Groundnuts are also a popular crop.
The following is an extract from the June report of the District Officer, Bintulu, (Mr. Jacks) : “Discussions with members of the Native Authority, Sebauh, took place as to various matters to be placed on the agenda of the full meeting to be held on July 2nd when estimates for the year 1919 would also be considered. I am optimistic about this authority who seem to have grasped the idea behind this important step towards eventual self Govem- ment.”
The District Officer, Bintulu, reports that a cinema was started during the latter half of June showing American, Chinese and Malay films. In spite of poor acoustics and technical hitches, large audiences attended the shows.
FIFTH DIVISION.
The Honourable the Resident, Fifth Division, (Mr. Anderson) comments in the June report that it was pleasant to note a few people putting down a second crop of padi in the year. He adds : “It is hoped, as soon as the advantages of irrigation can be made more widely known, to induce as many people as possible to do this, on swamp land, most of which will bear two annual crops.”
The Cadet Officer. Limbang, (Mr. Harper) reports a mild outbreak of influenza during the second half of June.
A Murut patient was admitted into Brunei hos- pital suffering from a dislocated hip, three broken ribs, at least one of which had punctured his lungs, and pneumonia. It is reported that he had fallen about forty feet from a tree and had landed on a stump. Once in hospital, the patient started on a rapid recovery.
The Cadet Officer, Limbang, gives an interesting uccount in his monthly report of the Limbang Agricultural Show held on the 12th June : “En- tries were most numerous in the local produce and arts and crafts sections. Livestock depended chiefly on poultry and buffaloes, but some goats, cows, a snake, crab, monkey and puppy were also entered. (The puppy was later bought by the British Resi- dent, Brunei). A small brass buffalo with toy harrow and roller also strayed into this section but was recovered before judging began.
Entries, as was expected, did not come in until the morning of the show so that judging could not begin until the afternoon. This was unfortunate as the 12th happened to be the second wettest day of the month and most of the 1.75 inches that feil that day, fell during the period of judging. Luckily all exhibits except the livestock were housed in the Chung Hwa School—whose grounds had been lent for the occasion—but the animal judges were unfortunate.
A good crowd turned up including a lot of upriver people. Malays, Kedayans, Chinese, Muruts and Bisayahs all entered exhibits but none were received from Ibans. As plenty of the last were present and have now seen what a show is, it is hoped that they will join next year.
His Highness the Sultan very kindly sent over as non-competitive exhibits some very fine silver, prayer mats, sarongs and hats. Mr. Ritchings also very kindly brought over exhibits of silver and local produce.
Prizes were presented by Mrs. Anderson.
On the day following the show. in order to encourage people to come in, buffalo races were held on the football field. These were fully as exciting as, and the winner was quite as unpredict- able as in, the Grand National. These were followed by.races for various sizes of boys, upriver people—easily won by Ibans—and the meeting ended with a handicap race for government ser- vants. A very large crowd attended.”
CORRESPONDENCE.
THE ALMANAC.
Kuching, 16th August, 1948. The Editor,
Sarawak Gazette,
Kuching.
Sir,
Mr. W. L. Ditmas’s letter is timely. To those who have recently come to Sarawak, the Almanac is something of a surprise. While one appreciates the importance of preserving old history in this way, some of the references are extremely obscure and others seem oddly selected—e.g. “Sarawak Enters Postal Union, 1897,’’ “Capture of Jerusalem, 1917,” or “Waterloo 1815.”
There is a tremendous list of murders—hardly good propaganda at the present time—and deaths, such as King Edward VII, Mr. Alan Lee, Mr. George Steward. Mr. Brereton, Ex-Penghulu Ngumbang and Tama Bulan ! The emphasis is heavily on the 1850s, and there is nothing on the previous history of Sarawak and its well-known links with Brunei, China, Java and Malaya.
But oddest of all, as Mr. Ditmas suggests, is the treatment of the recent war. Future generations of Sarawakians might well come to think that the war in Sarawak was confined to :
Dec. 16 Occupation of Miri by the Japanese, 1941.
Dec. 24 Occupation of Kuching by the Japanese, 1941.
and, in heavy type :
Sept. 11 Liberation Day.
Arrival of Australian Forces, 1945.
No one would dream from this that the first Australian Forces entered Sarawak (by parachute) six months before that date. That, I believe, several thousand Sarawak natives took up arms and fought with some distinction (and a lot of awards to liberate large slices of the 3rd, 4th and 5th Divisions. That Australian regular forces made sea landings to liberate Brunei Bay, Miri and Labuan in June, 1945, and many died fighting there.
No hint of such things, only :
Labuan taken by British Government 1846. Are there not more hopeful and contemporary things, as well as other fine flowers of an ancient past, to put in the Almanac, so that new comers can feel more a part of a living tradition, far back to far ahead? Perhaps it is partly because of this outlook that you, sir, have cause to complain of inadequate contributions? Some of us new boys find it hard to fit into the groove of Sarawak Gazette Almanac inentality.
Yours, etc.
Belom Pandai.
THIS SARAWAK !
The Editor,
Sarawak Gazette,
Kuching.
Dear Sir,
It is difficult to understand why your other- wise excellent Journal continually publishes items ridiculing the Chinese in their writing of English— or alternatively, the Sarawak Tribune and students in Government examinations.
It is not encouraging either, to good relations between peoples, or to those who sincerely strive to speak the English language fluently.
If you insist on this habit, why not also take more trouble to collect some of the illiteracies of some of the European population? And especially when they start to try to write letters or memoranda in Malay. Then it is sometimes pitiful.
Yours, .
“Semi-Kerani.”
From “Adversity”: Internment Quarterly.
(The following story was published in “Adversity" on 1st July, 1944.)
A SHORT GUIDE TO HORSE RACING IN SARAWAK.
They say that the first things the English do when they start on a new country are to build a church, a race course and a golf links. Like many hoary old sayings this is probably quite untrue, but when two or three Englishmen are gathered to- gether and a few horses and ponies collected, the result is invariably a race course and a local Turf Club.
Sarawak cannot be called a “horsey” country. There are few places where a horse can go, and, so far as I know, the animal was practically unknown until some time after Rajah James Brooke’s arrival. Gradually ponies were imported and it is clear that sometime in the eighteen eighties racing was firmly established in Kuching.
I used to have a few notes on this subject, but I suspect that many of them are now wrapping up tobacco or used for other purposes, The files of the Sarawak Gazette show accounts of race meetings before 1890—but my memory is fast being absorbed by bubor. Shortly, racing in Sarawak is sixty years old.
The late Rajah, as many know, was devoted to horses, and it is evident that it was by his efforts, aided by a staff of almost exclusively West Country- men fox hunters that ponies were imported, raced and used wherever possible in the primitive out- station places.
Why exactly the so-called B.N.B. ponies were never bred in Sarawak it is difficult to say. They are obviously comparatively new to B.N.B. The type of the Sarawak hinterland is, I suppose, unsuited to wild ponies; anyway all our racing ponies were imported.
The Sarawak Gazette prints some racy accounts of meetings of bye-gone years, and it is evident that the older generation of Europeans were keener on the game than they are in these days of cinemas, cold storage and swing music. There were few Asiatic jockeys, and Residents, B.C.L. Managers and Coramandants put on butcher boots and silk jackets and belted their mounts round in high spirits. The late Rajah, himself, rode in more than one race and to the last always had a pony or two in training.
The ponies used were of all kinds—pure B.N.B. (if there is such a breed?), Deli, Arab, Waler, Sulu and animals of apparently enthusiastic but ill-con- sidered parents! Attempts were made to classify these, but I believe that 14.2 Walers and 11.3 Delis have been known to run together. For many years we imported annually a batch of griffins from Australia. They ranged from 15 hands down to 13.3, but an average was 14.2. As race horses they often had a remarkable turn of speed, but as hacks thev were apt to discomfort the unwary. My own experience was that one out of three was a con- firmed buck-jumper, or shall we say pig-jumper, whilst the other two only performed at times. Nevertheless they were pleasant enough to ride and could be taught to jump. Some of them had good blood in their veins, always on the sire’s side. In 1912 they cost landed in Kuching about $400, a big enough price when one considers the pay of those days. Although mostly geldings there wcre a few mares and attempts were made to breed from them by Borneo stallions. Results were poor, and for many years only one foal (old Pilot) is known to have survived long. Since then at least one Borneo mare has foaled in Kuching and it is possible that one day Sarawak may have its own stud book, as well as the Civil Service List.
In 1922, for the first time for many years, a big batch of Borneo ponies arrived in Kuching, and in 1923 the old rather loosely-knit “Sarawak Races Committee” was merged into a full-blown Sarawak Turf Club. The membership is now about two hundred and includes all nationalities. Since then the whole structure of racing has changed. Now- adays, far from being almost a European monopoly, seventy-five per cent of owners are Chinese.
Amateur riders, gentlemen jocks, or call them what you will, are as rare as the great auk, and sometimes as clumsy.
A word or two about Borneo ponies. The present position is that unless one is prepared to pay a sum which would lead one to believe that the animal is encrusted with jewels, the Sarawak purchaser is generally landed with a dud. These may be hard words, but they are nearly true. One cannot blame the astute B.N.B. horse-copers.
For instance the first batch of thirty ponies in 1922 contained only about 95 sound legs between the whole boiling; and quite frankly several went into the stew-pot as thc best way of getting back anything at all. Still, it is the old game of a sucker with money and a supplier with rubbish. I feel that racing in Kuching will suffer if something is not done. Batches of griffins are unpopular as one never knows what one will draw, and the worst are so bad that it is useless to run them at all. A few years ago a batch of English and Australian race horses were obtained from Penang. Admittedly they were all said to be duds, but like the other griffins one or two were passable, but rest nowhere
at all. For many years we have not imported Australian ponies, principally because of the cost. A recent estimate was $850 landed in Singapore.
The ideal solution is not apparent; perhaps some B.N.B. readers will think it over.
Kuching race-course is about 1 1/3 miles round, is right handed and heavy going in parts. An ambitious scheme for remaking parts of the course, a new grand-stand, etc. was in progress when the balloon went up. Still the club is (or should be) well in funds and when the balloon is finally pricked perhaps it mav be set going again.
No professional bookies are allowed, although nothing prevents knowledgeable amateurs from laying the odds (By the way, one B.N.B. sports- man got badly stung). The totalisator (spell it with a z if you like) takes most of our raoney, whilst there is a cash sweep (limited generally to 1,200 tickets) on each race. The greatest draw, however, is the unliraited sweep on one race on the 2nd day of each meeting. This has reached $50,000 and every little office boy (and office g rl too) has a minute share in this great gamble. Fortune is always fickle. Once the 1st prize was won by a little unknown Chinese girl in Sebuyau; another time by an old Kheh coolie. Large prizes have been won by, for instance, a kongsi of filles de joie, a teetotal old European, by a very superior sort of Government officer who looked down upon racing as common, and by a jolly old Chinese shopkeeper who built a "folly” to mark his good luck. People laugh at him—but I don’t—every morning he gets up, looks at his “folly” and has a good laugh at the eccentricities and caprices of that jade fortune.
Nowadays we have at least two, sometimes three, meetings a year in Kuching. In four days racing there are generally twenty-eight to thirty races. Prizes range from $600 to $250—added to which are many cups presented every year by His High- ness the Rajah, Her Highness the Ranee, His Highness the Tuan Muda, the B.C.L., the Steam- ship Company, various sections of the Chinese community, and so on—generally a fine array. Finally there is the gigantic champion cup, to be won outright some day, but still after nearly 20 years the property of the club. It is frankly hideous —a child of the Victorian era, and it holds nearly six small bottles of champagne (as I know).
We race in proper coloure—some gorgeous, some very well-known and some oddly original. As secrctary I once had to register “old rose, rolled gold sleeves, ditto cap.” We have starting gates, paddocks, tea room, gazebo and brass band and all—in fact a very posh affair. In one respect we differ from all other courses. From time immemorial the Kuching Malays have had the right to build scores of small huts on each side of the straight for the accommodation of their women-folk. Attempts first to dislodge them, and later to charge rent have completely failed. For myself, I don't blame them. The arrival and departure of hundreds of fascinately dressed Malay women is worth seeing—and after all the course is free to all except the stand and enclosure for club members. Long may it remain so. We are a democratic club.
There are, or have been, so-called race-courses in Simanggang, Sibu and Baram. Actually they are turf roads built years ago by sporting District Officers.
Although all communities and classes patronise the Kuching races, either as owners, holiday makers or backers, so far the great oil company at Miri have never taken any part in the fun. I only remember one Miri owner, and an attempt to get them interested some years ago failed owing to an unfortunate misunderstanding. The fault, I main- tain, was on our side.
In 1941 racing in Kuching seemed to be in such a strong position that I fail to see why it should not regain its popularity when present matters are clarified and we all return to sanity again. We hope that B.N.B. will join in the game.
Kuching Market Price List.
Monthly Average Market Price from 20th July, 1948, to 20th August, 1948.
