Vol. LXXIV.
No. 1085.
Sarawak Gazette
PRICE KUCHING, Monday, August 2nd, 1948 . 50 CENTS
Contents.
The Sarawak Gazette.
MONDAY, AUGUST 2nd, 1948.
Acknowledgment.
Mrs. Chua Hoi Tiaw wishes to thank all relatives and friends for their kind telegrams and letters of condolence and wreaths sent to the funeral of her late beloved husband. Chua Hoi Tiaw, who died after a two days’ illness on the 6th July, 1948, at his own residence at Dalat.
Plain Figures.
There are plain figures and plain figures and Sarawak has few of the one and less of the other, the other being written in black on white price labels. The absence of these useful tags leads to a loss of time and patience for the buyer and gives an opportunity for gross profiteering to the seller.
The tradition of the East can offer inspiration to the West and particularly in its more leisurely conception of living. From deference to the ideas of the East, the West may learn that life for the many may not necessarily attain its highest express- ion in eight daily hours of fevervish spanner twisting, one daily hour of crowded commuting and
a short evening listening to radios or cinemas. It may learn that leisure increases pleasure, but at some stage comes a broad black line and neither the East can plead nor the West concede that, once over the line, leisure has any pleasure value. A leisurely haircut can be pleasant but by no stretch of imagination can nail paring be any the less dis- tasteful by increasing the time taken. It may be pleasant to make a morning’s job of buying a car- pet or a car but only an elastic imagination can fit the same pleasure to an equal time spent in buying a pair of garters.
It seems proper that weighty transactions should be squired by adequate time but such transactions in these hard few times are few and far between. What is needed in our daily life is a reasonable system to ensure that purchases will be made at a reasonable price.
Both fortunately and unfortunately, price control has never been a fully extended system here and prices are too often governed what each buyer in turn cun be induced to pay. A purse-happy Dayak, turning his harvest coin over in his chawat, spots a delightful coloured but suspect garment; he wishes to buy, the trailer wishes to sell; the agreed price might be any-one’s business.
A trader in textiles was, within the last month, asked what percentage of profit he normally expect- ed to make upon retailing his wares. Like a good lawyer he suggested that each case had to be con- sidered on its own merits. Like a good shop- keeper he later explained that he generally started off at over one hundred per cent profit and then accepted what he could get. His vagueness on what he could and did get is understandable; like “X” it was a constantly variable factor.
It seems that the up-country buyer is less knowledgeable and more impatient than the towns- man but it is particularly this class which needs some protection against the avariciousness of unscrupulous traders. By the time that wear and tear have proved the true worth of hi purchase, his wrath and disgust at the wastage of his hard earned money is powerless to effect the trader. Not that the. town-dweller has any better recourse but, at least, by bitter experience he is more familiar with the element of jungle warfare which attends even the most modest of transactions.
This snatch and grab policy brings no monetary advantage to either party; the income of each buyer can be stretched so far and no farther, hence he will buy rather less than he otherwise might do; the traders, to judge from the appearance of their business premises, do little more than pay their way.
The answer to this apparent contradiction is not far to seek; there arc too many dealers and most of them are content to buy in unprofitable if con- venient markets. Between production and con- sumption there are far too many mice having a nibble at the apple ; the process does the apple no good and the mice get no fatter on the diet. There is a loss of man-power to the community and a loss of spending power to the individual.
To a certain extent this wastage can be controlled by price labels. There will be lesser numbers of marginal retailers, but those surplus to require- ments can turn their agile abilities to egg producing, vegetable growing, poetry writing or whatever best suits the needs of the community they serve.
This fixing of price by ticket and not by per- suasion may have the stulifying effect of curbing the dealer’s imagination but, if need be, imaginat- ion could have loose rein with external placards like "Choicest Cut’’ or "Fresh To-day" with full approval for the dealer to ring the changes as his fancy saw fit.
Notes and Comments.
His Majesty the King has been graciously pleased to approve the following awards
Member of the Most Excellent Order of the British Empire (Civil Division)
Mr. J. L. Noakes.
King's Medal for Courage in the Cause of Freedom
Tuai Rumah Leban, Seruas. Tinjar.
Tinggang Malang, Long Beruang, Tutoh.
Soo Loh Lah, Marudi.
King's Commendation for Brave Conduct
Pet bin Mus, Marudi.
Bit (Kayan), Long Laput.
Corporal Ragam, No. 407.
Ajis bin Sigau, Marudi.
The Sarawak Gazette offers congratulations to the recipients.
His Highness the Sultan of Brunei, accompanied by the Sultana and their two daughters, arrived in Kuching on 20th July. It is understood that His Highness will reside in Kuching for a short time.
It is with grief and a sense of irreparable loss that we report the death of the Honourable Mr. J. B. Archer, c.m.g., M.S.S., who died in Kuching on Saturday 17th July. At the inquest which followed his death the Coroner returned a verdict of suicide while the balance of his mind was dis- turbed.
For twenty-six years John Beville Archer has been closely associated with the Sarawak Gazette, as printer, editor and contributor; there are few recent issues which have not carried an article by the ‘Optimistic Fiddler.' A few hours before his death he was busy correcting the typescript of his article "Outstations” which he had planned as one of a long series.
His tragic death comes as a severe loss to Sarawak.
The following telegram was received from Their Highnesses the Rajah and Ranee a few days after Mr. Archer’s death : "Ven sorry to hear of the sudden death of an excellent officer and wonderful friend to us and to Sarawak."
The Australian authorities have furnished inform- ation, additional to that previously published, relating to the sentences of Japanese Officers, Interpreters and Guards at Batu Lintang Camp. Kuching, who had been convicted of war crimes : —
Sentences of death by shooting in respect of Takao Ojima and Motoi Takina were both com- muted to five years’ imprisonment.
Takao Ojima was moved from Labuan to Morotai shortly after his conviction in December. 1945, and was transferred to Rabaul, where he is serving his sentence, on 22nd April, 1946.
Those war criminals who were sentenced to death and whose sentences were confirmed have been executed and the remainder have served or are serving their sentences of imprisonment in the War Criminals Compound at Rabaul.
After a long and chequered history the Kuching Fishing Industry Association has ceased to exist and an organisation known as The Kuching Fishing Kotak Association has been formed.
The First Christian Dayak wedding to be solemnised in Singapore took place early in July. The bridegroom, Mr. Leonard Charles, is Senior Dayak Collector to the Raffles Museum; his bride was previously a teacher at St. Marv's School. Kuching.
Two Malays, aged eighteen and twenty-two respectively, were each sentenced to three months rigorous imprisonment in Kuching for having used forged documents to support applications for employment. The Magistrate recalled a similar case last year when a public warning regarding the seriousness of the offence had been made.
Air Marshal Sir Hugh Lloyd. Commander-in- Chief, Air Command Far East, paid a short visit to Kuching on the 8th July.
Ingenuity in crime finds expression in many ways, simple and devious. On Saturday, 5th July, a young Chinese rode up to a small shop at Simpang Tiga, Kuching, and, producing a card, explained that he was a Supply Office Inspector detailed to search for stolen cigarettes. He collected several cartons of cigarettes and then, cupidity outstriding caution, he asked for any money in the premises, so that he might hand it over to the Police.
Completely unsuspecting, the shop-keeper handed the cash over but. on second thoughts, elected to accompany his wealth wherever it might go. The young man. clearly perturbed at having a shop-keeper amongst his loot, made off as quickly as he could.
Rajah of Sarawak Fund.
The Trustees of the Rajah of Sarawak Fund announce that the address of the Fund is now :—
Sanctuary Building, 18. Great Smith Street.
London, S.W. 1.
Correspondence should be addressed to the Secretary to the Trustees.
On 15th January. 1945, a U.S. Navy plant- crash-landed in the area of Sungei Limbang. Sarawak. One of the crew was killed, and certain natives assisted in the burial of the body. The
same and other natives assisted the nine survivors to escape from the Japanese to places of safety in Dutch Borneo. Five of the evaders escaped com- pletely, but four were lost.
A British Mission in 1947, headed by Major R. K. Dyce and assisted by the Honourable the Resident, Fifth Division, investigated the case thoroughly. The report of the mission was forwarded to the appropriate authorities of the United States Forces, and the Secretary of the Navy, following the recommendations of the report, cited some seventy-one natives for additional rewards.
On the 21st July, the United States Naval Liaison Officer, Lieutenant Commander S. L. Smith presented the American awards to the beneficiaries.
The Institute of Colonial Studies at Oxford has recently produced a series of reading lists on various aspects of Colonial affairs. Those of interest to Colonies outside Africa are 'Colonial Adminis- tration,' ‘Colonial Economics’ (Application for these should be made to the Institute of Colonial Studies, Oxford), 'Reading List on Rural Con- ditions and Betterment in the British Colonies' and ‘Colonial Law' (obtainable from Oxford University Press).
A correspondent forwards a letter from a one- time resident in Sarawak now living in U.S.A. It is thought that the extract which follows may be of interest.
"I am kicking myself for leaving Sarawak. Apart from the weather things are not my way of life. I cannot get accustomed to crowds and rush. Everyone in a hurry and don't know where they are headed for. Where in hell they get the money to keep up with the high cost of living is a mystery to me and yet all cry poverty. When pay day comes rolling around they shirt their allotment. The names of those they owe are put into hat and drawn out. If a blank is drawn it’s a payment due omitted. But the strange part of it is, it makes no difference which bit of piper is taken out of the hat, it’s a blank anyway. Putting down the names of those they owe is the part of the game to omit. So there you are. If you haven’t got a car. you are indeed considered a flop. Must have a car and good clothes or you don't fit. If you earn $1,000 a year, you pay the Government 60% for income tax. How it will all end is the unknown. But if a depression takes place, the panic of 1930 will not be in it. A house will cost to-day $20,000; the same house sold in 1938 for $3,000. They call it progress. It sure is, but for how long?
In the City you can’t keep a hen, too much noise. Therefore if you wish to keep hens, you must go into the country to live and start a chicken farm. A dead chicken costs $4—I haven’t got the least idea what a live one would cost. One pound of steak meat will cost you two bucks and it can’t be eaten with store teeth. If you haven’t got your own teeth, better to order hash which is horse meat put through a mincing machine. Fish costs as much as meat, so where are you. I don’t know what the conditions are in Sarawak, but I do hope they are better than they are here.”
The Sarawak Gazette for ‘‘Fifty Years Ago” is missing and again we publish extracts from a Kapit diary of 1885 in its stead.
His Excellency the Governor’s Tour to Saribas and Kalaka Districts.
His Excellency the Governor, accompanied by the Director of Education and the Private Secret- ary, left Euching on 12th July in m.l. “La Follette.’’ At the mouth of the Batang Saribas the Resident, Second Division, joined the party, which reached Pusa, where the District Officer, Kalaka District was waiting, in time for a walk round this decrepit and depressing station before night mercifully hid its mud from view.
After a night spent on board the “La Follette” anchored in mid-stream, the party proceeded to Spaoh on the morning tide. After His Excellency had been greeted on landing by local notables, the National Anthem was sung by school children. Following a talk in the Kubu with the Tua Kam- pong and Kapitan China, His Excellency inspected the new bazaar and took refreshments in the Chinese School.
In the afternoon His Excellency and party went by outboard to Rumah John at Plandok, Ulu Paku. On arrival a salute of five guns was fired without mishap.
That evening, after a talk on the development of education and other matters in which the people showed keen interest, His Excellency was enter- tained by a concert given by the children of the local Dayak School. Before leaving next morning the school was inspected, the seventy children being dressed in uniform, the boys as Sea Scouts and the girls in white.
Returning to Spaoh the party transferred to “La Follette,” and reached Betong shortly after mid- day.
On Thursday morning His Excellency opened the office of the Saribas Dayak Local Authority. After a speech in Dayak had been read on behalf of the Penghulus, to which His Excellency replied, the National Anthem was sung by school children. His Excellency then cut a tape and declared the building open. Refreshments were served and the toasts of His Majesty the King, His Excellency, and the Resident honoured.
The remainder of the morning was taken up with an interesting discussion on the plans of the Local Authority.
After tea members of the Malay community- called upon His Excellency at the District Officer’s bungalow.
His Excellency and party were entertained to an excellent dinner and most convivial evening by the Penghulus in their newly opened building. In view of the vast throng of their followers it was perhaps fortunate that the building was formerly the jail, so it was possible to bar the doors, although several Dayaks slipped in as each course arrived.
The next morning was taken up by visits to the S.P.G. Mission School, Chinese School, Govern- ment Malay School, and the dispensary.
That evening His Excellency was the guest of the Chinese community at dinner in their school. A floor show was provided by the school children.
Leaving Betong on the mid-day tide on Saturday, the night was spent on “La Follette“ anchored a short distance above Kabong, and Saratok reached on Sunday morning.
On landing His Excellency proceeded to the Kubu for requests, followed by a discussion with Penghulus and Tua Kampongs on the formation of Local Authorities. His Excellency then walked through the bazaar and kampong, and inspected the dispensary and Government Malay School.
The day concluded with two concerts. The first, given by the Malay school children, took place out of doors near the Kubu, whilst the second, put on by the Chinese School, took place in the Cinema Hall. A vast crowd of spectators followed the party from the Malay concert to the Cinema, but many were unable to obtain admission as the hall was already well filled.
Next morning His Excellency attended two football matches played to celebrate the rehabilitat- ion of the football ground after being turned into a vegetable plot by the Japanese. Despite the unusual hour and the roughness of the pitch, play was keen.
After the football, His Excellency was entertained to refreshments at the Chinese School.
In the afternoon the party went by outboard to Rumah Sabang at Nanga Drau. On arrival a gun was fired, and school children were drawn up along the path to the house. At the door five pigs were laid out, in descending order of size commensurate with the relative importance of the members of the party, each of whom duly speared the appropriate pig.
The evening’s entertainment took the form of a concert by the children lasting for four hours, including an interval during which the party and visiting Penghulus were entertained to dinner. Since, however, the other inhabitants of the house and their guests did not settle down to a feast on the ruai until the early hours, the night was somewhat disturbed.
As an indication of the interest being shown in the formation of Local Treasuries, it might be mentioned that the Penghulus held an animated discussion amongst themselves on this matter at one o'clock in the morning.
The following morning the party embarked in perahus for a tuba fishing which, as on previous occasions when tuba fishing has been arranged for His Excellency's entertainment, was well attended by all except the fish. Only one large fish was caught and most perahus recorded only one or two very small specimens.
Reaching Saratok at mid-day the party trans- ferred to “La Follette" and sailed for Kabong. On arrival His Excellency was ferried ashore in a decorated boat. A salute of cannon was fired, and repeated by the enthusiatic gunner on numerous occasions during the visit.
After addressing the local notables in the Kubu, His Excellency inspected the station, then attended a most enjoyable curry dinner given by the Malay and Chinese communities at the club-house of the Perhimpunan Permuda Melayu, Kabong.
After spending the night on “La Follette." His Excellency left at dawn on Wednesday July 21st for Kuching.
Locusts: 1.
(Reprinted front the Monthly Economic Bulletin, March, 1948.)
As is well known locusts are closely related to the familiar grasshopper; in fact, Uvarov states that a locust is merely a kind of grasshopper that, at times, occurs in great and dense swarms. There are thousands of species of grasshoppers but fortunately only six or seven species have yet earned the name of locusts by their swarming habits.
The common migratory locust of South East Europe (Locusta miyratoria) is very variable in its appearance and such variation is closely connected with periodical swarming, and it is now established that all true locusts occur in two phases—the solitary and the swarming. The differences between the two phases are noted in the colourings of the hoppers (young), in the general appearance, in the physiology and in the behaviour of the locusts and the shape of the pronotum.
Hoppers of the solitary phase generally take their coloration from their environment; gregarious hoppers on the other hand are characterised by a bold coloration pattern of spots and stripes usually of black, yellow or orange and the pattern is stable for each species and does not change with a changing background. A gregarious adult, how- ever, on approaching sexual maturity undergoes striking colour changes becoming more or less brilliant yellow, while the solitary adult shows no such colour change on maturity.
In the solitary phase of the locusta migratoria the wing is relatively shorter and the femur relatively longer so that the ratio between the length of the forewing and the femur is always under two, whereas this relationship in the gre- garious phase always exceeds two. In the gre- garious phase of this locust the head is relatively wider and the size of the eye relatively larger than in the solitary phase: the male also is much smaller than the female in the gregarious phase, while in the solitary phase they are of similar size.
In the gregarious phase bands of hoppers are conspicuous by their activity, probably due to their greater body temperatures because of their fre- quently dark skins, compared with the sluggishness of hoppers of the solitary phase.
Marching gregarious hoppers usually move in the same general direction, probably due to their efforts to maintain their orientation in relation to the sun; the moving band of hoppers never loses cohesion unless the visibility of individuals is obstructed and the same habit applies to flying adults in the gregarious phase.
Cage breeding experiments have shown that phase variation can easily be induced during the life of a locust. Also reliable observations show that the initial concentration of solitary locusts depends mainly on :
(a)
their sensitiveness to small changes in temperature and humidity to which they respond by movements and
(b)
that favoured concentration areas may themselves contract as result of continued drought, the locusts thus becoming densely crowded.
Also in egg laying, the female usually selects a bare spot of soil and if there are few such spots those available tend to be used excessively and the egg masses (30-100 in a cluster) tend to be laid too closely together in the soil, and to hatch out together as groups which remain in contact as bands.
The present theory is that, "as a result of such fortuitous aggregation, the hoppers become habit- uated to the proximity of other hoppers and develop the tendency to keep together, or, at least, in sight of each other. The habit of gregariousness, is, therefore, an acquired one and it becomes stronger from the continued association of hoppers in groups. The life in groups inevitably results in a greater rate of activity, owing to mutual excitation, and the black pigmentation characteristic of the gregarious phase makes its appearance. After that, the presence of black pigment will increase the rate of absorption of radiant heat and will lead to intensified activity, resulting in a complete trans- formation of a solitary hopper into a gregarious one. This process can be slowed down, interrupted, or even reversed, by environmental conditions. The initial aggregation of solitary hoppers depends thus on the pattern of the environment and the whole process of gregarisation is a matter of interplay between the insect and the environment which, in wet tropical regions, is very variable. The know- ledge of phase transformation in the field makes it possible to formulate a general conception of outbreak areas' where the transformation of solit- ary into gregarious locusts can occur and the first swarms can be formed. It is not in favourable areas that conditions for gregarisation are found. In such areas life is precarious for solitary locusts because the extent for the favourable and unfavour- able patches fluctuates according to season and thus may result in crowding of locusts".
Thus in Borneo, locusts live in grass patches in clearings in the forest and could not survive but the natives burn the grass periodically and thus create conditions liable to lead to gregarisation. Locusts are often found in the deltas of rivers surrounded by semi-desert sandy areas as in North East China. In a good season there is abundant grass for the solitary locusts but in a very dry season, grass will be deficient and the locusts will become gregarious.
Such, in brief, is the story of the conditions that make it possible for a harmless grasshopper to be- come a devastating locust—one of man’s longest known enemies.
Modern knowledge shows that locust swarms do not arise simultaneously over the whole region ultimately invaded but in typical outbreak areas which are relatively few in number and restricted in size and the problem is to prevent the formation of the initial swarms in the outbreak areas. The first and obvious step is to ensure that each probable outbreak area is patrolled by observers trained to report any sudden increase of solitary locusts or concentrations of them into bands which should at once be destroyed to prevent swarming.
This policy of prevention has been effectively followed in Africa, the Middle East and India, by permanent preventive organisations.
Such prevention measures can only be effective if they are continuously and effectively applied. Further research and regular observations may even suggest some means of altering conditions in out- break areas so as to render them unfavourable for
the gregarisation of locusts. The relative extent of grassy and bare patches, for example, may be changed by irrigation or by drainage so that solit- ary locusts get no chance to become gregarious. Much patient investigation is needed to achieve this aim but research on phase variation in locusts had indicated clearly a possible final means of control of this ubiquitous pest.
In compiling the notes above, free use has been made of a recent article by B. P. Uvarov which was published in the "New Biology" No. 3, 1947 (Penguin Books Ltd).
(To be continued.)
Colonial Estimates.
The following is the text of a broadcast by the Right Honourable the Secretary of State for the Colonies on the subject of the annual debate in Parliament on the Colonial Estimates.
The annual debate on the Colonial estimates in the British Parliament has sometimes in the past been described by the newspapers as a dull affair which lew members attend, Yesterday however the benches were well filled and it is indicative of the wide interest in Colonial affairs that many mem- bers of Parliament who wished to speak were un- able to do so because time did not allow. But the discussion ranged over a wide field—the affairs of Malaya, British Guiana, Tanganyika, West Indies. Hong Kong, Seychelles, the African territories— far too vast a range for full treatment in the com- paratively short time of seven or eight hours that were available. The House was critical and anxious and that mood is inportant both to ministers and to the Colonial peoples themselves.
I need not tell you what were the main topics of debate. A great deal was said about Colonial Economic Development, about local government especially in Africa and about the measures in Mal- aya to eradicate violence and restore order. I do not want to discuss these themes now but I do want to emphasise how important parliamentary discuss- ion is and how vital it is that in a free democracy ministers should have their policies closely examin- ed and should be heckled in regard to their steward- ship during the previous year. A minister must take seriously the trend of opinion expressed in parliament.
Debates of this kind also bring out the importance of good public relations as a means of educating the Public of Britain about British responsibilities in Colonial affairs. The members of the House of Commons had in their hand a report setting out the activities of the Secretary of State and his office together with an account of the many im- portant developments in the Colonial territories during the year. I wish everyone listening to me could obtain a copy of this report. It makes heartening reading in its record of the great work going forward, the progressive policy being pursued and the widespread activities of the Colonial Office and Colonial Governments. There are other reports as well, such as the annual statement of the ad- ministration of the Colonial development and Wel- fare Acts. This shows incidently that over T51 million has been devoted to Colonial development since the Acts were introduced. There is also an account of the extensive research work which is
seeking a solution for the many difficult problems which baffle all workers in the field in their efforts to improve life in the conditions of tro- pical and sub-tropical territories. In the course of the year a great variety of White Papers are publish- ed on general aspects of public policy as well as on particular territories; and the annual reports of practically every Colony have now been published here in their brighter post-war form. If ignorance exists in the United Kingdom on Colonial policy it is not due to our failure to put out informative papers.
In looking at the past year I realise that Colonial Administration in many parts of the world had been carried on against the difficulties of adjustments from war with its acute economic and food troub- les. its trying social and political repercussions, its dislocations and uncertainties. They have been crowded years of effort to steady conditions, to rehabilitate and reconstruct, and to provide the life which people demand after a great war.
The past year has indeed been a remarkable one. We are not satified with all we have done and we have had our special troubles in countries like Malaya and Palestine. But during the year Ceylon has reached Dominion Status. Malta was granted internal responsibility. the West Indies have embarked on a scheme of closer association, the Malay States entered a new federation based on a strong local government and common citizenship of all those who have made it their home. The territories of Uganda, Tanganyika and Kenya joined in an inter-territorial organisation designed to further their essential economic needs and the mandate in Palestine was ended and the country moved towards independence although present conditions remain unhappy. In addition there have been other important constitutional changes and advances in local government in Africa and elsewhere.
But political changes important as they are need to be supported by economic and social changes. In no other year has so much been done for economic development. The overseas Food Cor- poration has been created and the Colonial Develop- ment Corporation brought into being. We are considering tremendous projects of development and we have done a great deal in marketing schemes and towards stabilising prices for Colonial products. Ten year plans of development have also been launched in most Colonies. All this has been done to fortify the Colonial economics, to provide the foundations for the standards of life which Colonial peoples demand and to bring wide benefits to Colonial farmers and producers besides giving to Britain some of the commodities which she so sorely needs.
In the past year too the steady work to improve social Standards has gone on. New community education work is being done; labour legislation has been extender; social welfare schemes have been started; the Field Unit on Nutrition in Gambia has been at work on an experiment which is full of possibilities for all Colonies; a medical panel of consultants has been set up to visit Africa and freshen and keep up to date the medical services there; big housing schemes and town planning projects are being carried through; and the Universities in West Africa, West Indies. Malaya, Hong Kong and East Africa have started or renewed their work.
All this is only a portion of our activities. It is done both for the Colonial peoples and in partnership with them.
Parliament was also told of the success of the African Governors’ Conference last year and the arrangements for an African conference of unofficial representatives from the Legislative Councils. I look forward to welcoming these leaders of the Colonial Peoples to London and to reviewing with them the many things that remain to be done and the way we should do them. The road ahead is clear before us; you in the Colonies and we here in Great Britain must join hands to maintain the spiritual values and the material strength of the great human civilisation of Western Europe on which depend the good life and free development of peace-loving and liberal peoples all over the world. We shall not fail you in this task and we are sure of the response which you will give us.
Cooperation,
In view of the awakening interest of the people of Sarawak in ‘Co-operation,’ the Sarawak Gazette publishes below a definition of co-operation, the principles behind the movement and certain advice to members of co-operative societies; the informat- ion has been supplied by the Registrar of Co- operative Societies. It should be pointed out that the Registrar has yet to visit Ceylon and Malaya in order to complete his studies of a movement which in course of time will, it is hoped, bring economic security to the many honest but poor people of this small country. Two Co-operative Officers are now undergoing a course of study in Malaya, but it will be realised that the organisation of a Co-operative Department takes time, and many more officers must be thoroughly trained before the movement can be effective. Would-be co-operators are therefore advised to lie patient for a little while longer. The Government is anxious that co-operation shall be introduced as soon as possible, but it is also determined that it shall be successful, and therefore requires that the Registrar and his staff shall be masters of this subject before new societies are organised.
One definition of “co-operation” is —
“Co-operation is a form of organisation wherein persons voluntarily associate together as human beings, on a basis of equality, for the promotion of the economic interests of themselves.”
Very briefly, the principles of “co-operation” may be said to be
“(1) Members join as human beings and not as capitalists, which involves an important feature, namely, distribution of surplus according to business done with the society and not to capital invested.
(2)
They meet on a basis of equality, which involves another important feature, namely, one man. one vote.
(3)
The act of association is voluntary.
(4)
They join to promote the economic interests or advantage of members, not of non-members.” Over one hundred years ago the Rochdale Pioneers gave the following advice to co-opera- tors :—
“1. Procure the authority and protection of the law by enrolment.
2. Let integrity, intelligence and ability be indispensable qualifications in the choice of officers and managers and not wealth or dis- tinction.
3. Let each member have one vote, and make
no distinction as regard the amount of wealth any
contribute.
4. Let majorities rule in all matters of
government.
5. Look well after the money matters.
Punish fraud when duly established by the
immediate expulsion of the defrauder.
6. Buy your goods as much as possible in the
first markets; or, if you have the produce of your
industry to sell, contrive, if possible, to sell it
in the last.
7. Never depart from the principle of buying
and selling for Ready Money.
8. For the sake of security always have the
accounted value or the "fixed stock" at least onefourth
less than its marketable value.
9. Let members take care that the accounts
are properly audited by men of their own choosing.
10. Let committees of management always
have the authority of members before taking any
important or expensive step.
11. Do not court opposition or publicity, nor
fear it when it comes.
12. Choose those only for your leaders whom
you can trust, and then give them your confidence."
This advice came from a small band of honest
men in a tiny store in Toad Lane, Rochdale,
England, a century ago. It has stood the test of
time and is as good to-day as it was then. To it
may be added the following :—
"See to it that your society is not used for
political purposes, and abhor all sectarian or
religious bias.”
Obituary.
With deep regret we report the death of the
Honourable Mr. J. B. Archer, C.M.G., M.S.S.,
known for many years to readers of the Sarawak
Gazette by his pen name of the "Optimistic
Fiddler."
Born in 1893, Mr. Archer entered the Sarawak
Civil Service at the age of nineteen and spent the
first eight years of his service, apart from a brief
interlude at Sadong, in the Third Division,
mainly in the Coastal District. It was during
these years that he learnt the Melanau language
and formed the strong affection for this people
which was so noticeable in his later writings. His
interest in the Sarawak Gazette, which he retained
until the end of his life, dates from 1922 when he
was Editor of the Gazettes and Manager of the
Printing Office in addition to his other duties.
In 1939 he was appointed Chief Secretary and
on several occasions before his retirement in 1911
lie became Officer Administering the Government.
From the time of his retirement until the occupation
of Sarawak by the Japanese Forces, he was
fully occupied in defence duties as Information
Officer and Special Policeman and later, with his
colleagues, underwent the hardships and rigours of
over three and a half years in the Japanese Internment
Camp at Batu Lintang.
A close associate during these drab years described
him as having taken over a new lease of life
and. on the re-occupation, it is not surprising to
find that although his health was seriously
impaired, he immediately devoted his energies to
the rehabilitation of Sarawak. In succession he
became Political Adviser to the British Military
Administration, Acting Chief Secretary and Officer
Administering the Government.
On the occasion of his second retirement from
public office he replied to an Address of Appreciation
from the Supreme Council :—
"You all know, I think, how sad I feel at
leaving a Service- of which I was proud to be a
member fur so long. I was the last European
active member of His Highness the late Rajah's
staff, and I served His present Highness throughout
the whole of his reign..................
It may be considered trite, but I can truthfully
say that it has been a labour of love, and I am
glad to have gained the good opinion of my late
fellow councillors.
There comes a time when it is desirable both
for the good of the State and for the good of the
individual that Senior Officers should retire.
The time has come for me to do so. I leave you
with gratitude in my heart for your kindly
thoughts and your good wishes."
John Beville Archer will long be remembered by
the communities of Sarawak as a good friend and
as a trusted servant of the country which he had
served faithfully and well.
. . . . . . 1912 .
17 1948 .
. ] .
, , , Outstations.
Last month 1 wrote how outstation officers sailed
up and down the coast, and 1 believe that 1 almost
became lyrical about it. There is, however, something
about sailing, something tranquil and peaceful,
which even the most up-to-date motor launch
can never give you.
That time just before dawn—the false dawn—
when the south wind dies away and is replaced by
the fresh sea breeze. Gradually the light conies
and the sea, so lately indigo, becomes translucent
with the first rays of the rising sun. The sleeping
crew wake and instinctively turn their heads
towards the East. The sails billow in the freshening
breeze and little waves lap alongside.
To be quite frank, the Government sailing fleet
on the coast stations was not much to boast about.
Some time in the past somebody or other got the
idea of building a boat on the lines of the batting
or panait boat. but decking her over and building
a sort of cabin just abaft amidships. Th s type
of craft had remained the flagship, as it were, of
each station. 1 do not think it was a good idea at
all. Binlt partly on purely native and partly on
European lines they had the disadvantages of both
and none of the advantages. It is true the so-called
cabin (it was not really a cabin. Merely an open
ended canopy of kajangs on a wooden framework)
did give some shelter in a rainstorm, but
that and the heavy deck robbed the craft of the
bouyancy of the Melanau panau boats. Their
rig was much the same except that the Government
barongs used to hoist a jig in addition to the
two higs. In fact, however, the jib was a nuisance,
and if it was carried under the idea that one could
sail nearer to the wind someone must have been
very dense as it did nothing of the sort. Being
flat-bottomed there was a lot of leeway and on most
voyages there was a lot of rowing with remarkably
clumsy oars, five a side.
Like the orthodox panau boats, however, the
old Government barongs did sail like billy-ho
with a soldier’s wind, which is, as you know, a
wind right astern. Then you all lay on the deck,
smoked cigarettes and let her go, the only people
sitting up and taking notice being the two steersmen
manipulating the extraordinary twin rudders.
If one was in a real hurry one took the Government
bandong. These craft were built almost
exactly on the lines of the fishing bandongs and
were beautiful vessels. There was not much comfort.
but they did go. and one hung over the weather
side to counteract the enormous spread of the lug
they carried. These bandongs too, we used for
pukat and anchau fishing. This is a most
enjoyable pastime, particularly pukat and I have
spent many an exciting morning with my crew of
policemen and (I suppose I must say it) prisoners.
We caught all sorts of fish—and one had to be
careful of the poisonous ones. If any of my readers
have been stung by a pari they will know
what I mean. All came into the net, including
those comic little fish which blow up like a balloon
when you stroke their stomachs.
A queer looking craft was the Government tuko
at Mukah. I never did find out where she came
from as she was the only vessel of her kind on the
coast. She was smaller than the barong and of
much lighter build. She sailed well and could get
within a reasonable number of points of the wind,
hut she had the most horrible feeling of insecurity
in a stiff breeze. She did not suit queasy people
at all. Luckily I have never suffered from that
disability at sea.
Twice I was wrecked, once in the Government
barong and once in a panau boat.
On the first occasion at three in the morning a
squall struck us. The crew on deck, including the
look-out, were asleep and the two steermen were
nodding over their tillers. The sheets had been
made fast, the course set and the south wind had
been blowing gently. I, too, was asleep, when I
was awakened by the most awful din. The crew
were yelling and everbody giving orders. Our lee
gunwhale was then awash and we turned over the
next moment. Bits of wreckage, a grating, oars
and part of the cabin roof floated and we made for
these. I am a poor swimmer and get asthmatical
in the water, but I hastened to propel my oar in
the direction of the beach, some half mile away—
I could not get the image of sharks out of my mind !
There was no loss of life and we all waded ashore
after an hour or so in the water. The barong,
oddly enough, was salved some days later.
The second occasion was rather dramatic. I had
sailed over to Balingian to settle some jelutong road
cases and whilst there the North East monsoon
suddenly came down in earnest. When I got down
to the Kuala on my way home the bar was just
one seething mass of foam and the whole fishing
fleet had run in for shelter. I stayed in the Tua
Kampong’s house for two days waiting for the gale
to blow itself out, but all it did was to blow harder.
Now the date was the 21st December and I had
planned to spend Christmas in Sibu. The old Tua
Kampong gave me no hope, and apart from my
desire to get away the sandflies were so bad that
for the two nights I had slept under a canvas sail
amidst the odour of decaying fish, decomposed
prawns and raw sago.
On the morning of the 22nd I set out to walk the forty miles to Mukah. If you look at the map you will see that the coast is perfectly straight; not a bay, not a cove, not a cliff and not a rock. By evening I was two thirds of my way; not bad going for that shadeless, endless road. I slept in a fish- ing langkau and ate with the fisherman and his his wife as I had no food of my own. The next morning I was off again and reached Mukah before noon.
On the morning of the 23rd, we tried to get over Mukah bar in a fishing barong with a picked crew. Our intention was to make either Oya or Igan, whichever looked the least dangerous.
As we approached Mukah bar the roar of the breakers drowned all other noise. Looking astern I saw crowds lined up near Kuala Lama and out- side Fort Burdett watching our progress.
The crew strained at the oars and we met the first roller with a bang which drenched us from bow to stern. The next une half-filled the boat and the bottom-boards and tackle were awash. Now they came, one after another, covering us with spray and half-drowning two women who were crouching underneath our feet. Half-way over the bar we were waterlogged. The rowers were up to their knees in water and despite the threats and entreaties of the two steersmen, perched precariously on the gyrating stern, ail rowing had ceased. One roller forced us broadside on to the bar, the next sank us. Luckily all the dozens of odds and ends of a panau boat’s gear float and we clung to this flotsam and jettison.
We all struck out for the beach and the rollers rolled us in. I landed stark naked, a most un- fortunate occurrence as the place on the sands where I came ashore was where a bevy of Melanau girls were looking for lukar. One of them, saucy girl, tossed me her head kain, a gracious and decent gesture, but I am afraid the giggling that was going on made even my wretched naked body blush all over.
Once more I set off along the beach for Oya that evening, and by express paddlers to Dalat, a nightmare passage through the “kut” at dead low water and a lucky lift in a commercial launch up the long Igan River to Sibu, I arrived triumphantly at Sibu just after dinner on Christmas Eve.
Our river craft were generally the build known as osmoi, and were of all sizes. Fourteen men boats, eight men boats, kajang s'krat paddled by four men and diminutive bedar with two men.
There was much competition amongst outstations to possess the handiest, the fastest and the most comfortable craft. The acme was reached, thought one District Officer, when he fitted little shelves to hold glasses of different sizes, places for round bottles and square bottles (square-faced gin) and hooks on which to hang the corkscrew and the old- fashioned push-bottle opener.
His opposite number not to be outdone fitted his boat with plate-rack and miniature meat safe. Then the race began and only ended when the boats became so cluttered up with gear that the paddlers could’nt move them and the District Officer had nowhere to sit at all.
When one got to the far upper reaches of the rivers, of course, all this glory was useless, and one transferred to small Dayak craft paddled, poled and
dragged up the streams, and over rocks and gravel- beds. Here one squatted amidships and put up with discomfort and heat.
It was amazing however, how soon one forgot one’s discomfort in the beauty and charm of the countryside. Gone were the long reaches of the great sluggish rivers, with their mud-banks and endless thick vegetation right down to the water's edge. Here was movement and light and alive- ness. The water foamed and bubbled and one ate one's meals on sparkling gravel-beds.
Hour after hour slim-legged Dayaks poled one along. One felt ashamed to be trying to read a Greek Testament in front of such vigour and energy.
Once I had a jewel of a captain, or whatever you call the bend of the crew. He was a middle- aged Haji, slim, alert and witty. Never have I seen a man so successful with the ladies. Every evening, when we had decided to stop at the long- house for the night this Haji would gather the girls round him. By hook or crook, or by means which were unperceivable to me, he always got the best supper, the choicest tit-bits and, as I ruefully knew, all sorts of favours later. Many times have I heard him “telling the tale” to a bevy of indu dara, with eyes goggling out of their heads.
As an ambassador, a Government agent, or what- ever you call it, he was superb.
I wonder who “Tuan Djek” of the Straits Times is. When the Papers come, most spasmodically, I look first for his fascinating page. As a poor imitator I lift my glass to you “salamat, panjang umor, Tuan Djek!”
O.F.
The End.
The Water Party.
For some time the Kuching Rotary Club had been considering social welfare projects of various sorts. The idea of an excursion down river for small boys was mooted, but at first it met with many object- ions. What if some are drowned, or eaten by sharks, or otherwise lost? Would parents be pre- pared to commit their offspring to strangers? What of the countless other hazards involved? How- ever, it was finally decided to organise an experi- mental trip, and so plans were laid for the Water Party for Indigent Urchins. The house of Wee Kheng Chiang generously placed the m.v. “Kim Chin Soon” at the disposal of the Club for the pur- pose on Sunday 6th June.
It was decided to take forty urchins, divided in the proportion of twenty Chinese, fifteen Malays, and five Tamils or others, all to be selected from families of reduced circumstances. There was no difficulty in filling the quota of Malays and Tamils, but Chinese parents evinced the gravest mis- givings. and only with difficulty could nine urchins be mustered, even for these the parents demand- ed receipts. It would seem that the club was suspected of a design to trepan the infants and dispose of them overseas for the benefit of its funds. At the last moment therefore it was decided to invite the Bad Boys from the home at Sungei Priok, and this proved a most happy expedient, for not only were they models of good behaviour, but they proved to be the life and soul of the party.
The beginnings were sombre enough. Unhappy urchins were handed over by weeping parents, they were duly labelled, ticketed, registered, and then put on board where they sat in apprehensive huddles awaiting the worst. Ever anon the jura- gan, who was in a festive mood, blew his siren, but this had as cheering an effect as a blast of the last trump. Altogether one felt that, appearances not- withstanding, the vessel was really bound for Devil’s Island. The pall of gloom began to lift with the arrival of the Bad Boys, who turned up with a football and showed every intention of enjoying themselves; once they were on board the juragan tootled his swan song and the vessel cast off.
The public address unit bad been installed and diverse well-wishers had loaned records, both Malay, Chinese and English, so the vessel moved down river to the strains of music varied by occasional vocal and instrumental items rendered by members of the party. The high spirits of the Bad Boys soon proved infectious and the urchins started to play games. Several balls had been brought and it was a good sign that one had gone overboard before Lintang was reached. Two sets of boxing gloves had also been brought and these proved immensely popular throughout the voyage. The vigour with which the urchins set about one another was at times positively alarming, hut no damage was done nor was any ill-will caused.
As a measure of security the District Com- missioner, two scoutmasters and several scouts, all stout swimmers, had been invited to join the expedition. There was always the possibility that one or more urchins in the heat of play might fall overboard, and to obviate the need of not over- athletic Rotarians having to plunge into the water at short notice, it was thought well to have several professional life-savers with the party. As it hap- pened none of the urchins met with mischance, but though the scouts had no occasion, to show their skill they proved invaluable in looking after the youngsters and organizing their sports, so that the more sedentary Rotarians were able to retire to the quiet of the bridge. Others, however, plied the urchins with sweets and biscuits, or restrained over- vigorous pugilists.
As Santubong was approached the urchins were victualled with curry. This proved somewhat hot and many of the Chinese ones were compelled to quench the burning with large quantities of water. However, all ate vigorously and seemed much fortified by their refection, for the din on board was redoubled. However, a hush descended as the vessel put out to sea. The day was one of perfect calm and only a gentle swell was experienced as the bar was crossed, but this was sufficient to quell the urchins, and silence descended; only one was actually sick, but all were momentarily subdued. Few if any had ever beheld the sea and the more observant marvelled at such an expanse of water, but its very vastness gave rise to some misgivings, so that it was thought well to point out Satang Island as the goal of the voyage. This was perhaps ill-advised, for the exigencies of navigation compel mariners using the Santubong entrance to follow a devious route, and hardly had the island been pointed out than the vessel altered course and headed for the void of the open sea. This awakened the worst misgivings amongst the urchins and it was only gradually as the island was neared that confidence was restored.
*Footnote:
Some have objected that the word urchin implys a certain opprobrium. The word is here used in the non-derogatory sense.
The vessel cast anchor some distance off shore. The Hon. Secretary produced as from a hat his outboard motor and this was attached to the ship’s jolly boat, which ferried the urchins ashore in no time. Once ashore they commenced to disport themselves with the most riotous abandon. Some could swim, but all could splash about; they divided the time betwen the water and the beach, where they played football and other games. The more athletic Rotarians swam some little distance off shore and formed a cordon to restrain the adventur- ous. The more portly Rotarians remained in the shallows and with these the urchins sported like minnows amongst whales.
After some two hours of revels the urchins’ energies began to show signs of flagging and the time was judged ripe for ferrying them back to the vessel. Panic was loosed when it was found that there were three short of the tally. This con- tingency had been the subject of long debate previously, but no satisfactory means had been found for replacing mislaid urchins. The crisis was resolved, however, when it was discovered that three had previously gone on board with the ship's company.
Anchor was weighed about 2 p.m. and the vessel moved off towards Santubong. A wondrous calm had descended upon the urchins as most slept roundly from exhaustion. Some of the Rotarians disappeared into the more secret parts of the ship and presumably went to sleep also, even those who maintained watch and ward on deck were observed to nod; by comparison with the earlier part of the voyage the “Kim Chin Soon’’ moved through the water with the silence of a phantom ship.
On passing Santubong tea was served and the urchins came to life with vigour, thereafter the gaiety of fun and games continued to the end of the trip. As the sun went down most migrated from the deck to the roof of the vessel to enjoy the music which was heard to the best advantage at this time. At the approaches of Kuching a dis- tribution of turtles eggs took place. These had been freshly gathered at Satang and each urchin received a dozen or so to take home.
It was 7 p.m. and darkness had fallen by the time that the "Kim Chin Soon" was secured and the urchins restored to anxious parents. The Bad Boys regretted the end of the trip; they voted it a success and volunteered to go on the next or any subsequent expedition. No doubt they will be gratified, for much of the day’s success was due to them. So ended the water party ; what had been regarded as a dutious experiment proved a succesful venture and, it is hoped, the first of a series of efforts to make life brighter for the less fortunate youngsters of Kuching—(Contributed).
News from Far and Near.
FIRST DIVISION.
The District Officer, Kuching, (Mr. Outran)) re rts that a case was opened on the 29th June against one Chan Kim Leong who was charged with having in his jiossession some 501,600 boxes of matches, being uncustomed goods. The case was adjourned for two weeks and bail granted in two sureties of $50,000 each.
There were several prosecutions for overloading sea-going motor vessels.
In his monthly report, the District Officer, Kuching, comments upon the work done by the Travelling Dispensary and adds : “Another greatly appreciated medical service is rendered by the Dresser who pays weekly visits to the 15th and 24 1/2 Mile Bazaars, Simanggang Road every Satur- day. The average number of patients treated weekly on this one day trip is about two hundred.
Dresser Haji Su'ut accompanied the District Officer on a trip up the Left Hand Branch (Sungei Sarawak) to Senah Negri. During these five days he treated 699 patients and in addition dispensed large amounts of medicine to the various Tua Kampongs for use in those villages which were not visited. “Haji" is regarded as an old friend in the Left Hand Branch now and his ministrations are welcomed by all as also is the excellent advice which he gives.
The District Officer, Kuching, reports that the contractor to the Police Canteen had been prosecuted and convicted for selling sugar above the controlled price to a policeman in the Central Police Station canteen. The District Officer adds : “Not only a crime but an insult to boot.”
We understand that a new contractor is now servicing the canteen.
The District Officer, Kuching, conducted an inquiry into the Padungan football field incident on the 4th, 5th, 7th and 8th June. Thirty-two witnesses were heard and a mass of conflicting evidence produced. A report was subsequently submitted to His Excellency the Governor.
An extract from the report appears elsewhere in this issue.
The District Officer. Bau, (Mr. Lloyd Thomas) reports that a male Chinese named Chiew Fah, aged sixty years, was reported missing on the 2nd of June whilst bathing in the river near the Siniawan Bazaar. His corpse was found floating naked near the bank of the river in the vicinity of the Siniawan Chinese Cemetery, some distance away from where the deceased was bathing. Examination revealed no noticeable signs of injury.
The following is an extract from the report of the District Officer, Bau : “Most Dayak Kam- pongs were holding makan tahun during the month. Some Dayaks from Kampongs near Siniawan came in to apply for registration for rice rations as they said they had finished their own rice—except what they were keeping for purposes of bagawai. Arrangements have been made to issue requisitions on the dealers selected by these Dayaks, but the dealers have not yet drawn the rations and the Dayaks are unwilling to buy direct from Govern- ment owing to the fact that they wish to pay in rubber.''
The District Officer, Bau, reports that the production of gold by four of the gold mining com panies operating in Bau was 55.2105 ounces during the month of May. The District Officer adds : "A few cases of illegal mining of gold by treating ore in drums were again detected during the month. Such cases are likely to recur while so many mines (including some that are in operation) fail to take measures to assist in safeguarding their own property.
Arising out of the meeting held at Bau in April last whereat the Honourable the Financial Secretary, the Director of Lands and Surveys
and the District Officer discussed mining affairs with representatives of the local mining interests, it was announced that the Supreme Council had resolved upon the adoption of certain measures (e.g. a remission of rent to mines making genuine efforts to recommence operations within these two years and the continuance of the remission of the Royalty on gold won) in an endeavour to assist the rehabilitation of the mining industry.”
The District Officer, Bau, reports that towards the end of June several cases of mumps were noticed among the school-children of the Chung Hun School, Bau. Precautions were taken against the spreading of this disease.
A party of about thirty students from Batu Lintang Training School were taken on a brief visit to the Tai Ton Gold Mine to inspect the various processes undertaken there.
The District Officer, Serian, (Mr. Roberts) reports that some Dayaks planted catch crops after the padi harvest with fair success.
SECOND DIVISION.
The Honourable the Resident, Second Division, (Mr. Ditmas) writes that before the opening of the Agricultural Show, a parade was held al Fort Alice when the Birthday honours were read out and one gun was fired. A satai and curry puff lunch was afterwards held at the Simanggang Recreation Club.
The District Officer. Simanggang, (Mr. Bruen) reports that on the 12th of June a Chinese gardener living in Klasen, Undup, was murdered and his wife was severely cut about. Two Undup Dayaks, one a mere youth, were later taken into custody.
It is reported that the Undup Dayaks have been informed of the present market for lemon and citronella grass and cotton: one house is said to be growing one quarter of an acre of lemon grass.
At the Agricultural Show held on the 10th June there were not many exhibits of an agricultural nature but the handicraft section maintained its usual high standard.
One would-be exhibitor was thwarted in his ambition to show some fine tomatoes; his pet maias planned and executed a well-timed raid and enjoyed the fruits of the other’s labour.
Sea Scout students from Batu Lintang Training School visited the Second Division during June and ail stations comment upon the impressive smartness of their turn-out.
On the 11th of June an organised tuba fishing took place in the Batang Lupar between Nanga Skrang and Simanggang Bazaar. The total catch was very disappointing. The only catch worthy of record was a saw-nosed shark (Yu parang) which was taught in the Salimbau near Kampong Hilir, Simanggang. This is the first recorded case of a shark being caught in this locality.
The following is an extract from the monthly report of the Native Officer-in-Charge, Kalaka (Datu Abang Abu Talip) : “Meetings of the Kabong Malay school committee to raise funds yielded only an agreement that Government should provide the money needed.
PUSTAKA NEGERI SARAWAK
This contrasts sadly with the general agreement on paper that school attendance should be com- pulsory and English taught, and is most discourag- ing for the teachers. The Saratok Malay school committee is more able, raising funds for school prizes last year and intending to do so again this year.”
The Native Officer-in-Charge, Kalaka, reports that the export of sago flour in June was nearly eight times that of the corresponding month in 1947. He suggests that the reason for this is that the seasonal halt in padi farming and the fading away of the jelutong market leaves fishing as the only alternative to working sago.
On the 29th June, a travelling cinema gave what is reputed to be the first talking show to be held in Kabong. The performance was held in the open air and the Native Officer-in-Charge com- ments that it drew a large audience most of whom viewed the show free of charge from without the enclosure.
THIRD DIVISION.
The Honourable the Resident, Third Division, (Mr. Barcroft) comments upon a growing sense of irritation amongst the more enlightened and res- ponsible members of the Malay communities at the irresponsible actions of a few anti-cession agitators.
The following is extracted from the monthly report of the District Officer, Sibu, (Mr. Dilks) : “On the 26th (May) Police and Customs Officers carried out a search of the s.s. “Empire Palace.” The search brought to light contraband chandu to a total value of $3,529.90. Some of the chandu was found in sealed cigarette packets and some in sealed packets of match boxes. Four members of the ship’s crew have been charged with offences under the Opium Ordinance.”
Police Stations at Belawai and Rejang were dosed down during the month. These villages will have their peace preserved by Village Constables in future.
The following is an extract from the report of the District Officer, Lower Rejang, (Mr. Snelus) : “The detailed results of the Paloh/Daro/Bruit/Tan- jong Sirik area harvest are now to hand and disclose the following splendid figures: Acreage—4,364 acres; yield—59,708 piculs. This compares with 3,130 acres yielding 37,102 piculs in 1947. It is clear that there must be some magnificent padi land in that region. They are early birds there and padi nurseries for the coming season had, in the majority of cases, already been sown by the middle of the month.
The cultivation of pepper has recently shewn welcome signs of being on the up grade in Sarikei. The good price still ruling is persuading more and more of the old Chinese pepper planters to have another go at it; some are replanting old pepper gardens, and one Chinese along the Repok Road now has 3,000 vines in the ground again."
The District Officer, Kanowit, (Mr. Drake) reports that the Rural Improvement School, under Mr. Bewsher. started work during the month. After a very poor response from the local people,
as soon as students from other districts started to arrive, a good many applicants from Kanowit came in. Apart from two or three places promised to people who have not yet arrived, the school is now up to strength, but it is too early to make any report on progress.
The District Officer, Mukah, (Mr. Morris) re- ports that three deaths occurred at Rumah Chang- an, Ulu Balingian as a result of an outbreak of dysentery.
The following is an extract from the monthly re- port of the District Officer, Mukah : “The Melanau section of the community were most assiduously working sago during the month. In the Oya River little hand rasping is being done, most growers having their logs mechanically rasped for them at 30 cents per krat the whole family concentrating on the washing. In the Mukah area, however, individual hand rasping is still popular. A number of the larger growers are installing engine driven mills for their own exclusive use and some of the other smaller gardeners are forming small syndic- ates to purchase engines to replace hand paruts. One enterprising gentleman has rigged up a most ingenious contrivance driven by a belt from the back wheel of a bicycle, though I have not seen the apparatus personally I understand that it works quite well and has more than trebled his daily out- put.
The monthly meeting of Tua Kampongs was held on 31st, the main subject of discussion being Co-operative Societies; there seems to be some con- fusion as to the difference between a limited liability company with Melanau capital and a co-operative society, however I think the difference has now been made clear."
The District Officer, Mukah, commenting upon fishing activities in his area, reports that there has been an increase in the number of vessels engaged and the price of fish averaged about seventy cents per kati.
At the end of May four four-engined aircraft flew over the Coastal District and the District Officer received a number of enquiries as to whether there was another war in progress.
It is reported that a Melanau from Kampong Oya, engaged in moving sago logs, was bitten on the leg by a small shark.
The Assistant District Officer, Kapit, (Mr. Rennick) reports that a boat capsized in the rapids at Kapit and one person was drowned as a result. An enquiry has been ordered.
FOURTH DIVISION.
The District Officer, Miri, (Mr. Lascelles) reports an increase in the number of cases of malaria at Lutong. He comments that some difficulty is still encountered in persuading people not to keep their weekly ration of paludrine until they actually get malaria.
In commenting on the tour which His Excellency the Governor made of the coastal districts of the Fourth Division during April, the District Officer. Miri, writes: "It is worthy of note that no one at Sibuti and Kululit could remember a visit by
His Highness the Rajah, and both at Niah and Sibuti it appeared as if almost every able-bodied person on the river, from Kuala to Ulu, made a point of gathering for the occasion of His Excellen- cy’s visit.”
The following is extracted from the monthly report of the District Officer, Miri : “On the 25th a Chinese boy aged twelve, was taken by a crocodile at Batu (while standing on the bank of the river preparatory to bathing). Half the body was recovered next day, on a grass hank at the water's edge.
A thirteen foot crocodile has since been caught but, on being opened up. was found to contain no human bones so the hunt goes on. The Batu Chinese have engaged a local expert at $3 per day.”
The following is an extract from the report of the District Officer, Baram, (Mr. Morgan) : “On the last day of the month all upriver penghulus were gathered at the Kubu Marudi in preparation for the District Advisory Council meeting on the 1st May and the Regatta which is to be held on the 8th and 9th of May. In addition over two thousand upriver peoples were in the station for these events and it is estimated that by the 8th the total will propably be in the region of four thousand.”
During the month an auction sale of edible birds' nests was held at Long Lama. The prices varied from $22 to $33 per kati.
The following is an extract from the monthly report of the District Officer, Baram : “Penghulu Tama Kalang Lawai m.B.e. of Long Akah has shown keen interest in developing wet padi cultivat- ion on a large scale at his house at Long San. This interest is caused to some extent by the Penghulu's recent conversion to Christianity but it is principally due to his own breadth of outlook and progressiveness. Now that his people are no longer prevented by pantangs from looking after their crops the introduction of wet padi, with Government assistance and advice, is both desirable and practicable.
The site selected for the scheme is opposite the longhouse across river and about half a mile down stream. It is only a few hundred yards from the Kubu and bazaar. It is ground gradually sloping from the river to foothills a few miles away; a stream runs through it which could be dammed and used for irrigation. The site is in the administrat- ive centre of the sub-district and on the borders of Kayan and Kenyah countries. It is frequently visited by the Akah and Ulu Kelabits also Punans and is in every respect ideal.”
The District Officer, Bintulu, (Mr. Jacks) reports that a male maias which arrived at the end of the month for the District Officer caused considerable interest among the younger portion of the commun- ity, most of whom had never seen one before.
The following curious case is extracted from the monthly report for May of the District Officer. Miri, (Mr. Lascelles) : “On the 20th a police constable, Abang Kassim, while on duty outside the Government offices deserted his post at 11.30 p.m. and ambushed a party of police with their wives and children returning from the bangsawan. He is alleged to have fired three times at Sergeant Zaini,
missing each time, although it was broad moon- light, and he was only a few yards away at the time. He is alleged to have a grudge against Ser- geant Zaini for persuading his wife, Zaini s sister, to leave him. Abang Kassim gave himself up the next morning and is awaiting trial for attempted murder.”
At the end of May, the m.l. "Lee Lee” ran aground while crossing the bar at Miri. It was not considered that the vessel, which was lying in shallow water to the south of the channel, would be in any danger as long as the weather remained calm.
The following is an extract from the monthly report of the District Officer, Miri : “Following the engagement of a Malay by the Batu Chinese to try to catch the crocodile which took a Chinese boy in April, two more crocodiles, 13 1/2 feet and 11 feet, have been caught, but apparently they have been proved to be innocent.
A large biawak, 6 feet long, was shot by the police while crawling up the slope to the Kubu; it. was at first believed to be a crocodile.
Niah reports that a party of crocodile hunters is now operating at Niah and Suai with considerable success. The party is apparently hunting for the hides.”
A new sea line was launched at Lutong on the 24th May.
Over half of the Government telephones at Miri were out of action at the end of May as a result of an accident involving the electric power line and the telephone lines. The telephone switch board was badly damaged but danger of serious fire was averted by the prompt action of the Constabulary Corporal on duty.
The following is extracted from the monthly report of the District Officer, Baram, (Mr. Morgan) : “A very successful Regatta was held on the 8th and 9th May and upriver peoples to the number of about five thousand visited the station. Every penghulu with the exception of the Kelabit and Long Muh penghulus was present. Penans, Kayans, Kenyahs, Kelabits, Malays, Chinese and Europeans combined with real enthusiasm to make it a gala performance.
Nearly fifty Europeans visited the station for the week and were the cause of an unprecedented event in the annals of the district. This was an all European race for eight man canoes the winners being the Miri crew in their boat “Mirong”, the “Seria Soaks” gained second place and the “Naga Meluan” which was crewed by the Honour- able the Resident. Fourth Division, three Padres, one European lady, the Borneo Australian Timber Company’s agent and the District Officer, came a sorry third, all three boats capsized after complet- ing the course. Prizes consisting of trindaks and tongkats were donated by the Penghulus.
There were eleven events the most important being the unlimited race for the "Hudden Cup” which was won by the Batu Belah boat. This was an exceptionally fine boat which gained the hat trick by winning the three main events of the regatta and gained two hundred and sixty dollars in prizes.
The evening of the second day was occupied with native dances, every race giving two or three examples of its art. Kayan and Kenyah singing with appropriate drinks of borak opened and closed the proceedings.”
The District Officer, Bintulu, (Mr. Jacks) reports that Penghulu Ovat Mereng, who has been a penghulu for twenty one years, recently paid his first visit to Kuching. He was much impressed with what he saw but, as he found prices to be very high, his visit was only a short one.
On the 24th May a meeting was held at Tatau to elect a new penghulu to replace Penghulu Begok who had regrettably met with a fatal accident. The District Officer, Bintulu, reports that the elect- ion was not without humour. “No less than twelve names were submitted. The first man to receive the most votes was the late penghulus's son. But he refused to accept the post on the grounds that he was too dense. It was pointed out that be. through his close association with bis father, was a most eligible successor. However he con- tinued to plead that he was incapable of carrying out the necessary duties.
The next man to be elected, on being informed of the fact, burst into floods of tears, and also re- fused to accept the post. As one or two of the headmen had not arrived, and the figures for the remaining ten candidates were very close the meet- ing had to be adjourned. At the end of the month it was learnt that when final figures had been counted the successful candidate was prepared to act as penghulu.”
The District Officer, Bintulu, reports that a scheme for a series of lectures, given by various Government Departments, was instituted during the month.
Originally these lectures were intended for the top standard boys but the scheme was extended to any person interested.
The supply of electric current was scheduled to start in Bintulu on the 1st June.
FIFTH DIVISION.
The Honourable the Resident. Fifth Division, (Mr. Anderson) comments in his Max report that the ancient local practice of buffalo thieving, which has lain dormant for some years, seems to have been revived by the present heavy demand for buffalo meat. One local Malay was charged with breach of trust of two buffaloes which had possibly been smuggled over the border near Kampong Pandam. He was allowed bail in his own surety to enable him to find the buffaloes but it is strongly suspected that they have long since entered the cooking pot.
The Honourable the Resident adds that it is most urgent that the law regarding export of buffalo, especially females, be rigidly observed for some years until the herds have recovered from enemy depredations during the occupation.
The Honourable the Resident reports that some difficulty was experienced at the Limbang Agricul- tural Station from the homesickness of the Iban and Murut trainees; it is hoped to remedy this before long.
The following is an extract from the monthly report of the Cadet Officer, Limbang, (Mr. Harper) : “Considerable travelling was done during the month by the Hospital Assistant and the Dresser-in-Charge, mainly among the Bisayahs of the Lower Limbang and the Ibans of the Lubai. Over 450 patients were treated aud more than 440 vaccinations performed during travelling.”
The following is an extract from the report of the Cadet Officer, Limbang: "Large numbers of upriver natives have come down to Limbang this month, most of them clamouring for guns. Several parties of Kelabits from the Medit have turned up, and some few UNRRA great coats were handed to them. One small boy received a rather moth- eaten 'lapin-squirrel' fur with great delight. They all state that their health is good and please can they have some medicine.”
The Cadet Officer. Limbang, reports that local prices remain steadily higher than in Brunei and considerably higher than in Kuching. This is largely due to the high handling charges levied in Labuan.
The Death of the late Ex Kapitan China, Dalat, Chua Hoi Tiaw.
Let us publish with regret the death of the late ex-Kapitan China, Chua Hoi Tiaw of Dalat, who died at the age of 72 on the 6th July, 1948, at 3 a.m. in his own residence. His death was caused by a two-day illness which occurred on the night of the 3rd July, 1948. He lost his speech from the moment the sudden high fever attacked him and was throughout in a sleeping condition. He was suspected to be possessed by a devil and the Kev. Father Mak, who happened to be visit- ing Dalat, was sent for on the night of the 4th July to say prayers and to sprinkle Holy Water all over the place to drive the evil spirit away. He could not take any food during his short illness. Chinese and patent medicines in the form of injections did not give the desired effect. Native medicinal charms were applied without good result. On the 6th July, at 3 a.m. he breathed his last by giving up the ghost. All in the house were in deep sorrows and wept hard. The funeral took place on the 8th July, 1948, and was well attended by relatives, friends and school-children. He left behind a widow. 2 sons, 6 daughters, 5 sons-in- law, 24 grand-children and 2 great grand children. He had held the post of Kapitan China, Dalat. for over 26 years and his place was taken over by his second son in 1947.—(Contributed.)
Padungan Incident Inquiry.
(On Saturday, 29th May, 1948, at the end of a game between two football teams at the Song Kheng Hai Recreation Ground, Padungan, a dis- turbance broke out between the rival supporters. Partisanship was strong and garbled versions of the incident were quickly circulating in Kuching.
His Excellency the Governor ordered an inquiry to be held with Mr. J. R. Outram as Commissioner).
Mr. J. R. Outram, the Commissioner appointed by His Excellency the Governor to inquire into the incident whit h occurred at the Padungan Recreat- ion Ground on 30th May 1948, has now submitted his report, which has received the consideration of His Excellency. His Excellency has directed that disciplinary action be taken in the case of two members of the Police, who are alleged to have used unnecessary force in effecting arrests. As the Commissioner’s report deals with incidents which may form the subject of legal proceedings, it is not proposed to publish it. A summary of his conclusions is, however, given below.
Cause of the Disturbance.
On Saturday, 29th May, 1948, a league football match was played at the Song Kheng Hai Recreat- ion Ground, Padungan, between the Thomians and the Sarawak Constabulary. Mr. W. J. Chater refereed. There was no score in the first half; the Constabulary then scored, the Thomians replied with three goals in succession, and finally the Con- stabulary brought the score to 3—2. The evidence shows that :—
(a)
Applause and encouragement in this match were more vociferous than usual, owing possibly to the abnormal number of Police supporters (there were 160 from the Depot), and possibly to heavy betting on the match.
(b)
Though the game itself was clean, the con- duct of certain young Chinese supporters behind and around the Police goal in the second half most definitely was not. Sand, grass and leaves were thrown around and at the Police goalkeeper; also barracking was directed at him and designed to put him off. One witness states that he saw a small boy trying to deflect the ball into the goal. This certainly annoyed the Police goal-keeper, who, though he denies it, was seen to make un- official protests.
(e) The Police on duty (there were only two N.C.Os and six men on duty round the ground) dealt with these small boys, certainly forcefully, but probably excusably so. It is not much good bandying words with small boys en masse and some reasonable force might be excusable.
(d)
Chinese youths in the vicinity, already over-excited by the game, took exception to such activity by the Police, not appreciating that they were attempting to keep order, but believing that they were abusing their powers in order to quell the ardour of the Thomians’ supporters.
(e)
This led to the exchange of verbal abuse between a Chinese and a Police recruit standing near him.
(f)Reliable Police evidence shows that the word “phah,” meaning “to hit" or “beat up,” was being uttered by that section of the Chinese spectators situated between the Police goal and the north side of the field before the game ended.
(g)
After the final whistle, the Depot party moved on to the field to form up. in the middle of the north side near the rail opposite the grand- stand.
(h)
At least three Chinese moved in from the end of the field towards the Police. Their ex- planations for this are most unsatisfactory.
(i) A general fight then started and stones were flung. There is some doubt who struck the first blow, but the evidence that one of these three Chinese did so must be accepted as true.
Summary.
The cause of the incident, therefore, appears clearly to have been
(a)
the over-enthusiasm and, probably, the betting interests of the crowd, giving rise to heated feelings,
(b)
the bad conduct and unsporting behaviour of small boys near the Police goal,
(c) the intervention of the Police on duty being regarded by the Chinese as favouritism of the Police team.
(d) the determination of certain young Chinese to vent their feelings forcibly on the Police after the game, and
(e) their doing so.
Nature of the Disturbance.
As soon as the Chinese spectator mentioned above had struck the first blow at the Police, the Chinese spectators on the road at the end of the field started pelting the Police with stones. Some of the Police Recruits ran towards them, and fighting took place near the back line until the crowd was dispersed and the Recruits called to fall in. The whole affair appears to have lasted only about five minutes. Whether or not the Police took off their belts is uncertain; some witnesses say they did, but other witnesses and all the Police say they did not. Damage to the Police was almost entirely due to stones; they must have been subjected to a fairly heavy bombardment. One Chinese was seen by several witnesses to hit one of the Police, who fell down; the latter thereupon chased him with four Recruits and caught him in the main Padungan Road. He was taken to the Padungan Police Station, and evidence has been given that he was assaulted by the Police both on the way to the Police Station and on arrival there. Another Chinese, who tried to intervene in the fracas of the football field, has stated that he was hit by the Police, kicked and struck on the head by a baton. There was in fact no baton in the hands of the Depot group, and his statement is therefore untrue. His injury was almost certainly the result of a stone thrown towards the Police by his companions off the field. Evidence has been given that he threw a stone and was then chased, being caught by the Police at the gate of Heng Ann Association, where it is alleged that he was assaulted by one of the Police. Medical reports show that both the above-mentioned Chinese suffered abrasions and bruises. They also show that many of the Recruits suffered slight injury, almost certainly from stones, with the exception of one, who showed abrasions on the forehead and neck, which were probably caused by blows.
Responsibility.
The Commissioner finds that, from the evidence produced, certain Chinese spectators were responsi- ble for the disturbance. There is insufficient evidence to show that they were provoked to this action by the conduct of the Police during the game, and the alleged ill-treatment of small boys by the Police has been exaggerated. With regard to the incidents which subsequently occurred in the
street, the evidence shows that unnecessary force was used by the Police in making the arrests of the two Chinese.
Recommendations.
The Commissioner recommends that considerat- ion be given to taking suitable action against the Chinese who was responsible for the outbreak of physical violence and against two members of the Police for the use of unnecessary force in arresting two Chinese. He recommends that no further action be taken against any other members of the Constabulary or against any other Chinese. The injuries sustained by the latter were the result of their having voluntarily taken part in the affray and their worst wounds were undoubtedly caused by stones thrown by other Chinese.
To avoid incidents of a similar nature in future, the Commissioner recommends that
(a)
A body of Municipal stewards replace the Police on duty at the ground, with a small patrol of Police in the background to keep order if re- quired, and that no other members of the Con- sabulary attend such matches in uniform.
(b)
Referees in such matches be asked to exert their influence in controlling the crowd as well as the players, if necessary by stopping play on the occurrence of any disorder among the spectators.
This Sarawak.
(With apologies to the New Statesman and Nation.)
The Association strictly prohibits any member to bring in prostitute, opium and all sorts of illegal behaviour.
...........but one who is under the age of eighteen or lunatic, cannot join as a member of the association.—A Constitution.
Police and troops rushed to the call for aid and in the gun battle that followed the only casualties were four Chinese killed.—Sarawak Tribune.
Sir Secretary,
Please to give your information about the currency of brass-guns of the Dayaks by the trade of Sarawak and its importance for the accounts. Please to answer soon.—A letter.
To Which is Most Honourable Sir,
Mr...................Esquire.
Sir,
With much respects sir I your humble servant wishing inform you am very infirmary and hopes your lordship will grant to your faithful servant passport for returning to China country.
And your humble petitioner will ever pray.
(Signed with a thumbprint but no name.)
A missionary said in Sydney.............that Bibles
had replaced beer, and hymnals had replaced hang- overs among the headhunters of North Borneo.— A Sydney Morning Herald.
And thence forward the honourable government also began to favour my humble self with the works; hard or harder, big or small and irrespective of their nature and those were to the best of my ability being done. During my long sojourn in this abroad I had been blamelessly and devotedly at your worship’s service.
...........old age already overcome, what I earned was actually exhausted what remained is about to go.—A petition.
...........at 6.30 they had to take their makan, that is called last supper.—A Student's paper.
In view of the short time available for pre- paration the performance was carried out success- fully.—Sarawak Tribune.
News of this went round rapidly along the China Coast and as a result British Shipping enjoyed a big room.—Sarawak Tribune.
Dear Sir,
Please send me the names and addresses of all manufacturing companies in your country.
Also, the names and addresses of all wholesales companies and brokerages in your country.
Please rush names by return mail.—A letter. (The recipient had noted for action. ‘Please rush accordingly—at your convenience’).
Conversion of Lunatic Shed into Bachelor's Quarters.—The Estimates.
(The Editor is unable to follow the example of our illustrious contemporary and offer a prize for the best entry in this column. Contributions from all parts of "This Sarawak" will, however, be warmly appreciated, and the most favoured will be given pride of place.)
A Kapit Diary.
22nd August, 1885.
"I have the honour to request you will be good enough to have the following medicines sent up here as soon as possible as the List stock sent up has been completely finished.
Gregory’s mixture Diarrhoe mixture Cough mixture Quinine Diluted sulph acid Friars Balsam Sulphate of Tin Chlorodyne Epsom Salts Goitre ointment Castor oil."
28th November, 1885.
"A dayak of Seranau, by name Lapau of Lau’s house, complained to me yesterday that Mohomed went to his house and borrowed a parang Jempol from him and saying that he is going on a visit to Gedau’s house, and on his return promising to return the parang to him which Mohomed has fail- ed to do, and now he (Lapau) heard that it was
taken to Sibu, will you have the kindness to get it from him.
On the night of the 27th an attempting robbery has nearly been committed in the office, one of the duit boxes was prized open during Gapar’s watch; before any money was taken out, Pegan receives the watch, and examine the boxes and found out one very slack lid, nothing was lost."
1st Feb. 1887.
"I have the honour to request that you will be good enough to procure as soon as possible a man to act as fortman here in the place of Klaa whose time has expired, I should prefer Hassan an ex- Kapit Fortman as he is a good makshift in case the Cowman fall sick, as he does not object to look after cattles."
4th February, 1887.
I have the honour to acknowledge the receipt of your letter concerning the Kapit Diaries. Your remarks are only noted. It is somewhat hard at times to find matter for the diaries here, especially just now as the Dayaks are mostly away working in the jungle, and consequently there are not many about the Bazaar and Fort. There are days when scarcely a single Dayak comes to the Fort. One comes always be writing of that which does not happen. In future I will endeavour to find more to write about."
1st May, 1887.
"Sir,
I have the honour to request that you will good enough to procure at your earliest convenience 15 Matu parang tebas as bazaar parangs are of no use for work at Kapit.
I have also the honour to request you wilt be good enough to send—
.............padi for the government pigeons
1
bundles tin tacks
4
2 1/2 inch brass hinges
24
1 1/2 inch brass screws."
May 13th, 1887.
". . . . . Your Highness having instructed me to report on the advisability or otherwise of maintaining a government station at Belaga. I therefore venture to submit to your Highness as follows—
1.
Although the local traders of Kapit might benefit slightly by the abolishment of Belaga as a station, the whole trade of the district would suffer, as the Belaga station is creating and collect- ing a trade of its own which would never reach Kapit.
2.
Belaga as a trading station is now begin- ning to develop and as long as an energetic policy is pursued having for its own object the maintenance of peace and order amongst the surrounding tribes, and encouragement of trade, there is no doubt that the presence of a govern- ment station will tend to increase the trade and prosperity of the district.”
[Note : As readers will note, the diary has been written up by different writers during the period. —Ed.]
Films of the Month.
The Marx Brothers provided excellent entertain- ment in the film “A Night in Casablanca;” all the ingredients of a good farce were well mixed in with a pinch of improbable romance to make weight. The clowning of the Marx Brothers was superb— at their own game they are accomplished artists— and the action raced ahead with delightful ease and with plenty of suspense. ‘‘A Night in Casablanca” is an enjoyable film, and one to be recommended, rnore-so for audiences of mixed nationalities; to miss parts of the dialogue by no means interfered with enjoyment of the film. Those who went to see the film were well rewarded for their trouble; trouble there was because, from one of the mishaps of transport, the film was not shown on the advertised night and those who sat through the screening of “Humoresque” and those who turned back daunted were equally disappointed.
Sunday is usually a favoured cinema evening in Kuching but the opening performance of “The Magic Bow” was screened to a packed house. A Gainsborough production, it was well produced and the acting throughout was excellent. Music lovers in the audience were delighted with Yehudi Menuhin’s violin solos and particularly pleasing was the production of Pagannini’s “Caprice.” The technical difficulties of accurately syncronising sound to action are obvious but at no point did the production trip up over this.
International Rubber Situation —May, 1948.
The following is a summary of the world rubber position at the end of May, 1948. Full details are published in the July issue of the ‘Rubber Statistical Bulletin.”
Excluding such government stocks as are not available to industry.
From “Adversity”: Internment Quarterly.
(The following story was published in "Adversity'' on 1st July, 1943.)
EPSOM SALTS.
Men of war : battleships, cruisers, destroyers and sloops, moored at some protected bay, in two lines ahead, in strict seniority...........
Such a sight you may witness on the Regatta Day of any of Britain's fleets, home or foreign.
The lane formed by the ships provides the track, while the ships themselves make the grandstands from which you will see many gruelling races. Cutters, whalers, gigs and dinghys, manned by selected ratings from the various departments of the ships assembled, will provide thrill after thrill.
Just for a moment imagine yourself on board the flagship at the head of the line with the "Tote" ship opposite you. Flags will be up and down the yardarms in a jiffy, each one conveying something to the initiated, as they acknowledge and receive the bets from the various ships. The Seaman’s Cutter race big event of the day, over a two-mile course is due; the twelve best seamen in the ship comprise the crew. The wizened little officer sitting there with all those papers is the Ship’s School- master, but for to-day his job is "Betting” and all the local wagers go through him to the tote.
Now the motor-boats and pinnaces which have been towing the cutters and their crews to the starting line have cast off their tows and the boats are lining up. The start seems to have been de- layed, but if we were spectators of the start instead of the finish, we would witness a scene similar to Epsom. The “horses” have drawn for places and are lined up. with each "jockey” keeping his "horse” dead on the course, and at the same time maintaining sufficient movement on his boat, so that on the Starter’s gun going off he has no dead weight. Blue is ahead now. and back she comes; now it’s Yellow, and so on until the great moment arrives at last.
Bang!
“They're off!" comes in a subdued roar from the ships in the distance.
On the flagship all is hushed with excitement, the stillness being broken only by the voice of the signalman on the bridge as he tries to keep us in- formed as to progress. Suddenly a cheer is heard from the distance. indicating that the boats have entered the line formed by the ships and are on the "Home Straight.” The guardrails are crowded, as we await the boats coming in sight. The cheer- ing is now louder, and louder even yet, until with one accord “Yellow’s first!” comes from a hundred throats.
But no! Blue, who has been hidden from sight by the ships' sides, is now seen racing almost neck and neck. The cheering is terrific; but now. above the noise, one may hear the coxswain of Blue : “One . . . two . . . three . . . heave! one . two . . . three . . . heave!” while Green’s coxswain, now standing up, shouts "Let them have it, come on you ------one . . . two . . , three! Both crews
are sore: the feathering of the oar is now a thing of the past; bodies like automatons.
“One . . . two . . . three . . . heave!”
Sweat streaming from their bodies, wrists and arms like lead, pains starting somewhere in the legs,
and sterns like over-ripe papayas. But on they go neck and neck.
"One . . . two . . . three . . , heave !" is now all you can hear, and Blue’s away; the coxswain now standing up; damn it all, I believe he’s frothing at the mouth, but "one . . . two” on he goes.
Blue wins! Blue wins!" is heard as the gun goes and both crews collapse over their oars. But Blue’s coxswain, is up like a flash on the thwarts assisting his victorious men to "toss their oars" as a challenge to any crew in the fleet. The victor- ious cutter is then towed back to her ship and placed alongside the after gangway, where the crew is given a rousing welcome back on board by all, while the band plays "See the Conquering Hero Comes.”
The big event of the day is over.
CORRESPONDENCE.
THE ALMANAC.
SlMANGGANG.
2nd July, 1948.
The Editor,
Sarawak Gazette, Kuching.
Sir,
There does not appear to be any mention of the following important events in the "Sarawak Gazette Almanac."
The A.I.F. landing in Brunei Bay at Brooketon, Labuan, and Muara Island, on 10th June, 1945.
The liberation of Brunei town on 13th June, 1945.
The liberation of Limbang some days later might also be recorded, since this was the first place in Sarawak territory to be officially liberated.
If not of greater importance, but certainly of equal interest, was the arrival of the first S.R.D. party by parachute.
It would seem that the above events are just as important to Sarawak history and deserve to be recorded as well, as for instance, H.M.S. Samarang visits Sarawak 5th July, 1843, or Ex-Penghulu Ngumbang died 5th October, 1914, or Brunei accepts a British Resident, 2nd January, 1906.
Yours, etc.
W. P. N. L. Ditmas.
Kuching Market Price List.
Monthly Average Market Price from 20th June, 1948, to 20th July, 1948.
