Vol. LXXIV.
No. 1083.
Sarawak Gazette
PRICE KUCHING, Tuesday, June 1st, 1948. 20 CENTS
Contents.
The Sarawak Gazette.
TUESDAY, JUNE 1st, 1948.
Birth.
Digby.—On Saturday, May 16th, 1948, at Kuching to Mutal, wife of K. H. Digby—a daughter.
Hounds and Horns.
Hounds and horns are excellent things in their proper setting; in Kuching they can be the twin pests of life.
The local dogs have a range of notes that may well make a prima donna envious; from the full throated roar of a Thessalian bull they can run
through the scale to the high pitched scream of an enraged parrot. Not only can this effect be achiev- ed collectively but also individually, and a dog in the throes of choir practice or just boredom can repeat the performance apparently without effort.
These local doge have a keenly developed sense of property, their domains usually include not only the owner’s house but also the highway bordering it. The company of their own kind is a source of courage and inspiration to them and the greater their courage the more vociferously they express it. Until in the end it needs a brave man to take an evening walk through dog haunted areas; not that he need fear physical assault, usually his sense of dignity stands in graver peril than the seat of his trousers, but the canine cacophony can gain almost the force of material onslaught.
At the end of a perfect, and usually very noisy, day the local hound will not retire to well-earned slumbers; in the thin hours of the night he will remember his watch-dog duties and, doubtlessly whimpering “I’ll bark to show I’m not afraid,” sets up a deafening barking. The challenge is taken up in howls of defiance and rolls away in waves of sound to the township’s limits.
In comparison with the nuisance value of dogs, the motor horn sinks into pale insignificance. Some years ago, a Japanese authority published a thought- ful circular for the benefit of foreign motorists (it was reproduced by the Gazette sometime in 1935) which might well have provided the answer to our traffic troubles :
“When a passenger of the foot hove in sight tootle the horn-trumpet to him, melodiously at first.
If he still obstacles your passage, tootle him with vigour and express by word of mouth the warning ‘Hi Hi.’ ”
Unfortunately the Japanese circular omitted to say how the average horn-trumpet is to be made melodious, the aim of the horn manufacturer seems to be to produce a “you have been warned” sound. But it does seem to have the right idea in visualising a horn so gentle in tone that when tootled with vigour the volume of sound will be insufficient to drown the warning by word of mouth, “Hi Hi.” If the principle of warning by word of mouth be carried one step further and accompanied by a suit- able gesture of salutation it may go far towards im- proving the present estranged relations between the motorist and the pedestrian.
Speech by His Excellency the Governor at the opening of the Council Negri, 24th May, 1948.
Mr. President, Members of the Council Negri :
I welcome you to this meeting of Council.
Some of the Bills which await your consideration are of far reaching importance. I refer in particular to the Debtor and Creditor (Occupation Period) Bill which aims at providing an equitable solution to the problem of the relationship between debtors and creditors in respect of debts incurred before and during the Japanese Occupation of Sarawak.
Another important Bill deals with the Registration of Births and Deaths. If we are not to lose the benefit of the information obtained by the recent census and are to plan intelligently for the future development of our health and education services, that information must be kept up-to-date. Accurate particulars of all births and deaths must be registered. The Bill provides a flexible system for achieving this and for overcoming the difficulties imposed on us by distance, lack of communications and illiteracy.
In my last address to this Council I gave a review of the financial position of the Colony. I am glad to be able to inform you that the expected deficit of $757,000 on last year's working has been con- verted into a surplus of approximately $1,000,000. This surplus has not been achieved by curtail- ment of expenditure, for the actual estimate of expenditure has been exceeded, but by the buoyancy of our revenues.
The early revenue returns for the first few months of the year continue to reveal a favourable trend. While it is too early to make an assured forecast, there is no reason to anticipate any deficiency in the estimate of this year's revenue.
Progress is being made in the development and expansion of our Social Services.
Two new Medical Officers and a Nursing Sister have been recruited from the United Kingdom, and have either arrived or will arrive shortly. Our thanks are due to the Colonial Office for their appointment, for, as I mentioned in my last address, there is serious difficulty in recruitment resulting from the dislocation of training during the war.
The new wing of the Nurses' Home, which is now complete, will allow for the recruitment of more nurses to be employed in our hospitals in the place of dressers, who will then become available or manning-our new mobile dispensaries.
The first travelling dispensary left Sibu on March 15th this year and now runs regularly up and down the Igan, calling at fixed points on stated days to give treatment to the people. A second mobile dis- pensary will shortly be put into commission on the Samarahan river.
Training in midwifery continues and a scheme introduced before the war has been started again whereby Government subsidizes certified midwives in outstations until they have established their practices. It is hoped to obtain young women, sponsored by their own local communities, for training in Kuching, after which they will return to practise near their own homes. Matu Advisory
Council is sponsoring a local Melanau woman who is now in training here and I trust others will come forward shortly.
I mentioned in my last address the plan for establishing a Secondary School and Teacher Training Centre at Batu Lintang.
The renovation of the buildings is now almost completed and it is expected that staff and students wrill move into residence there early in July. Teacher Training classes are already under way and there are now 52 students living at Springfield, representing many different races including Muruts, Bisayahs, Kenyahs and one Kelabit. In addition we have accepted four students for training on behalf of the North Borneo Government.
In co-operation with the Mission authorities a class has been formed to coach students for the Cambridge School Certificate examination. Par- ticular importance is attached to this, for without this certificate it is impossible to send students to Malaya or elsewhere for the higher education so urgently needed.
The Kanowit Rural Improvement School, which I have already mentioned to this Council, opened this month under the charge of Mr. Bewsher, although all buildings are not yet complete. The interest and enthusiasm shown in the various Dayak districts for this scheme has been most encouraging. Government Malay schools have been re-opened in Kuching, Selalang and Gedong, and arrangements are complete for the provision of Government schools for Kayans in the Baram and for Sea Dayaks in the Limbang.
It is also gratifying to note the enthusiasm of the newly formed Native Authorities for education. Most of them have included provision for new schools in their 1948 programmes.
Under Scholarship scheme eleven local students are now in training at institutions in Malaya and Singapore, five at the King Edward VII Medical College, Singapore, three at the School of Forestry, Kepong, one at the Technical College, Kuala Lumpur, and two at the School of Agriculture, Serdang.
A Social Welfare Advisory Committee has now been established under the Chairmanship of Dr. Hedges, the Chief Justice, to advise the Govern- ment on the future extension of social welfare work. I am very conscious of the need for further extension in many directions and I should like to take this opportunity of appealing to the public to take a greater part in all activities connected with social welfare. The Sibu Benevolent Society, which continues to do excellent work, is setting an admirable example to the rest of the country, which I commend to the attention of all associations and public-spirited people throughout the Colony.
A branch of the British Red Cross has been formed in Kuching, organized on all-community lines. The Society has under consideration the establishment of a motor ambulance service for areas outside Kuching accessible by road, and an ambulance launch service; both projects will be of great benefit to our peoples. The Society is also active in organizing blood donations and in welfare work for the benefit of the inmates of the leper and pauper camps.
In February last a Boys’ Home for juvenile delinquents was opened in Kuching on an attractive site near the Government Dairy Farm. This is an experimental home run on modem reformatory
lines. The boys are not confined in any way nor do they associate with any adult prisoners. They receive regular instruction, and do a little manual work, mostly gardening. Sport of all kinds is encouraged and the principles and practice of scouting are taught by the Local Boy Scout Association.
The care of women and girls in need of protection has also been under consideration and at our request a Senior Officer of the Salvation Army came to Kuching to investigate and report. It is not known yet whether the Salvation Army will be prepared to undertake this work in Sarawak.
A Prisoner Aid Society, set up by Kuching Rotary, is now functioning and assisting the families of prisoners, where necessary, as well as finding employment for prisoners on release.
To turn now from the social to the economic field. I mentioned at your last meeting that experts were investigating the coal deposits of Sarawak. Results are disappointing and, though it is too early to say definitely, the indications are that the quality of our coal measures, even of those at Selantik, of which we had some hopes, is such that their exploitation would not be justified under present market conditions. As a result of these and other reports it is becoming increasingly clear that it is on the development of its agricultural and forest resources that this country must mainly depend for its future progress and prosperity.
The preliminary stage of the Soil Survey, under- taken by the Agricultural Department, is now virtually complete, and it has been possible to start the preliminary planning of some large scale padi schemes on the basis of information gained. Many of you at your last meeting in Kuching saw a practical demonstration of the use in padi cul- tivation of small mechanically propelled agricultural machines. It seems probable that, suitably modified, such machines could be economically and successfully worked under conditions where ad quate water control is possible. A grant from the Colonial Development and Welfare Fund has been sought to allow for further experiment.
In January a party of cocoa experts came to explore the possibility of cocoa cultivation in Sarawak on a large scale. Their report was only received a few days ago and there has not yet been time to study it. Small scale trial plots of the crop, planted by the Agricultural Department, are making satisfactory progress.
Steady progress is being made with the scheme to provide budwood of high yielding clones to rubber growers.
The Agricultural Adviser to the Secretary of State for the Colonies paid a visit to Sarawak in March. His visit was most welcome, as he has acquired first hand information about our needs and has been able to help us with advice about the presentation of plans for future agricultural development.
It is interesting to note that the revenue derived from forest produce in 1947 was the highest ever recorded. Our timber exports are expanding and a shipment of kapor to Hong Kong evoked most favourable comment from the Chief Forest Officer of that Colony.
We have an important asset in our forests and care must be taken to plan the best way of con- serving our reserves and utilising our assets to the greatest advantage.
A new Protected Forest known as the Naman Protected Forest of some 18,700 acres was finally constituted in February. Good progress has also been made with the improvement of jelutong in two Forest Reserves.
In February the Fisheries Survey scheme, to which I drew your attention at the last meeting, was put into operation. The survey has been welcomed by fishermen themselves, who are co-operating fully with the officer charged with its conduct. It seems, however, that certain dealers have for reasons best known to themselves decided to be obstructive and refuse to supply essential information. Council therefore is being asked to consider at this meeting a Bill designed to enable information required for this survey and for the development and benefit of the industry as a whole to be procured by the exercise, when necessary, of compulsory powers. A Master Fisherman has now been engaged, and arrived last week. As soon as a suitable fishing vessel has been procured, practical experiments and demonstrations in the use of modern fishing methods and gear in the waters off our coasts will be undertaken.
The staff of the Lands and Surveys Department will shortly receive much needed re-inforcement by the arrival of four new surveyors. It has not hitherto been possible to allocate staff to deal with the many problems of Land Settlement, the solution of which is becoming a matter of increasing urgency and is vital to many of the plans for agricultural development throughout the Colony. This will now be remedied.
A free grant of $408,000 has been approved by the Secretary of State from the Colonial Develop- ment and Welfare Fund for the construction of a new air strip at Kuching, including the erection of station buildings, and the provision of air traffic control equipment and furniture. The present strip is unsafe for modern civil air traffic. It is too short and any extension would be prohibitively expensive and involve aircraft in an unjustifiable degree of risk owing to the presence of high land at either end. We cannot expect our good friends of the R.A.F., to whom we are greatly indebted, to maintain indefinitely the present flying boat service. As soon as an airfield is available that conforms with modern safety standards, no difficulty is anticipated in arranging for the operation by a commercial air line of a regular air service connecting Kuching with Singapore, Labuan and North Borneo.
A new Protected Forest known as the Naman Protected Forest of some 18,700 acres was finally constituted in February. Good progress has also been made with the improvement of jelutong in two Forest Reserves.
There is no need for me to stress the value of regular and fast communication with the outside world, which both Government and the business community have already learned to appreciate.
A General Communications Development Plan is being prepared. This is divided into five main schemes, Air, Main Roads. Secondary Roads, Waterways and Telecommunications. Applications for grants from the Colonial Development and Wel- fare Fund have been made to provide for the preliminary survey of some of the projects, and grants have recently been approved for the con- struction of secondary roads between Serian and Tebakang and between Lidong and Betong, and for the provision of telephonic communication between Simanggang, Lidong and Betong.
Unfortunately grave difficulties are still being experienced in the search for qualified engineers. One new officer arrived this month, but the Public Works Department is still seriously understaffed.
The staff of the projected Co-operative Depart- ment is now undergoing training, the Director Designate, Mr. J. L. Noakes, in England and later in Ceylon, and one Malay Native Officer and one Dayak Native Officer in Kuala Lumpur.
You will remember that Dr. E. R. Leach paid a visit to Sarawak last year to draw up plans for a Socio Economic Survey. He has now submitted a most interesting and detailed report. His recommendations include several projects which will be of great assistance in devising means to improve the living conditions of our indigenous peoples. I have informed the Secretary of State that I shall welcome the appointment of Research Workers to undertake projects of this kind.
The rice position has improved considerably since I addressed you last owing to unexpectedly high production in Burma and Siam and a good local harvest. As a result it has been possible to increase the ration from 12 lbs. to 20 lbs., with a supple- mentary 10 lbs. to heavy and special category workers, and to build up a substantial reserve of imported rice to see us through the lean months ahead. There is still, however, serious under- production of rice to meet world requirements and there must be no relaxation of our efforts to make Sarawak self-sufficient in this important food-stuff.
Cigarettes, tobacco, kerosene oil and salt were all released from control at the beginning of the year.
The introduction of a new Customs Tariff in December last increased the duties on alcoholic liquors, tobacco, and certain foodstuffs (mostly of the nature of luxuries) and also brought textiles on to the tariff. On the other hand machinery and manufactured metal products were removed from the import tariff and a number of minor items from the export tariff.
There has been little change in the price and quantity of the three main exports, rubber, sago, and jelutong, and the trade position remains satis- factory. There is no engkabang crop this year.
Rubber production for 1947 was over 37,000 tons and for the first quarter of this year production has exceeded that for the first quarter of last year. The Custodian's Department has taken over ex-enemy rubber estates and is now the biggest single producer of crude rubber in Sarawak.
Progress is being made in carrying out the pro- posals outlined in the Note on the Development of Local Government, which was laid on the table at your last meeting. District and Divisional Advisory Councils are now functioning throughout the Colony. I recently had the privilege of opening and attending a meeting of the Advisory Council of the Third Division at Sibu and was favourably impressed by the business-like procedure, the free and forthright expression of opinions and the relatively high standard of debate. If this can be taken as a fair sample of the working of other Divisional Councils, which I have not yet seen in action, there is good reason to be satisfied with the progress that is being made. Five Native Autho- rities, each with its own Treasury, came into being at the beginning of the year and have made a satisfactory start in learning their new duties and responsibilities.
I have briefly recounted for the information of Council some of the principal developments and activities of Government during the past six months. Progress is steady but it is neither swift nor spectacular. The chief obstacle to a more rapid expansion of our social and technical services is the
shortage of professional supervisory and trained subordinate staff, particularly trained subordinate staff. The Colonial Office is doing all it can to provide the former and the Batu Lintang Secondary School and Training Institute, when it is in full swing, will do much to provide the latter. But it takes years, not months, to turn out trained teachers, dressers, agricultural assistants and the other technicians, whom we need so urgently. The deficiencies of our pre-war educational system and the legacy of the enemy occupation, when for nearly four years education and technical training virtually ceased, cannot be remedied in a matter of days or months. It is as well to remember these things, when, as at times happens to me and I expect to many of you, there come feelings of impatience and frustration that we are not getting on faster with the job.
But there is one important sphere in which I think we can and should go faster, that is in the establishment of local authorities and local treasuries, for they are the instruments which must be used to effect the improvement of our education and agriculture. The people want and it is Government’s duty and intention to provide more and better food both for mind and body. These are matters affecting the everyday life of the people and the people must have a say in their manage- ment and control. Government by itself without the people can achieve nothing : if there is active co-operation and mutual trust and goodwill between Government and people and both share the work and responsibilities, real and lasting progress can be made. The best way to achieve this co-operat- ion and share the work is by organising local authorities composed of the chiefs, headmen and chosen representatives of the people and vesting them with such measure of executive power and financial control as they are capable of undertaking. It is for the local authorities to manage and finance with the aid of Government the village schools within their areas, to assist in any settlement schemes designed to make the best use of any large areas of good wet padi lands that may be found and to issue and enforce orders for their proper cultivation, to establish and run their own padi banks and so on.
There was at first some reluctance among some of the chiefs and people to establish their own local authorities and treasuries, based largely on fears that they would be given duties and responsibilities beyond their capacity to carry out. Such fears are groundless. Residents, District Officers and other Government officials are on the spot to guide, help and advise them. I was glad to note, when recently I visited the offices of the Iban Local Authority and Treasury for Sibu District in com- pany with many visiting Penghulus from neighbouring districts, that this reluctance was fast disappearing and that a strong desire to establish their own local authorities was shown by many. This is encouraging but I regret to say that in many areas Malays and Melanaus still seem apathetic.
As you all well know and as the brief review I have given today clearly shows, the activities of Government cover a wide and diverse range. When there is so much to be done and the resources of men and money at our disposal are so limited, it is not always easy to select and keep in mind the objectives of prime importance on which we should concentrate. It is my view that for the next few years our main effort should be directed to the expansion of the means of education throughout the
Colony and to the development and diversification of its agriculture. It is also my view that the best method of achieving real and lasting progress in these two spheres is through the medium of local authorities, which are representative and have the confidence of the people. I trust that Council will share these views and that when your Finance Committee starts, as it soon will, the task of preparing next year's estimates, it will make generous provision to assist the newly-fledged local authorities and to expand substantially the activities of the education and agricultural depart- ments.
Mr. President, Members of Council, I thank you for your attention and leave you now to your labours.
His Excellency the Governor of Sarawak assumes the duties of High Commissioner for Brunei.
At nine o’clock on Saturday, May 1st, the “La Follette,” flying the Union and Brunei flags from the yard-arm, tied up at the Customs Wharf, Bru- nei, with His Excellency on board in uniform.
Shortly afterwards His Highness the Sultan of Brunei arrived, and after receiving a Royal Salute from the Guard of Honour of Brunei Constabulary, boarded the “La Follette.” His Highness, who was in morning dress, was accompanied by the British Resident, Brunei, and by his A.D.C. and Private Secretary. Having welcomed His Ex- cellency and talked for a few minutes, His Highness left the “La Follette” and proceeded to the Council Chamber.
His Excellency then went ashore, received a Royal Salute and inspected the Guard of Honour, then drove slowly up the road from the wharf. Numerous arches of welcome had been erected over the road, which was lined with school children.
On arrival at the Government offices, which are of temporary construction since Brunei town was practically obliterated by hombing during the war, but are nevertheless pleasing in appearance, His Excellency proceeded to the Council Chamber, where His Highness the Sultan, members of the State Council, and representatives of all communit- ies were waiting.
The Royal Commission appointing the Officer Administering the Government of Sarawak to be High Commissioner for Brunei was then read in English and Malay by the British Resident.
His Highness the Sultan then read in Malay the following speech of welcome :—
Your Excellency Sir Charles Arden Clarke, k.c.m.g., Governor of the British Colony of Sarawak and the High Commissioner for the State of Brunei, Darul-Sallam, the Honourable the British Resident, Wazier Wazier, Mentri Mentri, Members of the State Council, Heads of Departments of the Government Service, Pengiran Pengiran, Towkay Towkay, Ladies and Gentlemen present here at this ceremony—
I, Ahmad Tajuddin, Sultan and the Yang Di- Pertuan of the State of Brunei, Darul-Sallam, on behalf of myself, my people and all the in- habitants of this State, wish to express my very happy feelings and my thankfulness to the Almighty God that I am today given the appro-
priate opportunity to express in few words of welcome to His Excellency Sir Charles Arden Clarke, k.c.m.g., to this State.
Today, in fact, is a day of sparkling brightness to this State and a day of great rejoicings to the people. I say so because we are today blessed with a fortune to welcome such a great man in the person of Sir Charles Arden Clarke, k.c.m.g., who had come here to be our High Commissioner, an Officer and Knight of distinctive abilities and of a high-ranking position to be the Represent- ative of His Majesty the King in our State.
I, together with my subjects, and all the in- habitants of this State entertain very high hopes and full confidence that during your tenure of Your Excellency’s service in this State as our High Commissioner, Your Excellency will en- deavour to do the best you can with a heart of sincerity to bring about with every success, advancement, progress and prosperity to this State and to my people, particularly on education by which it is hoped my people shall be able to achieve their long cherished desire.
Today is a day of great historical event in the State of Brunei, and an occasion which we shall forever remember. I and all the inhabitants of this country raise our hands in prayer to the Almighty God that Your Excellency be spared long enough to remain as our High Commissioner so that we might be able to witness the distinct- ive progress which will bring more wealth and riches to this State, and which we all hope for.
I thus conclude my speech this morning and I thank you all for listening.
His Excellency's reply, which was translated into Malay by the British Resident was as follows:—
Your Highness, Members of the State Council, Gentlemen—
I am most grateful to Your Highness for your speech of welcome on behalf of the inhabitants of the State of Brunei. The warmth of this wel- come has been shown to me not only by Your Highness’ kind words but by the reception which I have received in the streets of Brunei on my way from the wharf to this Council Chamber. As you know, this is not the first time that I have had the good fortune to visit your State, and such is the friendliness of the people of Brunei that I do not feel a stranger among you.
His Excellency Mr. Malcolm MacDonald has today assumed office as Commissioner-General. He now combines the duties formerly attached to the posts of the Governor-General and the Special Commissioner. In this capacity his re- lationship to Brunei is the same as his relation- ship to the Federation of Malaya and the Colonies of Singapore, Sarawak and North Borneo. His interest in and contact with Brunei will be main- tained, and I trust that he will continue to visit both Brunei and Sarawak as he did in the past, as often as the onerous duties of his new post permit. He has sent you a message which I shall now read to you—
“I would have liked to be present in Brunei today when the Representative of His Majesty the King in Sarawak assumes the duty of High Commissioner for the State of Brunei. Un- fortunately I only reached Singapore on a journey from England on the same date and so cannot come to Brunei. I wish to assure
Your Highness and the population of Brunei of my continued close interest in the welfare of the State and of all its people and of my confidence in their progress under the new ad- ministrative arrangement for the office of High Commissioner. The new facilities which will become available to Brunei by these arrange- ments will help greatly to promote the welfare and prosperity of its citizens. I look forward to seeing Your Highness and my other friends on my next visit to your beautiful country and in the meantime I send my warm regards and best wishes to Your Highness and all people of Brunei.”
You have just listened to the reading of the Commission by virtue of which I assume the office of High Commissioner for Brunei today. This is a simple administrative change and has no political implications of any kind. It was first announced on March 3rd, after having been approved by Your Highness and this State Coun- cil. The meaning of the change has already been explained throughout the State by the British Resident with the aid of the two Minist- ers and Your Highness’ Representative.
I know that some fears were at first felt that Brunei was to be in some way “under" Sarawak and that it would lose its independent position as a Protected State. I should like to assure you afresh that such fears are groundless. There is no question of Brunei coming under Sarawak or Sarawak coming under Brunei, or the interests of one being sacrificed to the interests of the other. There is no question of this at all. The administration of the two countries will remain separate. There is no change in the status of Brunei, which remains a Protected State with a High Commissioner. The State of Brunei will continue to have its own Sultan, its own Con- stitution, its own laws, its own budget, its own flag, and its own stamps. It will not be asked to accept Sarawak Native Officers in the public Service or to use Sarawak currency.
Although they are separate and distinct political and administrative units, Brunei and Sarawak are tied together by geographical position and by long historical association; they have many pro- blems and interests, economic and social, in common. When before the war the High Com- missioner for Brunei was the High Commissioner and Governor living in Singapore it was impossi- ble for him to visit Brunei as frequently as he would have wished. Now that Your High Com- missioner lives in Borneo in a Colony adjacent to your State, it will be possible for him to visit your State more frequently and give your affairs the personal study and attention on the spot which they demand. Similarly the Heads of certain tehnical departments in Sarawak, who now become the technical advisers of the Sultan, will also be able to visit Brunei more frequently to study its problems and assist with their advice towards the improvement of education and other services, whenever Your Highness and the British Resident feel in need of their help. The know- ledge and experience gained in solving the pro- blems of one will be used for the benefit of the other.
One of the subjects in which I hope that pro- gress will be made is Education. I know that a wish for English education in Brunei lies very near Your Highness’ heart and that Your High- ness' subjects are also keenly interested in the
matter. I should like to assure you that it is our intention that State Controlled English Schools shall be set up in Brunei as early as possible in order to enable Your Highness’ sub- jects to fill as many as possible of the posts in Brunei, whether in Government Service or out- side, which require English Education.
Much has been done to make good the devastat- ion and deficiencies left by the war and the years of enemy occupation, but the chief impediment to further progress in this sphere, as in so many others, is the lack of trained staff. It has been decided to recruit a European Educational Officer for Brunei who will be able to devote all his ener- gies to improving the existing schools and at the same time plan and supervise the institution of English Education in the State. The Secretary of State is aware of the urgent necessity for the appointment and I trust that a candidate will be selected very soon. Trained teachers are also urg- ently required. In the past Brunei has looked to the Federation of Malaya for assistance in the training of some of its teachers. There need be no fear that this assistance will be withdrawn. The Federation Government are reserving and will continue to reserve a quota of admissions for Brunei to the Sultan Idris Training College at Tanjong Malim. Here perhaps Sarawak, which is wrestling with a similar problem, will be able to provide further help to supplement that already given by Malaya, if Your Highness and the Council so desire, by reserving a quota of ad- missions for Brunei student teachers to the new Teacher Training Centre about to be opened at Batu Lintang near Kuching.
Brunei already makes use of the Leper Settle- ment and Mental Asylum established in Sarawak. It is possible that by agreement and co-operation improvements in these sendees can be effected to the mutual benefit of the two countries. In Brunei itself large scale improvements in the Health Services of the State have been planned, among others the erection of a new hospital and the establishment of travelling dispensaries along the principal roads and rivers. The desire of of Your Highness and of Your Council to increase the prosperity and improve the standard of living and well-being of your people is manifest. You may rest assured that as your High Commissioner I shall do all I can to help you achieve such aims.
In conclusion, I ask Your Highness, you mem- bers of the State Council, and all the people of Brunei to remember that, so far as you are con- cerned, I am not Governor of a neighbouring Colo- ny but your own High Commissioner, and that it is my duty and responsibility to safeguard the in- terests and welfare of Brunei and its inhabitants and to provide for its future development and pro- gress. This duty I shall do my utmost to dis- charge faithfully and impartially, not only when I am visiting Brunei but also when I am in Sarawak, where I shall be equally mindful of it. This concluded the ceremony, and after a group photograph, His Highness retired to the Astana and His Excellency to the Residency.
Later in the morning His Excellency inspected the Malay, Chinese and R. C. Mission schools, whilst in the afternoon a visit was paid to the tem- porary hospital.
In the evening a State Banquet was held in the Malay School building. His Highness the Sultan was unfortunately unable to attend owing to indisposition.
Afterwards His Excellency and party boarded the Sri Brunei and cruised round the River kampongs which were illuminated with strings of coloured lights which reflected in the placid water, presented a fine spectacle.
On Sunday morning His Excellency, wearing uniform, drove to the padang in front of the Govern- ment offices, where he was received by His Highness the Sultan and the British Resident and accorded a Royal Salute by the Guard of Honour.
His Excellency then proceeded to the dais, and after the British Resident had read the citation, presented King’s Commendations for Brave Conduct to Mr. George Newn Ah Foott and Mr. Low Cheng Kow.
During the morning His Excellency visited the Government Agricultural Station at Kilanas, being shown round by the State Agricultural Officer, Mr. Ritchings, then shortly after noon called on His Highness the Sultan at the Astana. An informal touch was added by a photograph being taken of His Highness and His Excellency with the latter holding His Highness’ grandchild, who obligingly refrained from crying.
After a luncheon party at the Residency His Excellency visited the Silversmiths Guild, where the process of producing Brunei silverware was ex- plained and the party made several purchases. His Excellency was presented with a silver casket suitably inscribed to commemorate the occasion, while all members of the party received local cigars nearly a foot long, His Excellency's being ornament- ed with a silver holder surmounted by a butterfly. Next the straw workers were visited, where His Excellency received a walking stick as a momento, and again the whole party smoked outsized cigars. When a call was paid at a second straw worker’s house it was with some relief that the party accepted cigarettes and a drink of lemonade.
At a tea party held outside the Government offices, a speech of welcome from the Malay, Chinese, Arab and Indian communities was read, to which His Excellency replied.
In the evening His Highness the Sultan, mem- bers of the State Council, and representatives of all communities were guests at a pahit party given by His Excellency at the Residency.
After dinner His Highness and His Excellency attended a ronggeng held outside the Government offices. Several European style dances were also played, and the Resident from Limbang, Mr. Anderson, removed any shyness on the part of the European guests by a polished exibition of a tango with the Confidential Assistant to the Resident. Such was the enthusiasm for the ronggeng that apart from the guests sitting around the dancing floor, a queue was formed and time regulated by a whistle blast when each pair of performers had had their turn.
On Monday morning the “La Follette,” accom- panied by the Sri Brunei, sailed from the Residency with His Excellency and party. Several “perahu hormat” paddled energetically alongside until they were out-stripped. Proceeding by way of Kuala Limbang, Bangar in the Temburong District was reached shortly before noon. After meeting local representatives and inspecting the pleasant little station, His Excellency attended a curry tiffin at the District Officer's House.
Leaving Bangar in the early afternoon the party crossed to Muara where everyone enjoyed a swim;
a welcome relaxation after a crowded programme of engagements.
At six o’clock the “Sri Brunei” and “La Follette” parted company, the former for Brunei, and the latter en route to Sibu.—(Contributed).
The Visit of His Excellency the Governor to Sibu from 5th May to 9th May, 1948.
In a very crowded five days in Sibu, His Excellency managed to combine a great deal of business with, apparently, a great deal of pleasure.
The “La Follette’’ with His Excellency on board, accompanied by his Private Secretary and Mr. Paul Arden Clarke arrived at Sibu at 12 noon on Wednesday 5th May from Brunei. The party. was met at Kubu Wharf by the Honourable the Resident and the Divisional Datu. While His Excellency was inspecting the Sarawak Con- stabulary Guard of Honour and meeting the dignitaries from every district in Third Division, the “Mermaid” arrived from Kuching bearing Mrs. Middleton and Miss Jennifer Arden Clarke. Lady Arden Clarke had most unfortunately been detained in Kuching to iook after her youngest daughter who was indisposed.
Sibu was full to capacity before the arrival of His Excellency, but it was surprising how many more people of every race arrived from all over the Division and even the Colony on every subsequent day and were somehow absorbed and managed to get a home. Bungalows bulged with guests, dapors were full, visitors were underneath and on top of houses, and even a bicycle shed was trans- formed overnight into a miniature Kayan long- house, with gay sarongs and beautifully beaded hats banging out to air. On such a festive occasion the residents of Sibu did not bear the slightest grudge as a result of the overcrowded conditions and the local discomfort. The town was gaily decorated and presented a pretty picture.
At 9 a.m. on the 6th, His Excellency presented medals and ribbons outside the Government buildings. A Guard of Honour was present. The following gentlemen are to be congratulated on their awards :—
British Empire Medals.
1.
Mr. Yu Sut Moi, Sibu.
2.
Penghulu Jugah anak Lapek, Song.
3.
Mr. Peter Liew Shong Meng of the Lands and Surveys Department, Sibu.
4.
Sergeant Embah of the Sarawak Con- stabulary, Sibu.
5.
Mr. Chong Ah Onn of the Medical Depart- ment, Sibu.
King’s Medals for Courage, etc.
1.
Mr. Thomas Nyandau, Kanowit.
2.
Mr. Teo Ah Chong, Belaga.
3.
Mr. John C. Liu, Sibu.
4.
Penghulu Jugah anak Barieng of Merirai, Kapit.
5.
Penghulu Sibat anak Semada of Melinau, Kapit.
6.
Mr. Helbourne Semigaat of the Posts and Telegraphs Department, Kanowit.
When this was over, His Excellency presented surat kuasa and flags to Tua Kampongs and
Penghulus. Practically all the chiefs of Third Division were here, except for those of Balingian who had been presented with flags on a previous occasion. Photographs were subsequently taken of the recipients of medals and then of the massed Penghulus and Tua Kampongs. Such a conglomer- ation of chiefs is not often witnessed.
His Excellency, accompanied by the Honourable the Resident, then moved to the P.W.D. office, which had been vacated for the purpose, and opened the Divisional Advisory Council. His Excellency made a very full speech, which was listened to with great interest and care by the Councillors. Unfortunately there is not enough space here to give his speech in full, but the main points were that His Excellency welcomed the establishment of Councils as associating the people more closely with their Government and with the management of their own affairs. His Excellency considered the three most important factors in any scheme for the ordered progress and development of the Colony and its peoples were the development of local authorities, of education and of agriculture.
The Divisional Advisory Council sat through Thursday and Friday morning. His Excellency in his closing remarks said how pleased he had been to note the business-like manner with which the Council had dealt with a long agenda, as the speeches had been concise and to the point.
In the afternoon of the 5th Datu Abang Yan gave a tea party for His Excellency and party and the Malay community, and during the afternoon of the 6th May His Excellency visited the Bukit Lima water works and housing sites. That evening the native chiefs called at the Residency where His Excellency was staying.
On the afternoon of the 7th May after the Divisional Council, His Excellency and party visited the Photographic Exhibition, the Sibu Benevolent Society, the Police and the Gaol, and arrived at the Land Sports in time to see the final of the tug-of-war and a display of Sikh wrestling. Miss Jennifer Arden Clarke very kindly presented the prizes. That evening the Chinese Chamber of Commerce gave their usual cheery dinner to His Excellency and the dignitaries of Sibu.
Next day (the 8th May) was largely taken up by the Regatta, which with the other festivities is described elsewhere. A hurried but nevertheless excellent curry tiffin was had by the members of the Divisional Council in the Sibu Recreation Club at the Honourable the Resident's expense, and that evening there was the Governor's dance party at the Island Club.
On the 9th May His Excellency and party witnessed the tuba fishing in the Batang Igan and at mid-day left Sibu for Sarikei. The “La Follette” looked very fine sailing slowly up the Igan through a mass of small craft and launches. That afternoon the football competition took place and thus ended the period of the Sibu Annual Regatta except for a few Dayak celebrations and festivities beneath Bah Maling and Rumah Tinggi and a few other places in the town.—(Contributed.)
morning they were met at Kuala Balingian by the Honourable the Resident, Third Division, Mr. Barcroft, and reached Balingian at noon.
On going ashore His Excellency was greeted by the District Officer, Mr. Morris, and Native Officer, Abang Ahmad. After His Excellency had inspected the Guard of Honour, local notables were introduced. The path from the landing stage to the Government Office, over which arches of wel- come had been erected, was lined with children from the Malay and Chinese schools, each child from the Malay school carrying a pole topped with a Union flag. As His Excellency approached the pupils of both schools sang the National Anthem.
During the afternoon His Excellency presented Tua Kampongs and Penghulus with their Surat Kuasa and flags, then heard requests. This was followed by a visit to both schools and a walk through the bazaar, after which His Excellency attended a tea party held in the Government Office.
In the evening a party for Penghulus and their followers was also held in the Government Office owing to lack of space elsewhere, the floor standing up well to the ngajat. The day concluded with a dinner given by the Chinese Community in their school.
Next morning His Excellency walked through both the up-river and down-river kampongs, took coffee with the Kapitan China, and at mid-morning took refreshments with the Tua Kampong. This was followed by a visit to the Lee Seng Sago Factory, where yet more refreshments were offered.
Leaving Balingian at noon, the party reached Rumah Chendang in the Ulu Balingian at half past four. On landing His Excellency was given a warm welcome and a procession was formed from the river to the house headed by a flag bearer and a dancer. At the foot of the ladder His Excellency efficiently dispatched a large pig, then on entering the house the party filed round the length of the ruai two and a half times, on the first round taking tuak at each door.
After dinner, which was taken at a table on the ruai, His Excellency had a talk with those present. This was followed by more ceremonies, a procession headed by a dancer, followed by gongs and a file of Indu Dara, making the round of the ruai three times. The proceedings closed with tuak of a variety of brews being pressed upon their guests by the Indu Dara.
The party left Rumah Chendang next morning in heavy rain, but the weather cleared later. A pause of a few minutes only was made at Balingian for the District Officer to go ashore, and again at Kuala Balingian for the Resident to transfer to his own launch. The “La Follette” then headed for Bintulu, which was reached at three o’clock.
After His Excellency had been greeted by the Honourable the Resident, Fourth Division, Mr. Gilbert, and District Officer, Mr. Jacks, the party proceed to the District Officer’s bungalow. As the day was free of engagements the party enjoyed a bathe in the sea.
On Friday, April 23rd, His Excellency opened the new Government offices at Bintulu. After inspecting them His Excellency took his seat in the new Court room, presented Penghulus and Tua Kampongs with their Surat Kuasa and flags, and then heard requests.
The rest of the morning was taken up with an inspection of the new Government quarters, visits
to the Chinese and Malay schools, and a walk through the kampong and bazaar.
A curry luncheon attended by representatives of all communities was held to commemorate the opening of the new offices.
His Excellency and party were guests of the Bintulu Recreation Club to tea. and of the Chinese Community to dinner.
Owing to the state of the tide the “La Follette” sailed from Bintulu shortly, before midnight, anchored a few hours off Kedurong Point, then made for Kuala Niah, which was reached at eleven the next morning, the District Officer, Mr. Lascelles coming out to meet His Excellency. On arrival at Niah at noon His Excellency was greeted by a large crowd.
The afternoon was taken up with a walk through the kampong and bazaar, followed by a tea party at the Chinese school.
After dark the path from the landing stage to the Government office was illuminated with coloured lanterns, as was the Chinese school across river. Both Dayak and Malay dancing took place outside the Government office, many ladies sharing the verandah as a point of vantage with His Excellency and party.
Next morning His Excellency and party visited the Niah Caves, negotiating the perilous plank walks without mishap although they were slippery from a night's rain.
In the afternoon a regatta was held cousisting of six races for Malays and Dayaks. At the con- clusion of this interest was centred on impromptu games organised by the Resident. A tug of war by members of His Excellency's party against a team of Dayaks was only won by the former owing to their collecting more supporters on the end of the rope than their opponents.
At night His Excellency attended a concert held at the Chinese school which also drew a large and enthusiastic audience of all communities.
It was estimated that nearly half the total population of the Niah river attended the celebrat ions. Local reports stated that the last great occasion was the visit of His Highness the Rajah twenty-eight years ago, the year being fixed by the birth of a Niah girl, named Ranee, at the time of that visit. Furthermore, the launch used was a previous “La Follette.”
Next day, after presenting Surat Kuasa and flags, and hearing requests, His Excellency left for Sibuti, arriving in the early afternoon.
At the Government offices His Excellency presented L/CpL Muli with the ribbon of the King’s Medal for Courage, then gave Surat Kuasa and flags to Penghulus and Tua Kampongs. This was followed by requests.
In the evening His Excellency was “at home” on “La Follette” to sundry Dayak Tuai Rumah, then attended a most enjoyable concert held at the temporary Chinese school in front of which there was fortunately enough dry land to accommodate the large audience, whose enthusiasm was in no way damped by a shower of rain, which caused His Excellency’s party to sit in the wings of the stage for a couple of items.
Leaving Sibuti next morning, the party trans- ferred to a perahu at Kuala Kelulit and was paddled to the Kedayan village of Kelulit situated in the midst of a large swamp padi area. An out-
door reception with refreshments was curtailed by a heavy shower of rain, the party taking shelter in the school.
Leaving at noon the party returned to the “La Follette” and proceeded to Kuala Sibuti. In the evening a dance was held at the Tua Kampong's house in which the members of His Excellency's party participated. Although the party was in bed on the “La Follette” before midnight, the dance did not cease until dawn.
Next morning the "La Follette” crossed to Miri on a perfectly smooth sea. On arrival the party proceeded straight to the Residency. In the evening there was a pahit party given by the Resident for representatives of the Government Sendees to meet His Excellence.
At nine o’clock the following day His Excellency drove to the Government offices, and after inspect- ing a smart Constabulary Guard of Honour, presented Surat Kuasa and flags to Tua Kampong, and Surat Kuasa to the Kapitan China and Chinese Area Headmen. This was followed by the Court of Requests, after which His Excellency went round the offices.
The afternoon was spent in examining on the ground certain problems arising out of the proposed layout of the new Miri township, and in conference with representatives of the Oil Company.
In the evening Messrs. Higgins, Hall and Carter of the Sarawak Oilfields Limited, with their ladies, were guests to dinner at the Residency.
On Friday, April 30th, His Excellency proceeded overland to Kuala Belait where he was met by the British Resident, Brunei, Mr. Davis, and the Assistant Resident. Mr. Wernham. In the capacity of High Commissioner Designate His Excellency inspected the Malay, Chinese and Mission schools and the British Malayan Petroleum Companv’s hospital at Kuala Belait.
The party then visited the Shell Club at Seria, where His Excellency met the General Manager and senior executives of the British Malayan Petroleum Company. This was followed by a luncheon party given by Mr. and Mrs. Higgins.
After a visit to the British Malayan Petroleum Company’s offices at Seria His Excellency and party returned to Kuala Belait for a tea party at the Assistant Resident’s house before leaving for Brunei.—(Contributed.)
Notes and Comments.
The Council Negri met in Kuching on the 24th May and was adjourned on the 26th May, The address by His Excellency the Governor is reported in this issue.
On the morning of the 25th May, His Excellency the Commissioner-General for the United Kingdom in South East Asia arrived by Borneo Courier and the Members of the Council were presented to His Excellency on adjournment for the day.
On the motion for the adjournment the following day, Mr. D. M. Deen addressed the Council on the subject of Co-operative Banking and Abang Haji Abdulrahim spoke on the needs of small holders in the rubber industry in Sarawak.
The 29th June, 1948, is the centenary of the arrival of the first Christian Missionary in Sara-
wak. On St. Peter’s Day, 1948, the Reverend Francis McDougall, who in addition to being in Holy Orders was also a qualified surgeon, landed in Kuching having come at the request of the first Rajah. Seven years later, the diocese was founded, St. Thomas’ Cathedral consecrated and the Rever- end Francis McDougall consecrated as first Bishop.
In celebration of the inauguration of the first constitutionally elected President and Vice President of the Republic of China, the Chinese Consul, Doctor Ying Wing Chan, held a reception at the Consular residence, Kuching. Some one hundred and forty guests were present.
Later in the month, there was a Chinese assembly to discuss plans for building the Chinese Consulate, the cost of which is estimated at about $200,000.
A special issue of stamps is being made in the United Kingdom to commemorate the silver wed- ding of Their Majesties the King and Queen. The Colonial Governments have expressed a wish to participate in this issue, and arrangements are being made for the printing of the stamps for Sarawak in denominations of 8 cents and $5. The design of the stamps will be the same for all Colonial Territories and will be similar to the design for the United Kingdom stamps. It is hoped that these stamps will be available in September or October; they will remain on sale for three months.
The wharf labourers' strike in Singapore had its inevitable effect upon Sarawak’s export trade when the normal shipping schedules were thrown out of gear. In Kuching, where godown accommodation is usually limited, the hold up of some 1,400 tons of cargo in the first fortnight in May caused many rubber dealers to stop buying or to buy cautiously. The position eased considerably in the second half of the month.
It is understood that four of the Sarawak gold mining companies have agreed to amalgamate with the object of raising fresh capital and instituting more economical methods of gold extraction. The name of the new Company will be The Associated Mines (Borneo) Ltd. and will incorporate The Kro- kong Gold Mining Syndicate Ltd.. The Borneo Gold Mining Company Ltd., the Lian Hap Gold Mining Company Ltd. and the Nam Loong Gold Mining Syndicate. The Secretaries to the new company are Messrs. Tan Sum Guan of Kuching.
As we go to Press, news has just come in of the death of Mr. C. G. Beers in North Borneo.
All ex-Lintang Internees will remember his excellent acting in the camp plays and his attractive stories, which did so much to cheer them up in those days of adversity. He will be a great loss to his many friends.
Obituary.
It is with deep regret that we report the death of Reverend Father Jansen who. at the age of seventy-three, died in Miri hospital on the 31st March after a short illness.
Father Jansen can be truly said to have been one of the oldest brigade. He first arrived in Sarawak in January, 1900, and was in charge of
the Roman Catholic Mission in Sungei Sari, Lower Rejang. Later he was at Singgi, but by 1903 he had reached Baram and opened up the Miri Mission and transferred his headquarters from Baram to Miri, where he built the Church. From this mo- ment he has always been closely associated with the North part of Sarawak.
Shortly before the outbreak of the war with Japan Father Jansen's health was not too good, but on being interned, he appeared to take on a new lease of life and those few who were originally interned with him at Miri, cannot but remember forever his courage and refusal to be depressed.
After peace was declared and the internees from Kuching had proceeded to Labuan, he was among the first of the priests to leave the camp and return to his post at Miri and start the great task of re- habilitation and of undoing the evils wrought by the Japanese.
He was taking keen interest in the Ulu Baram, especially the Long Akah area, and he was de- termined to establish the Mission there before the work became too much for him. It was obvious that he was failing in health, but nevertheless he persisted in his task and achieved his object. Altogether he made three trips to the Long Akah area, but on his last trip he fell ill at Long Akah on March 19th. He started downstream on 21st and reached Miri late at night on 25th, dying in Miri hospital on 31st. Everyone, including medical authorities, had urged Father Jansen to "take things easily” but without effect and he died "in harness” as he would have wished.
A Father Jansen Memorial Fund has been opened at Miri and it is proposed that the memorial to Father Jansen should be the re-building of the Roman Catholic Church, Miri.
Those who would like to contribute to this memorial are asked to send their donations to the Honorary Secretary and Treasurer, Father Jansen Memorial Fund, Miri.
KUCHING IS NOT THE CITY OF THE CAT.
The article below was written in the Prison Camp at Lintang in April 1944 and published in “Adversity.” At first I thought of re-writing it but on reflection prefer to publish it as it stands with the exception of a few sentences which concern only my fellow prisoners who died and which would not be of great interest to present readers, and corrections to some deplorable grammar, brought on, no doubt, by living behind barbed wire.
I am aware that this article has no literary mer- it and that it is just a skimpy affair. If it is any excuse, however, I would ask readers to remember that it was written in times of great stress and under some difficulties. The manuscript in front of me is an affair of Sun Wah Tobacco Co. wrap- pers, home-made (or shall we say prison-made) ink and a borrowed stub of pencil. It must be remem- bered too that it was not possible to write freely. The Japanese suspected all writing and read sedit- ion, rebellion and secret ciphers into the most
innocent sentence. And now having made a lot of excuses, I leave it to you to decide on its worth.
Startling Revelations.
I must admit that I am beginning to get rather sick of the rude remarks of my fellow potato-peelers about Kuching. Of course it rains now and again, but I feel that they are taking rather a jaundiced view of the situation. Personally I like Kuching, and I hope that when the present little affair is over the grousers will give me an opportunity of showing them some of the more innocent sights.
Firstly in Kuching there are the three institutions so essential to the British : that is to say the Church- es, the race-course and the golf-links. I speak most respectfully of the Churches as the oldest, St. Thomas’ Cathedral, will be a hundred years old in 1948. The big brick Roman Catholic Church, although not so old, cost only the modest sum of $6,000 which, you must admit, was a remarkable achievement. There is a Chinese Temple, how- ever, still standing on the river front which must be very much older. Rightly the Chinese venerate and look upon it as a symbol of their long residence in the country. There is a Chinese monastery, I think, near Sekama Road, possibly unknown to many Europeans which intrigues me. Few pass through its doors and it is very old.
Whilst on this subject I wonder how many peo- ple know of the old Christian cemetery overlooking Bishopsgate. It has not been used for many a long year and most people pass it by. Here are buried many of the pioneers of modern Sarawak. For in- stance there are the graves of Fox and Steele, who were murdered at Kanowit in 1859. Here also lie Lee and Brereton. Their story is not generally well- known. On a punitive expedition up the Skrang in 1853 Brereton accused his great friend Lee of cowardice for refusing to advance up-river and attack the enemy. Lee, who was in command, suspected that the Dayaks had prepared an ambush and did not wish to walk into a trap.
On the last evening the two had a violent quarrel and the next morning Lee, exasperated by his friend’s taunts, ordered an advance. Exactly as he had foretold happened. The Government forces were surrounded and outnumbered and Lee, up to his waist in water, met a valiant death defending himself with his sword against Dayaks all round him.
Brereton escaped but, they say, never forgave himself for his share in the disaster and died a year or two later.
Although it may not be of much interest to pre- sent-day readers I should like to mention that Lee was my ancestor. I have tried many times to identify his smoked head which has been hanging in some Skrang Dayak long-house as a trophy for nearly a hundred years. His sword was recovered and is now in my possession.
Here too lie several persons killed in the Chinese insurrection, a number of naval ratings, members of the first Rajah’s staff and some others of little or no great importance.
Chinese Insurrection.
A word about the so-called Chinese insurrection of 1857 lest mention of it leads to misunderstand- ing.
Although in most text books and histories this affair is alwavs called “The Chinese Insurrection”
the truth is that it was nothing but the activities of a secret society resulting in a gigantic gang robbery. It was certainly not a general Chinese re- bellion against the existing Government. The cul- prits were all from one district and did not represent the Chinese living in other parts of the State. Ad- mittedly great damage was done and there was grave loss of life.
The Rajah had to swim the Kuching River after seeing his Astana go up in flames and his secretary killed. The whole affair was cleaned up in six days, and the flight, slaughter or capture of the guilty Chinese was quick and determined. The rest of the Chinese deplored this rash act and safety was soon restored again. The remains of the flagstaff on which the rebel flag was first hoisted were still to be seen at Bau Lama just before the war.
All The Amenities.
The golf links are, I believe, public ground and theoretically speaking there is nothing to stop any- one picnicking on the first green or riding ponies over the fairway.
It is a sporting course and they say that the Director of Education makes a tidy income from selling lost balls. His garden adjoins the links.
Racing has gone on, with one interval of seven years, since 1890. Since writing this we have dis- covered that the Japanese ate the racing ponies and destroyed the course so racing is still held up.
It is true that the second Rajah rode in several races, and the records seem to show that he won them all.
There are two up-to-date cinemas, and every golf caddie used to wear a Tom Mix or a Clark Gable button. Their elder brothers sported Merle Oberon and Ginger Rogers.
Dancing became almost a rage and was taken very seriously indeed. The Chinese and Malay misses would look with horror upon “kitchen lancers” or the Roger de Coverley.
Bottles in a Mosque.
The Museum, dating from 1881, is too well- known to need much comment except to say that the story is that a chance discovery in a picture paper of a town hall in France prompted the second Rajah to insist on the rather peculiar design of building. It has been altered twice in my recollection but it still remains an architectural curiosity. The con- tents, however, are fascinating, and such things as a whale to a burial totem post, and an elephant god to a palang may be seen.
Talking of buildings, Kuching seems to have been unfortunate. The Astana and the old block of Government buildings, for instance, are in harmony with the surroundings, but the same cannot be said of the recently built block of Government offices. These are a deplorable Pseudo-Gothic-Grecian Temple-Public Lavatorial mess.
Some people think that the people of the country know more about the building of cool and attractive houses than we do, and on reflection I think they may be right. Some of the older bungalows are spacious and charming and there are a few really beautiful Chinese houses. The biggest Mosque in the town is a plain affair except for the dome which has been studded with empty beer bottles to give it a glittering effect.
Street names are often interesting but Kuching has only Bishopsgate to rival Jesselton’s Bond
Street. A number of roads have been named for persons, but generally with unhappy effect. Some years ago the Indian Community insisted that Kling Street should be renamed India Street; but oddly enough a benevolent Government proposal to choose a more select name for Pig Lane was hotly and vehemently vetoed by the Chinese.
Pearl Street is a mystery and so was Pending until I solved it. Pending is really not a place at all; it is merely a customs station and wharf at the end of a road leading into Kuching. Many years ago the Borneo Company used to charter ships to carry their produce and the vessels stayed there “pending” further orders. Hence the name, and it has stuck. By the way, the people pronounce Pending with the emphasis in the “ding,” not as in the English word. The same applies to the great mountain of Matang overlooking this camp. It is Matang not Matang. Rather pedantic per- haps but one may as well speak as the people do rather than strike out out on a line of our own.
Clubs.
The Sarawak Club is known by repute. I suppose that if a prize had been offered for the best example of just what a Club should not be the architect of this one would be well in the running. The acous- tics (thank goodness I haven’t got to say it) of the Bar (I spell it with a big B on purpose) are shatter- ing to any newcomer and the intense gloom of the central hall casts a shadow on all human voices.
There are of course other clubs, and people tell me that there is a pink light area down a smelly little place called Khai Joo Lane, although of late years Padungan near the shipping centre has be- come very gay. Sailors don’t care !
A Band plays in the ornamental grounds and a kindly municipality has made cozy little retreats for lovers.
The streets are either very wide or very narrow and like Topsy “have growed.’’
I suppose that all lanes have an ending, but to my delight I have discovered some which meander charmingly for a while and then just fade out most restfully.
Town Planning.
There are miles and miles of neat bamboo hedges and hundreds of houses jumbled together in a friend- ly fashion. A few yards from the noise of bustle of Carpenter Street you may come upon a little Chinese Temple sleeping away its long years up a narrow alley. In the midst of a mass of shops you will discover a Chinese house nearly but not quite hidden by its courtvard of orange trees.
Showy saloon cars and messy little two-seaters mix with rickshaws and bullock carts.
Old and new, east and west. Modern hygiene and old age smells. Palm Beach suits and red cotton chawats. Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer and “Ali Baba Dengan Orang Penchuri Ampat-Puloh.” What a mixture. Forty thousand people of all colours, many races and more religions.
I see that I have forgotten to tell you how Kuch- ing came to be called by that name. Well, frankly I don’t know. In 1872 the Rajah, by decree, changed the name of the capital from Sarawak to Kuching. There is certainly a Sungei Kuching, or rather there is a drain which goes by that name.
One thing I can tell you—and that is that the name has nothing to do with a cat. No race in Sarawak uses the word touching for cat. The Malays and Melanaus call the animal pusa which
is, I suppose an onomatopcoeiac word. The Dayaks use an equally cat-like word. There is a Govern- ment station called Pusa.
A Tall Story.
As a parting word I will tell you something rather extraordinary. The main entrance of the Astana is the imposing and rather ancient tower overlooking the chief door to the Palace.
Now there is a Brooke tradition that the exterior of this tower must not be whitewashed or renovat- ed. If this should occur, so runs the legend, some disaster will take place. The tower had therefore became covered by an ivy-like creeper, and parts of the original building were crumbling in venerable decay.
The Japanese, vainglorious and victorious, saw fit to put this ruin into apple-pie order. The creeper was torn down, masons, plasterers and white wash- ers got busy.
Shortly afterwards Field Marshal Prince Maida, cousin of the Emperor Sun God and Generalissimo, fell miserably to earth in a crashed plane somewhere round about Miri. The Japanese suspected sabotage or suicide; the Sarawak people attributed it to the old tower. I dunno !
Nevertheless, the old motto still remains for those who can read it.
Harap-lah sa'lagi bernapas.
Some day when our dreams come true I hope to show you a pleasant Kuching—a place where there is really fun and laughter—may you live happy ever after.
Note.—Two of the last paragraphs above have been re-written entirely. I leave it to you to guess which.
O. F.
Sarawak Legends.
CHERITA LAMA,
AS TOLD BY T.K. PAWAN, KAMPONG LANGIR.
Long long ago at Semitau in the upper reaches of the Kapuas River in Dutch Borneo, there lived a man. His title and name was Nabi Adam, and the great Jewata had made him—the very first man in all the world.
Nabi Adam was happy enough at first. Wander- ing in the jungle, swimming in the hill streams, watching the beasts and all the time knowing that Jewata had singled him out to be different from all the others—why, of course he was happy. But as time went on he grew restless.
This restlessness grew and grew upon him, till he spent the days feverishly searching here, searching there, searching everywhere but just what he sought he didn’t know. The great Jewata knew though, and pitied his creation. So it came about that one day whilst Nabi Adam was searching he grew suddenly aware that his sachel, (which he wore slung on his left side) had grown curiously heavy. He stopped, opened it and what do you think—there was a lovely girl named Siti Awa! It is for that reason that even today when a man and a woman walk or sleep together, a woman's proper place is on the left.
Nabi Adam was content, and he and Siti Awa set up house together. In the fullness of time Siti
Awa bore a son and this son was given the name of Landar. Thereafter every year for six more years Siti Awa bore sons, and their names were Bira, Sara, Kara, Miang, Rangkang and Sarit. When we speak of them nowadays we always honour them by using the title “Pati” in front of their names.
Time slipped by and the lads grew up till they reached manhood. The eldest, Pati Landar seemed to have inherited his father’s early wanderlust. He was a peculiar looking fellow—tallish with a pasty complexion. Like so many elder sons he was a bit conceited too, no doubt from always having so many younger brothers to boss about. Eventually he wandered off towards the sea and didn’t come back. Instead he took a wife,1 and from Pati Landar and his wife have descended all the white2 races.
Pati Bira was the next to go—he went off down- river and took a wife, thus founding the Malay race.
Pati Sara wouldn’t stay home either. He went all the way to Shantung where he took him a wife and founded the Chinese race.
We will leave Pati Kara for the time being and pass on to Pati Miang and Pati Sarit. These two had always been a bit delicate, and the older they grew the more pale and wan they became. They loved wandering in the jungle, and if you’d met them you’d have thought they were a couple of wraiths. And you'd have been nearly right too for that is what they became. Having slipped over the border into the spirit world they evidently met a couple of attractive succubi, because from them has descended the whole race of imps, devils, bogles, ghosts, vampires and other hantus.
Pati Rangkang as a youngster was passionately fond of water. He was forever playing in the rivers, and at a very early age he could swim like a fish. Siti Awa was always telling him that no good would come of it, but he didn't heed. The older he grew the more time he spent in the river, until he only came out for his meals and even used to sleep in the river. No-one was really surprised when he turned into a crocodile and thus founded the species.
So out of the seven sons there now remained in Semitau only the fourth, Pati Ara. He was a good steady type and farmed his land, hunted game in the jungle, and looked after his father and mother. It was a bit lonely for him though, without his brothers, so he took a wife and founded his own race.
The years passed. Generation succeeded gene- ration. Nabi Adam and Siti Awa had long since died happily, surrounded by their descendants. Pati Kara also had long since passed away, and Semitau had become a huge village. So big was it that food began to run short, and each year the crop was a little worse than the year before. The two headmen. Bas and Bantat. after a conference with the older men decided the time had come to seek new lands. The villagers packed all their goods and their livestock, and off they moved in a general W N W direction.
It took them a long time, but finally they reached Sungei Melikin, on the upper reaches of Batang Krang. There they stayed for so long that they adopted the name of the stream as the name of their tribe, and to this day they are known as Melikins.
In due course they abandoned the site on Sungei Melikin in favour of Gunong Lebor, further down the Krang. From Lebor they have spread and formed the 12 main villages and the 4 sub-villages that comprise the Melikin race to-day.
Whilst the tribe was still at Sungei Melikin, a very unfortunate error occurred. A number of the villagers went out gathering those edible fungi that grow out of wood, and collected enough for a good big feast, Who made the mistake we will never know now, but mixed in with the edible variety were some poisonous ones. All those who ate were affected; men, women and children acted as though they were half drunk half imbecile.
In most similar cases the victims recover in a couple of days. For some reason these unfortunates did not—though they didn’t die they forgot how to speak Melikin, they forgot how to dress like Melikins, they forgot all the old customs and made new ones. Nowadays their descendants have forgotten they ever were Melikins and call them- selves by different names.
They call themselves Balaus and Bidayuhs, though some people call them Sea Dayaks and Land Dayaks.
1 This lady presumably was a sister-in-law of Cain.
2 “White” here means European. The contention that the Chinese are the true white race and that Europeans are either red devils or red monkeys can be argued elsewhere.
The Dog Show.
Long long ago—well, over a year ago, anyway—they wanted to raise money for the Guides, and a very clever person said, “Why not have a dog show? Nearly everyone here has a dog and some have several.”
Someone else said, “But surely they are hardly the types that frequent dog shows.”
“Thats where you are wrong,” said the clever one. “Except for Ben Sochon, all the dogs here are local born so they start level. Everybody thinks that their particular brindled barker is vastly superior to the others and will be sure to bring it along for that reason.”
“But how can you possibly decide which is the best dog when they are all kampong curs?”
“Oh well, that's for the judges to decide, of course. Old Gilly wouldn’t mind judging I’m sure.”
“Does Gilly know anything about dogs?”
“I don’t suppose he does, but he hasn’t got a dog of his own yet, and that’s the important point. No one who is showing a dog can be a judge too. Actually, it might be better to have several judges, and if you will help me to make a list of the people who have no dogs, we will ask them suddenly or we shall find that they have arranged to go to Santu- bong for the week-end.”
In this manner, more or less, the idea of the dog show originated, and, as the clever promoter had said, there were a great many dogs in Kuching and most of their owners were quite ready to give them an airing for a good cause.
Eight people were pursuaded—very reluctantly— to act as judges : four for the senior dogs, and four for those under six months. Prizes were offered
for 1, The dog most like any known breed. 2, The dog with the shortest nose. 3, The dog with the longest tail. 4, The most obedient dog, and 5, The dog in the best fancy dress.
A Sunday morning was chosen, and what a busy one it was! Just about the worst Sunday morning that the Kuching ticks have ever known ! Dogs were painstakingly caught, and washed and brushed and combed. They then escaped to the nearest muddy ditch, only to be caught and put through the whole business again.
It happened to be a boiling hot morning and from half past nine onwards the Club was the scene of furious activity as cars and jeeps drove up with their panting cargo of dogs and overheated owners; all the former quite unused to social life, and the latter rather resembling the parents of nervous d butantes, who hope to shine in the re- flected glory of their palpitating charges, if all goes well.
There were no serious fights to begin with, as all dogs had to be attached to their owners by a string. Sammy Dawson very sportingly entered for all the events, although his fancy dress consisted merely of one outsize red flower, and as everyone knows, his tail is by no means a long one, having been docked in his infancy. By the way, he tells an amusing story apropos of this incident. When he was a small pup, his master visited the hospital and made an appointment to have the longer part of Sammy's tail removed, and the dresser asked if he was a large dog who would require an anaesthetic. At that time, however, he fitted nicely into mas- ter’s pocket and so the answer was, “No.” On the fateful afternoon, when Sammy arrived for his operation, it happened that Ben Sochon also turned up at the hospital, and stalked in proudly just ahead of Sammy and his master.
“This dog cannot reasonably be described as a small puppy.” said the dresser, “and if I am to re- move his tail I really must insist on administering an anesthetic,”
At these words, Ben stalked out again and Sam- my was produced and duly docked. We wonder what Ben’s master would have said if he had come out of the hospital to find his ‘‘little lap dog” minus several feet of tail!
However, to return to the dog show. It was hotter than ever, now, on the Club lawn, and the perspiring judges were hard at work with measuring tapes, trying to decide which dogs rejoiced in the shortest noses and the longest tails. Snapped at, alike, by dogs and owners, their lot was not an enviable one, but they stuck grimly to the task, nevertheless. One member was heard to remark, “I have four dogs at home, and meant to bring them today but I couldn’t catch one of them!” He stayed to see the fun, all the same, and refreshed himself with so many glasses of iced beer, while enjoying the antics of the competitors who HAD been caught, that perhaps his pets were wise to choose to remain in obscurity.
Some of the senior dogs arrived at the show already decked out in fancy dress, but as this event was the last one, the puppies were dressed up just beforehand. Very sweet they looked too, albeit a trifle self conscious. Pluto Corbin made a most attractive “Dog Toby” and Rastus Soward, a win- some little girl in party frock and bonnet, but Buster Leach finally walked away with the prize. At that time he was a mere bundle of fluff, and with a neat barrel of brandy affixed to his small person he was a St. Bernard in miniature : only
too willing to go out and save lives or to chew up your shoes, or anything else that came his way.
Before the end of the show several competitors were missing, and it was found that one of the larger dogs had bitten through the strings of those who were tied up in the shade, whereupon they wasted no time in departing for home. In any case, they said to themselves, it was nearly time for dinner.
Ben Sochon came to the show to watch and criticize. When the prize giving was over he was kind enough to show his admirers how a really obedient dog behaves, by carrying out complicated orders given by his master. Finally, he too, decided that it was time for lunch—he always has his bones curried on Sunday—and the party dispers- ed, feeling happy to know that, thanks to their benevolence, a handsome sum had been collected for a deserving cause.
K. S.
The Sibu Annual Regatta 1948.
Sibu was in holiday mood for the first post-war regatta held on May 8th. The meeting was graced by the presence of His Excellency the Governor and party who had arrived in Sibu on 5th May.
There were many events arranged in connection with the Regatta, though the latter itself was the main attraction. The Land Sports, in which the local schools took the leading part, attracted vast crowds to the Finals on the Friday afternoon, when the cups were presented by Miss J. Arden Clarke. The Schools Challenge Cup was won easily by the Sacred Heart School. Mrs. C. B. Murray had the invidious task of handicapping the Penghulus in the 100 yards race. Those that were young and fit she put behind the start line, and those that were of a certain age she advanced accordingly but was unprepared for the resulting tumult as the young Penghulus were annoyed at being handicapped and the old ones were incensed at being given an advantage. The result was that in the Penghulus Handicap all the Penghu- lus started from the starting line at once. The Manager of the Chartered Bank is to be con- gratulated on winning the “Judges Threading the Needle Race” and the “Government Officials and Merchant Princes” race. The Sarawak Consta- bulary, are to be congratulated on winning the Tug- of-War. The Sacred Heart School won the Relay Race. For the first Land Sports held in Sibu for many years, the standard was remarkably high.
The Water Sports consisted of races in the Rejang, ‘catching the duck’ the ‘greasy pole’ and ‘pillow fights,’ which latter caused much amuse- ment to the spectators.
An interesting new departure was the Photo- graphic Exhibition where there was the opportunity of seeing and purchasing copies of the works of Mrs. Hedda Morrison and Mr. K. Wong, apart from the works of some of the ladies of Sibu. Mrs. Morrison was shewing 30 studies of life in China and 30 of Iban and Melanau life in the Rejang river. Mr. Wong exhibited photographs taken both in Malaya and Sarawak. The visitors in Sibu were able to see an exhibition of great interest and very high quality. It is to be hoped that this innovation will become a permanent feature of the events associated with the Sibu Annual Regatta.
The Tuba Fishing which took place in the Igan River was the high light for Sunday morning. The Dayaks had been bringing in the tuba for weeks and the preparations were complete with His Excellency the Governor performing the Bedara ceremony on Saturday morning. About 9 a.m. on the Sunday “La Follette” and several launches with innumerable small craft drifted down the Batang Igan. The river seemed covered with boats weaving in and out in a constantly changing design waiting for the signal to throw in the tuba root and then spear the fish as they rose to the surface. To an onlooker the first impression was that of the Doge of Venice holding a meeting on the Grand Canal. Owing to flood waters and to some rain the catch was disappointingly poor, few fish of any size being caught at all. However there was one exciting moment when 10 boats pounced on one hapless fish the size of a codfish. This fish was speared by one harpoon and six spears but is to be congratulated on making good its escape, much to the annoyance of the harpoonists. Many of the spectators returned to Sibu at mid-day in time to wave “Farewell” to “La Follette” as she left for Sarikei.
The final of the Football Championship was played off on Sunday afternoon and was won by the Sibu Constabulary. The runners up were the Lo- wer Rejang Wanderers who unfortunately appeared to be somewhat overwhelmed by the impressiveness of the occasion. The Honourable the Resident presented the cups and the event brought to a close a most enjoyable three days in Sibu.
The high light of the whole period was un- doubtedly the Regatta. As with the other shows, the weather held good, though at one time it was oppressively hot and there were a few light after- noon showers, though not enough to mar the enjoyment.
At one time the organisers of the Regatta feared there would be fewer competitors than there had been in the pre-occupation competition owing to the Dayak lack of boats; this proved a mistaken idea as there were record entries for all events.
Racing started at 8 a.m. on Saturday and con- tinued throughout the day with forty-five minutes intervals until 5 p.m. The Rev. Father Epping is to be congratulated on judging for the whole of that time with only one short break of 20 minutes for lunch.
The races for the Governor’s Cup and the Penghulus’ Cup were among the most exciting. In the Penghulus’ Cup forty-four boats raced. It took half an hour to start them in a stragly line well downstream of the official starting line and the unhappy starters were left hoarse and almost hysterical and very envious of the capable and con- fident manner in which one sheep dog can manage a flock of sheep. Once off, however, a race was a grand sight. The short crisp strokes, exactly together, of 15, 30 and sometimes 60 paddlers was most impressive. The flag man in the middle would urge on his crew, and would encouragingly unfurl his flag on nearing the winning post. The shouts from the bank intermingled with the periodic chorus from the crew would encourage one on to try one’s luck in dollars on the winner at the tote. All this supplied Sibu with enough excitement to last for sometime. Incidentally the difference be- tween the strokes of the Melanaus and Sea Dayaks was very noticeable right through the Regatta. I found myself thinking that our little affair from Putney to Mortlake would seem tame indeed after this.
Miss Jennifer Arden Clarke presented the cups and prizes at 5 p.m. when there were many amus- ing incidents. One winner put down his challenge cup and led the clapping himself. The crews from Bawang Assan, Lower Rejang (with a perahu suitably named S.R.D. J.C.B. Fisher) had a great day winning three cups including the Governor’s cup and Regatta cup and were later in the evening marching with them in procession round the bazaar.
A great deal of pleasure was experienced during the Regatta, but it should on no account be for- gotten that the object of the Regatta was to raise funds for charity for all races in Third Division. All races contributed most nobly towards providing funds for the Regatta and it would be invidious not to say injudicious to single out and mention any one person or race as an example. Suffice it to say that the Dayaks contributed over 500 pikuls of tuba, and that the prizes for the Re- gatta, the Land and Water Sports and for the Football Competition were all presented by voluntary collections in cash and in kind from amongst the Towkays and Merchants and the Government Departments and officers and individ- uals of all races, creeds and religions. Everyone gave to his capacity in cash, in work and in organis- ing ability, and the whole show was a magnificient combined effort of Third Division that went to make the great success which the period of the Sibu Annual Regatta undoubtedly was.
The results of the Regatta are :—
Sibu Annual Regatta 1948.
The following is the result of the Sibu Annual Regatta (1948) Sweepstake.
Prize. Ticket No.
First ... 8498
Second ... 6908
Third ... 7252
Consolation ... 1710
Consolation ... 4646
R. E. CHATER,
J. C. B. FISHER, Joint Hon : General Secretaries.
M.V. "RAJAH BROOKE”
The M.V. “Rajah Brooke” is the first ship to be commissioned by the Sarawak Steamship
Company since the M.V. “Rejang” in 1934. Built at Dundee, the “Rajah Brooke”
has been specially designed for the Kuching-Singapore service and has an overall length of
271'6" which is considered to be about the greatest length for safely navigating the Sarawak
River. The trip from Kuching to Singapore can be done in a little over thirty hours; the
maiden voyage on this service is scheduled for the 5th June.
Films of the Month.
For the cinema-goer, there has been a run of good
entertainment at the Sylvia Cinema this month.
The choice of films for an audience of mixed
nationalities must present considerable difficulties,
and allied to those difficulties are the uncertainties
of transport for the films. It is with a sense of
appreciation that one realises how high a standard
can be maintained here.
The two best films of the month were probably
Monsieur Verdoux and Black Narcissus.
Charlie Chaplin, who played the title role in
Monsieur Verdoux, occupies an unusual position in
the contemporary film world. For a generation he
has been a recognised star and during this t me has
not inflicted one bad film on his public. Few actors
have contrived to bridge the chasm between the
silent film and the talkie and of those few. most have
failed to susta n their earlier reputation. Charlie
Chaplin has not only done this but he has improved
upon his reputation and particularly so in this
interpretation of a French Bluebeard.
It is a film that can be strongly recommended.
Black Narcissus is an unusual film and, at first,
one wondered why the book should have been selected
as suitable for filming. The high standard of
acting was responsible for the fascination which the
film exerted and one left the cinema with the
pleasant sensation of having been to a playhouse.
This Sarawak.
(With apologies to the New Statesman
and Nation.)
One light-hearted enthusiast leapt at the idea
which seemed to him to open up unlimited possibilities
of voting himself increases in salary.—A
report.
It was found that a Chinese boat hawker had
been done to death apparently by spear wounds
in his boat.—A monthly report.
There are about 70 odd children at.............in
need of education.—Monthly report.
A surprised Board of Survey was carried out at
........... during the month.—Monthly report.
In this respect I beg leave to explain that in
certain cases it was found that some of the
labourers or even a few clerical staff who received
some pocket expenses from the Company to reach
their destination, imprudently lost their money and
became hard up, while waiting for the outgoing
boats or for transport. It will be useful also for
the men those who more often come to.............
for a short time work here may find their food and
lodging in their easy reach on payment of $2.50
and $3.00 per adult per day. with salutory services.
—A letter of application to open a lodging house.
Time please! ..................has promised to donate seven new
Swiss watches each to the winner of each school.
—Sarawak Tribune.
Head hunters please note.
By the end of the war the production of syn- thetic rubber head reached colossal proportions. —Sarawak Tribune.
New York City. Government of Sarawak, Kuching.
There is much trouble going about here in the U.S. What is the matter?—A letter.
What will the Kuching cross-river Residents have to say...............—An official memorandum.
To shelter pigs from foreign ships—An applicat- ion to build a shelter.
The people in the Kampong went to bazaar by perahu but now they can go on foot “happy go lucky” as before.—A report.
Members should be anotomically eligible to vote.
—A letter.
I have the honour to inform you that I was married on..........and I shall be obliged that my
cost of living be increased accordingly.—A letter.
(The Editor is unable to follow the example of our illustrious contemporary and offer a prize for the best entry in this column. Contributions from all parts of “This Sarawak” will, however, be warmly appreciated and the most favoured will be given pride of place.)
Fifty Years Ago.
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, JUNE 1,1898.
The Sea Dyaks.
The Sea Dyaks belong to the Malayan race. This is evident from the root-forms of their lan- guage which are synonymous with the root-forms of the Malayan language. Both languages admit prefixes. If there is at all a Dyak grammar its similarity will be at once identified with the Malay grammar.
Neither the Sea Dyaks nor the Malays of Sarawak may be called the aborigines of this part of the island of Borneo. Three or four centuries ago they were driven to migrate into this island. The Sea Dyaks appear to have migrated before the Malays. We can conjecture nothing satisfac- torily as to the causes of the migration than either the compulsory conversion of Mehomed’s successors, or famine, or war.
It is clear the Sea Dyaks were once upon a time in the Malayan Peninsular, this is proved from the arts of spinning, weaving, and colouring clothes, which they have possessed for many generations back independently of their neighbours the Malays of Sarawak. But the aborigines roughly speaking of this part of the island are quite ignorant even of the art of spinning.
The Malays, it may be presumed, were once what the Dyaks are now, in matters of civilization and religion. The Malays' semi-civilization perhaps dates from the time of their conversion to Meho- medanism. The proof of this is, that, they have not yet been thoroughly purged of their once heathenish rites, in the belief in witches and so forth.
There is no difficulty in tracing to its origin the name Malay, but the names Dyak and Laut present more difficulty in elucidation. Probably both words have been mispresented, and this mispresentation originated with Dyaks and the Malays themselves.
First with reference to the word Dyak, which is universally used and is only applied to the race in this island who are still living in much barbarism. This is the opinion of those who look at things in their outward aspect. But the Sea Dyaks are not at all a savage race, as may be proved later on.
It may be presumed, that, the word Dyak was not known to the Sea Dyaks before they migrated into this island. It is a word of the Land Dyaks whom we may roughly call one of the aboriginal races of this island. But the word according to the pronunciation of both the Land and the Sea Dyaks has been corrupted in the spelling by the in- troduction of the final K, which is not at all present in the native pronunciation of the word. The word Dyak or properly speaking Daya answers to the Malay word orang, which means a man, or the people.
Before proceeding to elucidate how the word Dyak came to be mispresented, I must first of all deal with the favourite meaning of it which is current already on the lips of many people, who affirm, that it is the corrupted form of the Malay word darat, which means inland, or up country. This is an impossibility. If darat could be at all corrupted it would not receive that form of corrupt- ion. but its corrupted form would be dara or dari; for both the Sea Dyaks and the Malays pronounce their R. Furthermore, when we come to explain the phrase Dyak Undup, Dyak Skrang, etc., by which each tribe of the Sea Dyaks calls itself, the word darat will not only appear ungrammatical, but also absurd.
The misrepresentation of the word Dyak, it may be presumed, had accidentally cropped up, and was retained in force, through the mere carelessness and ignorance of the Dyaks to have introduced them- selves to be thus called, and vice versa; the Malays call themselves Laut. But with reference to the Malays their nationality is known and therefore no question is necessarily raised to investigate their proper nationality.
With regard to the Sea Dyaks there is no light as yet thrown upon the matter which will lead us to any satisfactory conclusion with reference to their nationality. The word Daya which is a word of the Land Dyaks meaning a man, or the people, gives us no assistance whatever towards the in- vestigation of their nationality. But from studying their peculiarity and habit it gives one just a chance to surmise, without the aid of their tradition, that they once had a name to express their nationality; but for what cause or reason their fore-fathers had allowed it to die out in such a mysterious manner is better answered by our readers. The presumpt- ion that may be taken is this, that, the peculiarity of the Sea Dyaks up to the present day is to call themselves by the place or river they remove to.
If the Dyaks account of their migration could be even relied upon it still gives us no help to trace it beyond the island of Borneo. They unanimously affirm that, their forefathers had removed here (i.e. the lower and mouth of the Batang Lupar river) from the very source of the Batang Lupar or the main river.
The Sea Dyaks after their migration into this part of the island of Borneo and after having touch- ed at certain unknown localities must have separated themselves either on account of family discord or from choice. Before this had taken place they all must have talked one form of language, since which time they must have decided themselves into tribes and this resulted in the different forms of dialects now spoken in the Sea Dyak tribes.
The divisions of the Sea Dyak tribes are these, Batang Rajang, Katibas, Kanowit, Krian, Saribas, Sebuyau, Balau, Batang Ai, Undups, Skrang, Lemanak, Kumpang, Engkari, Kubau, Engkerbang, etc. If these tribes are to be subdivided again they will number five or ten times as many.
The Sea Dyaks although divided into various tribes, yet speak only one language, and this one language is the Malayan language. It is a signific- ant fact that the Malayan language is the mother language of various tribes of people. If is also a fountain of which the richness extents far and wide.
It is not to be wondered at if hundreds of Malay words are found in the Sea Dyak language. It is not assuming a privilege for argument but merely asserting a self-evident fact. If the Sea Dyak language is carefully compared we shall find many Sanscrit words used and admitted as genuine Dyak words.
Of the various tribes of Sea Dyaks, each tribe adopts its own idioms, pronunciation, and adds foreign words to its language to enrich it. To one who is not thoroughly conversant with the Malay and the Sea Dyak languages it would be difficult to detect their indentity. The peculiarity of tones and pronunciations which each tribe has habituated itself to, to suit its own taste would at first sight to a stranger appear unintelligible; and it would appear impossible to distinguish the language of one tribe from another.
The Sea Dyak language is like some other lan- guages growing rich in its vocabulary, as the people come in contact with foreigners they adopt their words. The Malayan language has adopted many Sanscrit words which were introduced perhaps un- der the Majapait Kingdom. The Malayan lan- guage also has adopted many Arabic words which came about dating from their conversion to Meho- med’s faith. But the adoption of the Sanscrit words into the Malay is prior to the Arabic. This appears more convincing in affirming the migration of the Sea Dyaks into the island of Borneo, and their being once upon a time in the Malayan Penin- sular, because the Sanscrit words are found in their language.
The Malays before their conversion to Meho- medanism had no letters of their own, and what they have now are made up out of the Arabic alpha- bet. To suit the tone of their language they have to name their letters accordingly. With reference to the Sea Dyaks since the Gospel of Christ has been preached to them, the Bishop and his Mis- sionaries have been able to form letters for them out of the Roman alphabet. To suit the tone of their language they have also to pronounce their letters accordingly.
It is difficult to form one’s opinion or judgment between the two languages (the Malays and the Sea Dyaks.) as to which is the richer and more expressive. Both languages claim classical forms. When the Malay language is spoken grammatically it is not only expressive but exceedingly musical. It is so also with the Sea Dyak language when it is spoken grammatically.
The above named tribes of the Sea Dyaks have descended from one family, which they are able to prove from their genealogy. Some of the people are extraordinarily gifted with good memories. Although we allow a limited amount of credit to traditions, yet we must admit that they have their foundations upon which their stories are built.
The Dyaks have their own rules of logic in their own courts of law, which are more approximate to axioms than proverbs. To listen to their advocates in defending or pleading cases in their own courts is certainly worth while, if one is conversant with their classical language. They are a political race, more so than the Malays or Chinese. With them all offences are fineable. Apologies are not accept- ed in their society.
WM. HOWELL.
(The Reverend William Howell was born in Labuan in 1856 and spent most of his eighty-two years in close contact with Borneo. He spent the whole of his priesthood amongst the Sea Dyaks and his writings are concerned with the customs and history of this people. In his time he was one of the greatest authorities on the language and in con- junction with Mr. D. J. S. Bailey, one time Resident of the Second Division, produced the first English-Dayak dictionary.—ED.)
News from Far and Near.
FIRST DIVISION.
The District Officer, Bau, (Mr. Lloyd Thomas) reports the removal of the temporary shops on the site opposite to the Vegetable Market at Bau which has freed a valuable area for the development of public buildings.
The following is extracted from the Serian District report for April : “Near Kampong Pan- chor (twenty-seventh mile Kuching-Simanggang Road) is a spring of hot water; appropriately enough, the creek in which it is situated is called Sungei Angat. The Dayaks say that it cools slightly as the sun rises to its zenith, but at dawn or sunset it boils. It was inspected at 10 a.m. and the water was far too hot to be pleasant to the touch. The water is clear, odourless and tasteless. Bubbles rise continuously, but not always from the same place. At the time of inspection there remained only a pool of hot water; it is stated that when the creek is flowing, the water is hot for several hundred yards downstream. The Dayaks swear they catch fish in the hottest water, but deny these fish are boiled and ready to eat.”
On 22nd April a party of Chinese was proceeding downriver towards Simunjan by perahu. At Gedong they were warned that the bore was nearly due. Either they misunderstood or under- estimated the danger, as a spokesman replied that they were in a hurry and could not wait.
The bore met them at Lubok Bunting, one of the most dangerous places on the river. Though experienced boatmen can “ride the bore” these people were not sufficiently expert. The perahu’s nose dipped under the waves and the perahu went under.
A Chinese woman and a Chinese boy were drowned—the others managed to stay afloat till the bore had passed. The corpse of the former was recovered the following day some eight miles downriver. So far the child’s corpse has not been recovered; in view of the number of crocodiles in the river it may never be recovered.
SECOND DIVISION.
Attempts to recruit labour in the Second Division have tended to dislocate work in Government offices at Simanggang with applicants crowding in to request work. The District Officer, Simanggang, (Mr. Bruen) writes that it cannot be over em- phasized that recruitment of labour must be done through official channels.
The following is an extract from the monthly report of the District Officer, Simanggang: “A report was received from Dutch Authorities that a house near Lubok Antu had farmed in Dutch territory. On investigation it appeared that this house has always farmed that particular land and that in any case the land was within the area from which a nearby river flowed into Sarawak and there- fore it was considered as Sarawak land. The matter is still pending and a meeting will probably be arranged between the houses on both sides of the border and an amicable settlement agreed upon.”
The Honourable the Resident, Second Division, (Mr. Ditmas) comments that many similar cases have been amicably settled in the past.
The District Officer, Simanggang, reports that the pepper plants in the experimental garden at Engkilili are doing well but a few of the coffee and cocoa plants have wilted away, possibly through an excess of rain.
Eight new canna beds have been made flanking the road running between the Junior Service quarters in Simanggang. The cannas were import- ed from Kuching.
The district Officer, Kalaka, (Mr. Wilson) reports an outbreak of diarrhoea accompanied by vomiting at Kabong; the outbreak coincided with the opening of the prawn season. Eight children died but the arrival of the Government Dresser stopped the outbreak.
The District Officer, Kalaka, reports that the Awik pegai, of inconvenient size and growing population,has been split in two and an election was held to fill the vacancy for a Penghulu. Two hundred persons attended the election, packing the sturdy six-doored house. The election passed off decorously and quiet conviviality continued until dawn, when the scene was enlivened by an official who had a nightmare that he had Dayaks fighting on top of him and awakened to find that he had.
The District Officer, Kalaka, writes : “Notes and Comments in the April Sarawak Gazette calls to mind a folktale involving the petrification of a house at Kerangan. Krian, which I heard some months ago but to date no Dayak can be found who can retell it.”
THIRD DIVISION.
The following is an extract from the report of the District Officer, Sibu, (Mr. Fisher) : “Dayaks report medium harvests and crops were mostly reaped by the end of the month. The Chinese on the other hand with their centuries of experience of wet rice cultivation have reaped bumper crops and the Headmen estimate that they are eighty per cent self-supporting in rice until the next harvest.”
The District Officer, Lower Rejang, (Mr. Snelus) comments upon the notable absence of tuak during his tour of the ulu Julau, Sungei Wak and ulu Sarikei. He says that the Dayaks were peaceful and contented and looking forward to enjoying the first fruits of the new harvest. The District Officer adds: “The most noticeable feature—apart from the lack of tuak—was the keen desire on the part of the Dayaks to open small shops in the ulu Julau. Both Penghulus Nyambar and Juti already have such shops where they employ Chinese as clerks.”
The following is an extract from the report of the District Officer, Lower Rejang: “Several houses expressed a wish to move to another district owing to their farming lands being worked out. It was indeed a sorry sight to walk for hours through scrub-land of fern and lalang : sure indications of the barrenness of the soil.”
The District Officer, Lower Rejang, reports a serious drop in the amount of mangrove bark coming forward on offer for the manufacture of cutch. It is believed, however, that this state of affairs is only seasonal and will soon right itself.
The following is extracted from the report of the District Officer, Lower Rejang. “With jacaranda trees planted on the main Bazaar road verges and on the centre islands, and casuarina and flame of the forest trees planted in front of the new office, Binatang is rapidly taking shape as an attractive new town.”
It is noticeable that in most of the Municipal areas on the Rejang strenuous efforts have been made to make the places attractive.
The following is an extract from the report of the District Officer, Lower Rejang: “On the 30th was held at Sarikei the first meeting of the re- organised District Advisory Council. The meeting lasted nearly all day and many matters vital to the interests of Melanaus, Dayaks and Chinese were brought up for discussion. But at present each community shews itself only interested in matters which are its own particular concern : it may take some time before the representatives can be brought to a realisation of their common interest in the affairs and progress of the district as a whole.
The following is extracted from the monthly re- port of the District Officer, Kanowit, (Mr. Drake): “Work proceeded on the rubber, pepper, cocoa and sago nurseries at the station. Kapok cuttings were planted to act as supports for the pepper, but most of the first lot died. A further attempt will be made next month. Fifty-eight cocoa seedlings were planted, and most have put new shoots and appear to be doing well. The pepper planted two
months ago appears to be healthy for the main part. Some were attacked by mealy bugs, and it was noticed that these were the plants with grass shades, while those with fern shades were not attacked. All the grass shades have now been replaced.”
The District Officer, Mukah, (Mr. Morris) reports that contrary to the expectations of many people, the fall in the price of rice has had no significant effect on the price of other commodities or on the labour market. The District Officer adds: “Despite the high rates of pay obtainable there has, so far as I can gather, been no corresponding rise in the standard of living, nor any appreciable attempt to save money either directly or in the form of jewellery purchases. The increase in spending power has merely served to inflate prices and encourage gambling. From my limited ex- perience in this district I am fairly sure that pro- ducers have and are deriving little benefit from the recent high prices for sago."
Owing to rough weather, the bars at Mukah and Oya could not be negotiated for four days during March.
The Assistant District Officer, Kapit, (Mr. Rennick) reports that information has been received from the Up-River-Agent that four Kayans were drowned while attempting to negotiate the Giam Lirong rapids in a heavily laden perahu.
A Dayak girl, aged fifteen was taken by a croco- dile while bathing in the river. A crocodile, believed to be the killer, was caught later on the same day. It measured fifteen feet in length.
FOURTH DIVISION.
The death of the Reverend Father Jansen is re- ported from Miri : an account of his life and work in Sarawak, together with the details of a proposal to raise a memorial, appears elsewhere in this issue.
The District Officer, Miri, (Mr. Lascelles) reports that a successful police raid was carried out on a gambling 'school' at Lutong. The two conductors were arrested.
The District Officer, Bintulu, (Mr. Jacks) reports that, owing to the drop in the price of sago, there was less activity during the month in this industry. The Melanaus have been advised to plant up more sago to replace the heavy cutting of the last few months.
The following is an extract from the report of the District Officer, Bintulu: “On Easter Sunday a large wild boar and four sows appeared on the lawn of the District Officer’s bungalow within twenty yards of the house. Unfortunately they turned back into the undergrowth before a gun could be brought to bear nor was the subsequent chase at all successful.”
The following story is taken from the monthly report of the District Officer, Baram, (Mr. Morgan) : “An unusual ‘patient’ was inadvertantly admitted to Marudi hospital during the month under the following circumstances. For some time a Malay woman from Kampong Sebrang opposite Marudi Bazaar had been seriously ill and she and her relatives had steadfastly and at times abusively, refused the ministrations of the Government dresser who. keen and efficient as he is, persisted in his attempts for some days. After some ten days or
so he was forced to admit that he was wasting his time and resigned the unfortunate lady to the tender care of the local tukang ubat. A month having passed without further incident the dresser was not unduly surprised when the relatives of the invalid appeared with a request that she be brought into hospital for treatment, this being the usual escape of tukangs who, having had recourse to everything from ground gall-stones to bats blood and observing that the patient shows no improve- ment and, in fact, is on the point of death, resign the patient hastily to the Government dresser and absolve themselves of all responsibility of the inevit- able death, the blame of which is borne by white man’s medicine; this by reflection increases the re- liability of local ubat and enhances the reputation of the tukang. The patient was brought unobstrus- ively to the hospital whilst the dresser was having his lunch and the relatives departed, for reasons known only to themselves, at once and without in- forming anyone. The dresser had reached the cigar- ette and coffee stage when he was informed by the dispensary assistant that the ‘patient’ had arrived. He proceeded immediately to examine her but was more than a little startled to be confronted by a perfectly good (or bad) corpse which had died from obvious illness some twenty-four hours pre- viously. Investigations showed that the relatives had hit upon the brilliant and unprecedented idea of stinging the Government for funeral expenses. Needless to say the ‘patient’ was smartly returned and the body was duly interred at the expense of the relatives.”
The first full dress, post-war regatta in the Baram District since the liberation was scheduled to be held on the 8th May. The news of the regatta arous- ed considerable interest and many houses were en- gaged in making new perahus. A trial regatta was held last year, all perahus being pre-war con- struction.
The District Officer writes : "In connection with the present regatta it is proposed to institute the “HUDDEN CUP” in memory of the late Mr. D. C. Hudden as first prize for the winner of the un- limited class of perahus. This will be a silver cup suitably inscribed in English and Malay to be kept for six months by the winning crew and for six months displayed in the Kubu Baram. A roll of annual winners of the cup will also be kept and displayed. The idea has proved so popular that within a few weeks of the first tentative suggestion a sum of over $500 has already been collected and subscriptions have had to be limited to $10 per per- son. Although it is doubtful if the cup will be ready in time for the forthcoming regatta the race will nevertheless be run and the winners will receive their prize at a later date.”
It also seems probable that a second challenge cup may be presented to the Baram Regatta.
The District Officer, Baram, reports that a Malay woman was seized by a crocodile whilst bathing in the vicinity of her house. As a result of this tragedy, a crocodile hunt was organised; it is re- ported that sixteen crocodiles were killed.
FIFTH DIVISION.
The Honourable the Resident, Fifth Division, (Mr. Anderson) reports a case where two small Chinese boys pleaded guilty to erasing post marks off postage stamps and using the stamps a second
time. The culprits were severely warned and bound over in the surety of their parents.
COOKERY NOOK.
The Honourable the Resident reports that a pre- liminary shipment of six pairs of buffaloes for breed- ing was sent to the Director of Agriculture, Kuching.
The Honourable the Resident reports that river erosion at Lawas and Sundar is becoming dangerous.
Three Bisayas from the Danau area and two Muruts from Lawas have been sent to Kuching to attend the Batu Lintang Training Course. It is hoped that it will be possible for live couples (two Muruts, two Bisayas and one Iban) to attend the course at Kanowit in May.
The Government padi plot at Bengkita yielded 500.5 gantangs per acre; the normal yield in non- irrigated plots in the same area is probably not above 200 gantangs per acre.
The Cadet Officer, Limbang, (Mr. Harper) reports a case of infection of the foot caused by treading on snake bones. A similar case was reported from the Second Division in February.
Rain gauges have been installed at Limbang, Ukong and Kubong.
CORRESPONDENCE.
THE MURUTS.
Resident’s Office,
Limbang, Sarawak.
29th April, 1948.
The Editor,
Sarawak Gazette,
Kuching.
Sir,
I feel compelled to reply to certain points raised by Mr. Southwell’s very interesting letter published in your issue of April 1st.
While head hunting is obviously a penal offence, I am not aware that songs and dances connected with it ceased to be practiced under Government control.
In fact I have seen such dances performed quite recently, and they are most graceful, the performers being Murut women in tribal dress, and they are in no sense obnoxious, neither from a religious nor a social nor aesthetic view point. In any event, what right have we to criticize, still less to control, these pleasant and harmless manifestations of a less aggressive outlook, when our own past is reflected in similar dances and nursery songs such as the May Pole and Oranges and Lemons?
Yours faithfully,
J. G. Anderson
COOKERY NOOK.
SlMANGGANG,
8th May, 1948. The Editor,
Sarawak Gazette,
Kuching.
Dear Sir,
Having nothing to do and a few hours to kill at Engkilili, I unearthed a bound copy of the Sarawak Gazette of 1936. Amongst many interesting articles I found an inspiring series on how food could be cooked in Sarawak. Without inferring, as the writer of those articles, that the average food eaten when you go out for a meal is appalling, I think it would be of interest to many readers if people would contribute interesting and practical recipes. Here are one or two that I have collected from various sources:—
Fish la Cr ole.
Soak fish, turning once or twice, for half an hour iu one table-spoonful of olive oil, and one of vinegar, squeeze of lime and chopped onion. Put fish in a buttered dish. Add one half pint of tomato pur e. Season. Cover dish. Bake for three quarters of an hour. When done sprinkle with grated cheese and brown.
Fish a L'Americaine.
Wash and dry steaks of fish. Put into a greased dish and cover with greased paper. Bake for twenty to thirty minutes. Put on a hot dish and mask with mustard sauce. Make the sauce by blending six level table-spoonsful of flour, one level table-spoonful of mustard, salt and pepper to a smooth cream with a little milk and water. Bring the remainder of the pint of milk and water to the boil and pour on to the blended mixture. Garnish with slices of tomato and chopped pickles.
Italian Rice.
1 1/2 cups boiled rice 1 large onion 2 tomatoes
1 cup minced pork 1/2 cup gravy breadcrumbs Grated cheese Parsley Salt.
Chop the onion and tomatoes, mix with the rice, minced pork and gravy. Place in a well greased pie dish and sprinkle with a mixture of bread- crumbs, grated cheese and a little parsley. Bake in a slow oven.
Yours faithfully,
A. Bruen.
THIS SARAWAK.
Kuching,
11th May, 1948. The Editor,
Sarawak Gazette,
Kuching.
Dear Sir,
May I request please that the “This Sarawak” Column be confined to matters concerning this Sarawak? The May issue includes matter from the North Borneo News, the China Mail and a Singapore paper and also from a document apparently issued in a P.O.W. Camp in Germany.
And why has the Editorial note at the end of the column linking it with “our illustrious con- temporary” been abandoned? Although no prize was offered, the most favoured entry did at least receive pride of place.
Yours faithfully,
Ng Hi Kuc.
[We are grateful to our correspondent for having drawn attention to the omission of the Editorial note from ‘This Sarawak'; the omission, which dates from the March issue, was entirely accidental.—Ed.]
SHIFTING CULTIVATION.
Kuching ,
21st May, 1948.
The Editor,
Sarawak Gazette, Kuching.
Sir,
Referring to the leading article in the Sarawak Gazette for May it appears to me that a misleading, and obviously unintended,. impression may be given by the reference to a six to seven year rotation for hill padi. A minimum, but by no means ideal rotation should be fifteen years. The ideal would be no hill padi. There is much hill padi cultivated here on land which has had less than six years fallow, and the position generally in Sarawak, as regards soil on the hills, because of this shifting cultivation, is serious. Six to seven years only are quite insufficient to prevent serious deterioration of the soil. One further point which might be amplified, to make it clear, (bad erosion on steep hill side is mentioned), it must not be overlooked that serious erosion occurs en the most gentle slope if the soil is left bare.
Yours faithfully,
“Top Soil.”
BIDAYUH.
The Editor,
Sarawak Gazette,
Kuching.
Sir,
You might be interested in reprinting an extract from an old Gazette (1885).
Extract: (From “Six weeks on the Samarahan River in Sarawak” by W.T.E. de M) “Un- fortunately they (i.e. the land Dyaks) have been much neglected by the Government, who lavish all their care on the Sea Dyaks.”
Bidayuh.
From “Adversity”: Internment Quarterly.
(The following story was published in “Adversi- ty” on 1st July, 1943.)
Royalty in the Dock.
I had often read in the newspapers of Emperor Jones, the popular racing tipster, who found that a fantastic costume and Red Indian head-dress con- siderably assisted the beguilement of the unwary. In fact I had once actually seen this popular figure, striding about behind the stands at Lords, looking, even in those hallowed precincts, like a cross be- tween a Harlem heavyweight and something out of Fenimore Cooper, although I could not imagine what outlet his talents could discover in such hum- drum surroundings. Accordingly I was a good deal more astonished than bewildered when, seated in counsels' pen in Marlborough Street Police Court, waiting to defend an ardent but indiscreet propagandist, I heard the gaoler say, “Number nineteen, sir, Emperor Jones.” There he came, with a magnificent swagger and clothed in his cus- tomary regal array, into the dock, looking every inch the Emperor that, for all I know, he well may be. Surely, I thought, there must be some mistake. Such a public idol, such a magnificent personality, can hardly have transgressed the law so blatantly as to warrant his being brought to justice in this shameful manner.
I waited with bated breath for the charge to be read, and I was amazed to hear that the police were brazen enough to allege that His Highness had been guilty of insulting behaviour in, of all places, Hyde Park. It occurred to me that he might well have been a client of mine, and I won- dered idly whether he had been making a blood- thirsty pacifist speech or retailing lascivious left- wing literature. Much to my disappointment it appeared that he had done neither of these things. In the witness-box a police constable, plentifully equipped with notes, rolled out a long and dreary account of accused’s activities on a rostrum in the park opposite Marble Arch. The Emperor, he said, had gathered a large concourse of earnest seek- ers after truth around and about him, and had then proceeded to instruct them in the habits of German chambermaids with the contents of domestic uten- sils and the habits of Hitler with the contents of German chambermaids. He had gone on, testified the constable, to add a note or two on the relation- ship between cows and old women, together with other bright comments on current topics, which, while failing to raise a smile in court, succeeded, without any doubt at all, in attaining their primary objective of indecency. And indecen- cy, repeated in a court, shorn of its surroundings and its sniggers, does sound indecent indeed. I gazed sadly at the massive figure in the dock, hoping at
least to hear a vehement denial, but silence hung there like a fog, while the constable continued to present his case with fairness and moderation. At last the dismal tale was done and the familiar question put, “Do you wish to ask the witness any questions?” Now, I thought, the truth will come out; now the curtain will be torn aside from yet another dastardly frame-up.
Yes, certainly, Emperor Jones did wish to ask the witness a question or two.
“Was not the greater part of my speech a song?”
“You did sing.”
“It wasn't an indecent song, was it?”
“I thought it was.”
“Why?,” with an expression of innocence injured unto death, “what was indecent about it?”
“The words.”
“No!" said Emperor Jones in a voice of a lion, “there was nothing indecent about it. What is indecent about this?" And then, through the passages of Marlborough Street Police Court, over the traffic jams and advertisement signs of Piccadil- ly, to the green spaces beyond Hyde Park Corner and the dusty offices of Holborn, the mighty voice of a mighty Emperor chanted out, “Peanuts and peanuts, and the same to you." He sang the first line with energy and no little feeling, but un- fortunately he was not allowed to proceed any fur- ther. “That will do, that will do,” said magis- trate, clerk, and gaoler simultaneously, the first add- ing, with possibly more respect for judicial procedure than common prudence, “Have yon any further questions to ask the constable?”
Emperor Jones had some further questions to ask the constable. “Was my audience amused at my speech?” he inquired.
Kuching Market Price List.
Monthly Average Market Price from 20th April, 1948, to 20th May, 1948.
“Some were,” replied the constable guardedly.
“The majority or the minority?”
The constable was young and obviously educated, if not at a public school, at any rate in the best pub- lic school traditions. Earnest desire to win his case struggled visibly with a proper respect for the truth, and to his credit veracity had the victory. “The majority, I suppose,” he said. This was Em- peror Jones' moment. Drawing himself up to his full height of what appeared to be seven foot some- thing, and thrusting out a tremendous chest, he boomed forth to the magistrate, “Then, sir, I am performing work of national importance.”
The bench, however, remained unimpressed. “Anything more to say?,” and then, before the accused could collect together his exploded self- esteem, “Anything known?” My last illusion was shattered when it transpired that a good deal was known. This was by no means the first appearance of the illustrious prisoner in the dock, and his record was a long sequence of the wretched narrative to which I had just been listening. “Forty shillings,” snapped the magistrate, and you could feel a hurricane rushing out of Emperor Jones.
“Time to pay, sir?” came a piteous whimper from a lifeless heap of old rags and feathers. “No!” The reply burst like the first crack of thunder. It was the turn of justice now, and never, I thought, as the scion of unknown royalty disappeared from view, had I hoard a categorical negative more enthusiastically or whole-heartedly pronounced.
Kuching Market Price List.
Monthly Average Market Price from 20th April, 1948, to 20th May, 1948.