VOL. LXXV.
No. 1090.
PRICE KUCHING, Monday, January 3rd, 1949. 50 CENTS
The Sarawak Gazette.
MONDAY, JANUARY 3rd, 1949.
1948.
His Excellency the Governor's opening address
at the third Budget meeting of the Council Negri
leaves little of major interest for comment in our
customary annual review. The year 1948 brought
changes in the social structure of Sarawak which
will deeply effect the future but so gently have the
changes been brought about that superficially small
difference is noticeable. The first steps towards
eventual self government have been taken, sometimes
with hesitation but always at pace suited to
the needs of the country.
Labour troubles have been remarkable for a
mildness that is hardly to be expected in a transitional
period such as the Colony is now experiencing.
Naturally in the newly formed Trade Unions
there have been teething troubles but these have
been soothed with sweet reasonability and there
have been neither strikes nor lock-outs in connection
with any registered Trade Union.
The Junior Service Association, under wise and
restrained leadership, has done much to ameliorate
the lot of its members and, in the process, has been
of no small assistance to Government. The policy
of the Association has been shrewd and
enlightened : not only did the Association collabor-
ate ably on the recent salary revisions but it
pushed ahead vigorously with a co-operative
canteen to ensure the maximum purchasing power
for its members' earnings.
The cost of living during 1948 allowed a disturbing
upward tendency. Heavy exports of copra
have probably caused the steep increase in the
market price of coconut oil and cake but the
increased cost of many other commodities is too
often the result of grasping opportunism and wasteful
distribution. During the year there has been
a substantial increase in the wage level of the
Colony but, under the influence of steadily mounting
prices, the real value of these wages will tend
slowly to sink back to the 1947 level. Since there
has been no serious shortage of consumer goods
during the year, the answer to this inflationary
tendency seems to lie in further rigid price control.
There seems little hope of improving the present
wasteful system of marketing until Co-operation
becomes firmly established here.
His Excellency has emphasised the extent to
which Sarawak is dependent for locally produced
rice upon dry padi fanning and the evils which
result from this system. Present reports indicate
that a substantial part of Sarawak's rice needs up
to subsistence level can be met by the intensive
cultivation of potential wet padi areas. The yield
per acre and per farmer is higher than in dry padi
farming and the risks of crop failure from disease,
animal pests and bad burns eliminated or reduced;
in addition to this healthier economy there should
be a substantial reduction in the cost of living. As
far as the people of Sarawak are concerned, the
high cost of handling imported rice is so much
wasted money and when eventually it becomes
possible to concentrate the rice producing areas
into intensive,wet padi cultivation the relative cost
of rice will naturally be lower.
Agriculture generally and rubber specifically
form the keystone of Sarawak's economy and
whilst agricultural development is going ahead the
position of the rubber industry is deteriorating.
The unstable price for rubber sheet is a millstone
round the neck of this hitherto resilient industry
and it causes the rehabilitation of robber gardens
to lag far behind other industries. Government
propaganda, together with a restriction upon the
import of inferior coagulants, is making some progress
towards an improvement in the standard of
smoked sheet but little or nothing is being done
towards replanting and improving the conditions
in rubber gardens. The rubber planted in Sarawak
is old and low yielding, the average production per
acre in Sarawak comparing unfavourably with
Malaya.
The depressed and fluctuating price for all grades
of smoked sheet has acted decisively against any
replanting programme; the year started off well
enough with R.S.S. No. 1 quoted in the Kuching
market at $48.50 per pikul; by July local quotations
had reached the maximum of $54.50 but fell
away to the minimum of $36.25 at the beginning
of December. A similar fluctuation is noticeable
in the different prices offered for various grades;
in January there was a difference of $8.50 per
pikul between the price of R.8.S. No. 1 and R.S.S.
No. 5 and in July there was a difference of $20.33
per pikul. There is a strong feeling that unethical
manipulations by American buyers contribute substantially
to exaggerating these price changes, but
whatever the cause a swinging price to the rubber
industry is as much handicap as a swinging
temperature to a sick man.
The export duty on rubber contributes about one
quarter of the Colony’s revenue; in the precarious
state in which the rubber industry of Sarawak now
finds itself, not only is this source of revenue
threatened but a major capital asset is wasting.
The natives of the Colony are not, except in very
rare cases, attracted by the considerable amount of
care and maintainance which is particularly needed
in planting budded and clonal seed rubber and high
costs combined with uncertain but too often
depressed prices for smoked sheet make such
replanting unattractive to Chinese owners.
There has been a decisive change for the better
in the crime record for the Colony during 1948 and
the present improvement in training and the
re-organisation within the Constabulary promises
further improvement next year. The post war
crime record has never been serious but in 1948
not only has the number of crimes dropped substantially
but the proportion of convictions to
reports of seizable offences has shown an encouraging
improvement. There has been an increase in
the number of smuggling offences brought before
the Courts and a substantial increase in the fines
imposed but it is probable that, in fact, evasion of
Customs regulations is on the decline.
During the year, improved social security and
the increased variety of consumer goods on sale
have brought more colour to social life in Sarawak.
On Mohammedan festivals, Malays in gaily
coloured sarongs and holiday attire have brightened
up the kampongs and towns; the same tendency
showed in Chinese festivities, particularly in the
lantern celebrations of the Double Tenth. Reports
from the Divisions indicate sustained efforts to
make the urban and kampong areas neater and
more attractive; Kuching Municipal gardens are
pleasant to see and the padang, even its half completed
state, contrasts pleasantly with the previous
wilderness of derelict huts and broken concrete
paths. The Sarawak Museum attracts more
visitors with an increased range of exhibits.
It is not easy to assess the importance of the anticession
question during 1948. The average citizen
sees and hears little of it in his daily life.
Occasionally there is an anti-cession procession,
always colourful and usually orderly, and from time
to time a column in the Singapore press reporting
one or another who speaks, authoritatively or
otherwise for some sections of the community on
the subject of cession. On the other hand, the
anti-cession slogans exhibited in some kampong
areas are getting weather-beaten and illegible;
many of the Government servants who resigned
from the service wish to return and there is
altogether less excitement over what once might
have threatened to become a cancer at the heart of
good relationships in Sarawak.
During the year, the control of the Boys’ Home
has been handed over from the Department of
Prisons to the Department of Education and plans
are being made to increase the accommodation forthe
boys and to build workshops and a Warden’s
Home. The boys are now under the supervision
of a resident warden and, when the Boys’ Hostel
at Padungan is opened, boys leaving the Home can
be accommodated in the Hostel until they have a
decent chance to start afresh.
Children seem to have been more in the limelight
this year—there was a very successful Rotary
outing for children to Satang; a Baby Show, which
aroused plenty of enthusiasm and competition; a
Children's Christmas party at the Sarawak Uuion
Club with the happy idea of bring a present and
receive a present; and there was the usual round of
children's Christmas Parties.
The number of European children in the Colony
has increased considerably in the last decade; like
the theory that people from temperate climates
cannot live in equatorial regions without Bombay
bowlers and spine pads, the idea that children are
not healthy has been exploded. The youngsters
seem happy and contented in every way. A
correspondent, reflecting on the change, with
apologies to Fougasse. sends this card to the
Sarawak Gazette :—
1938, How’s yourself, old boy?
1948. How’s your baby?
O tempora, O mores !
Notes and Comments.
His Majesty the King has been graciously
pleased to approve the bestowal of the following
New Year Honours :—
Father ANTHONY GUSTAF MULDER—O.B.E.
(Honorary)
Miss E. S. ANDREWS—M.B.E.
Mr. THOMAS ATTENBOROUGH—M.B.E.
Mr. CHIEW GEOK LIN—M.B.E. (Honorary)
TEDONG anak BARIENG—British Empire Medal.
The Sarawak Gazette takes this opportunity of
congratulating the recipients of these honours.
His Excellency the Governor will leave Sarawak
for the United Kingdom on furlough during
January. During his absence, the Officer Administering
the Government will be the Honourable
Mr. C. W. Dawson, C.M.G.
A project for the provision of a Youth Hostel and
Boys’ Club in Padungan has been launched by a
group of citizens interested in social welfare.
The Hostel will be located in Government premises
in Padungan bazaar and will provide a dormitory
for ten or twelve youths and accommodation for a
resident warden.
The Boys’ Club will be situated on the ground
floor of the Hostel Premises and is intended for
youths between the ages of fourteen and twenty
with a membership of about fifty.
An Appeal Committee has been formed under
the chairmanship of the Honourable the Chief
Justice and, of a target of $30,000, the Committee
has already raised a sum approaching $7,000.
Lottery tickets, from which seventy per cent of
the proceeds go to the prize winners, are already
on sale.
Early in December two race-horses were
imported from Singapore, presumably in anticipation
of the race course being re-opened.
The prospects of horse racing in Kuching are by
no means certain but the Turf Club Committee are
working on a new plan by which it is hoped to get
an eight furlong course in order by the end of the
year.
The J. Arthur Rank film 'Hamlet' was shown
in Kuching on the 2nd December. The film was
enthusiastically received by big audiences.
Early in December a large crocodile was caught
in the Kuching River and brought to the pontoon
wharf to be skinned. The carcass was partly in
the water when it was flayed but, secure in the
knowledge that detailed measurements would be
submitted to the District Officer’s office, we made
no effort to estimate the length.
Curiously enough, no claim was made on the
District Officer for a payment at the gazetted rate
of thirty-six cents per foot.
The Straits Steamship vessel, the Subok, has
been lifted from the Kuching River where she sank
in 1945. Salvage operations continue.
The m.v. Julie was struck by lightning on the
21st December at Pusa. The lightning struck and
splintered the main mast with, fortunately, no
harm to those on board.
Messrs. S. S. Awbery, M.P. and F. W. Dalley,
who were in Malaya between February and March
last year to study Malayan trade unionism, have
now published their report. The report emphasises
that the trade union movement had origins in
Malaya differing widely from those in the United
Kingdom; Malayan trade unions often developed
from Chinese guilds and secret societies and from
associations, with a social rather than industrial
bias. After commenting upon the attempt by
Communist leaders to gain control of the movement,
the report concludes. “the trade union
position is as good as we had hoped and much
better than we feared.”
The British Territories of South East Asia are
to receive £160,000 worth of medical supplies and
other commodities as part of Australia’s contribution
to post UNRRA Relief. The first shipment
of goods is already on its way from Australia on
board the s.s. Tjipondok which was due on December
8th in Singapore to discharge part of its cargo;
the Tjipondok will proceed to Port Swettenham
and Penang to unload supplies consigned to the
Federation. Australia’s interest in post-UNRRA
Relief has been considerable and she ranked as
fourth in order of importance among the contributors.
In accordance with her consciousness of
obligation to her neighbours in South East Asia,
she decided that her contribution should be put to
the relief and rehabilitation of the countries of that
area and in particular the British territories.
Indonesia and Burma are also benefiting by her
action. Under the scheme Australia issued a
schedule of available goods and left it to Governments
to select according to needs of individual
territories; the actual allocations have been
extremely generous. It will be remembered that
Australia recently established a number of scholarships
for students from countries in South East
Asia.
Sarawak will receive gifts of medical supplies
and clothing. The medical supplies will be handed
over to the Medical Department for use in the
Government Hospital Services and the clothing
will be distributed to Institutions and poor
persons.
Readers may recall an article on the development
of Binatang District contributed by the Assistant
District Officer. The following note by the
District Officer, Lower Rejang, may be of
interest :—
“During the course of a land dispute at Binatang
between Dayaks and Malays it came out that the
forest around Bunut was originally felled by
Bliuns. Enquiries as to the origin of these people,
of whom there still remain alive a few odd descendants—
though no longer of pure blood—elicited
the information that they were the original
inhabitants of the upper waters of the Julau, to
which river the first Bliun to arrive on a hunting
expedition, in the course of which he was killed,
gave his name. It appears the Bliuns suffered
heavily at the hands of the Dayak invaders from
the Second Division and the remainder of them
fled in the direction of Nyabor, Sarikei and
Binatang, some settling around Bunut. I am told
by one who speaks their dialect and in fact claims
to be part Bliun that his people were originally
sago eaters and are allied to the Skapans and
Tanjongs. Their speech bears a close resemblance
to that of the Tanjongs with whom they can make
themselves understood.”
An insignia of a Companion of the Order of the
Star of Sarawak was picked up on a rubber estate
last month and has now been handed to the
Secretariat. Any enquiries regarding this should
be addressed to the Deputy Chief Secretary.
Zanzibar has a plague of crows!
After all other methods had failed to reduce their
numbers effectively, rewards were offered; ten
cents (just over four cents local currency) for a
crow’s egg; fifty cents for crows alive or dead.
This at once produced results.
Payments were made by District Officers. A
young boy appeared at the Assistant District
Officer’s Office with a basket of crow’s eggs.
Urgent business kept the officer from dealing with
the boy at once. The eggs began to hatch out.
When the Assistant District Officer began paying
the boy asked for fifty cents for each of the
crow chickens.
Now the regulations have been altered. Fifty
cents will be paid for the crows........................... if they
have feathers on.
The Sarawak Gazette wishes all readers a Happy
New Year.
The Test Ground.
We republish an article which appeared in the
Straits Times on the 2nd December under the title
TEST GROUND OF EMPIRE by ANDREW
ROTH. A correspondent to the Sarawak Gazette
follows on with a reply to the article.
“SARAWAK is one of the most important testing
grounds of British colonial policy. It is also a
testing ground for how extensively the colonial
peoples benefit by this economic development and
the social services which accompany it.
By stepping up the exports of Sarawak's rubber,
gold, jelutong (for chewing gum) and other items
to the American market, Britain hopes to reduce
further its considerable postwar dollar deficit.
By stepping up the already considerable oil production
from fields in Sarawak and adjoining
Brunei, Britain hopes to cut dollar expenditure on
petroleum and make up losses incurred by losing
control of the Haifa terminus of the Kirkuk (Iraq)
oil fields.
Few people realise the enormity of the present
and projected oil production in the Sarawak-
Brunei fields, partly because of the curtain of
secrecy which surrounds petroleum production
figures in these war-planning days. Today, the
fields are running at the rate of fully three million
tons a year, making it the biggest oil field in the
Empire.
This development, run by a Shell subsidiary,
produced 940,000 tons in 1939, mostly from Miri
in Sarawak. The Miri fields were razed to prevent
Japanese use and after the war production has
moved across the border to Seria, in adjoining
Brunei, where the oil is plentiful closer to the
surface. By 1947 the two adjoining fields doubled
pre-war output with 1,882,000 tons and expect a
1948 total of over 2,500,000 tons.
“That’s only the beginning,” insiders say.
Nearly $9,000,000 has been allotted for expansion,
including the establishment of a whole new 750-
person prefabricated town, with its own cinema
and school system. They are drilling in Miri, to
tap deeper deposits and also plan to drill under the
South China Sea, a venture which requires building
a four-thousand foot concrete jetty out into the
water. This expansion will considerably decrease
the drain of precious dollars for oil by sterling-area
countries.
These economic considerations were among the
most important motivating the Colonial Office to
high-pressure the cession of Sarawak by the
Brooke dynasty.
The Brookes deliberately kept Sarawak an
economic backwater “avoiding the avarice of that
ogre civilization” as the second “White Rajah”
expressed. They wanted Sarawak moderately profitable,
but undisturbed.
Rubber production, for example, was left almost
entirely in the hands of small-holders. Big commercial
rubber estates account only for five per
cent of Sarawak’s production.
Defenders of the Brooke regime say this was to
protect the population, but critics point out that
no effort was made to assist the small-holders technically,
with the result that Sarawak's rubber
trees are mostly old, and low in yield.
Brooke dynasty defenders point to the fact that
it was pre-war policy to keep out big concerns
which wanted to exploit the country. Sarawak
had millions in the bank. However, its critics
reply, this was accomplished by saving on such
things as education. There was only one Government-
provided school for all of the almost 300,000
Dyaks—the majority of the population—with the
result that 99 per cent are illiterate.
The Brookes’ relatively undisturbed backwater
was churned up and its level lowered by the
Japanese occupation. Great shortages made themselves
felt because Sarawak imports 60 per cent of
its rice and virtually all its cloth.
Until recently much of Sarawak’s post-war
economic activities have centred about repairing
war-time damages, It was not so long ago that a
penghulu complained that the shortage of cloth
meant none of the young women in his village
could get married. Because there were so few
mosquito nets they were forced to sleep with their
parents, which severely restricted opportunities for
the young bachelors. Happily there is now more
netting.
“Today we have almost as many visiting experts
as mosquitoes,” one resident commented. The
Colonial Office has decided that before Sarawak's
development plans can be finalised, there must be
a solid basis of information.
Although there are many clashes of opinion
among the surveying experts, there is considerable
agreement on basic realities.
Sarawak is to continue as a predominantly
agricultural country, with rubber as its main
export. It will continue to depend on the smallholder
but an attempt will be made to improve his
methods so as to increase the amount for export.
Already rubber smokehouses have been erected to
assist the small rubber planter.
It has been decided that Sarawak should start
growing cocoa—with 10,000 tons annually as a
target.
Sarawak's 47,000 square miles is mostly virgin
jungle and swamp. The swamps of Sarawak could
produce large quantities of rice—if they were
drained and if people skilled in wet rice production
could be settled there.
But among the Dyaks only the vanishing Kelabits
know about wet padi production. The others
prefer a nomadic life or if they do cultivate the
soil, generally engage in what is known as
“fugitive cultivation.” They burn off a hillside
and plant their crop, and after the soil has been
exhausted they move on.
The Malays in Sarawak, who form 18 per cent
of the population, are largely town-people and the
agricultural side of their community is not very
energetic.
The Chinese, who make up over a fourth of the
population and do some farming as well as commerce,
are excellent agriculturists. But it is unlikely
that migration will be Resumed, though
labour is short.
Financing Sarawak’s development is another
headache. Sarawak has been allocated $4,600,000
from the Colonial Development and Welfare Fund
but this is only pump-priming : it has to be spread
over a period of years and is allocated largely to
surveys, medical services, scholarships and the
like.
Even a single large-scale rice development project,
with the clearing of swamps, proper drainage and
the use of mechnical equipment, could swallow up
this investment in a year or two.
But Britain has little capital to invest. An effort
is being made to finance Sarawak’s development
in huge part by internal taxation. But this is
somewhat dangerous.
Protests have already risen because the export
duty on rubber, the main export product, is twice
that of Malaya, and because textile imports, previously
free, are now taxed.
Some also grumble because although Sarawak is
a dollars-earner through its rubber exports, and a
dollar-saver through its oil production, its imports
from the dollar zone are being cut sharply to help
Britain.
“Sarawak's conversion to a colony was supposed
to help our economic development.” said one anticessionist
Chinese, “but we find instead that we
are supposed to help Britain’s recovery.”
More generous observers however, think that at
least for the next ten years, Sarawak will profit
by Britain’s efforts to develop it economically and
to raise its social services, particularly education.
In the long run, one of the chief purposes of the
Sarawak educational programme is to develop
“Sarawak's human resources so that they can
develop its economic resources. It is only when
some of Sarawak's people come back as graduate
engineers that really rapid progress will be made.
A remarkable effort to educate the upriver tribespeople
of Sarawak is being attempted at Batu
Lintang, once notorious as a Japanese concentration
ctunp. Fifty young tribesmen have looped their
distended earlobes to keep them out of the way
and are learning to become teachers so they can
spread literacy and knowledge in their backward
villages.
When British administrators took over from the
Brookes, they found the Dyaks very anxious to
learn. They have already increased the schools for
Dyaks from one to about twenty, but soon ran
into a teacher-shortage. Word was sent out to the
administrators in the interior to send down the most
promising young men.
It took some of them three weeks before they
could make their way through the Borneo wilds to
the District Officer’s headquarters, to be sent on
downstream, to the school! The school was converted
virtually into an anthropological museum.
Its inhabitants include representatives of most of
the tribes which are generally referred to as
Dyaks: Ibans (Sea Dyaks). Bisayahs, Muruts,
Kelabits, Kayans, Milanos—all with their own ways
of cutting their hair, tattooing their skins, piercing
their ears and dressing. Two would-be teachers it
was discovered, were completely illiterate.
This illiteracy has rot daunted the school administration.
While every one is getting his basic
teacher’s training, the two illiterates are learning
to read. At the end of the next year Batu Lintang
will turn out fifty teachers, enabling the authorities
to more than double the present facilities for teaching
Dayaks.
“This training school is a devil of a snowball,”
Dr. H. Earnshaw, the Education Commissioner,
explained.
He has enough money at present with an
allocation of four per cent of the budget and half
as much again from the Colonial Development
Fund. At present the Chinese and Mission schools
spend four times as much as the Government. But
with fifty additional teachers—and more coming
each year—expenditure will mount sharply.
The same problems will face the programme for
expanded medical facilities. Since Sarawak’s
population is so dispersed, mainly along the rivers,
medicine will be carried to the people by means
of river prahus powered by outboard motors, to
serve as travelling dispensaries.
There are two now in service and there will be
sixteen by the end of 1949. The other crews are
in training, the government fearing to send out halftrained
dressers for fear that mistakes might sour
the up-river people.
One of the most interesting experiments is a longhouse
training school at Kanowit. There thirty
Iban-speaking young married couples are living
together with a British couple—the man an agricultural
officer and his wife a trained nurse.
By living and working together for two years it
is hoped that they can transmit ideas and methods
of modern agriculture, modern hygiene and literacy.
At the end of the course the Ibans will return to
their own communities, to raise the level of their
fellow tribespeople by their example.
In short, the tribes are being civilized in the hope
of helping both them and Britain.”
Not bad, Mr. Roth, especially when it is
remembered that you spent only four days in
Sarawak and that you had to compress your bird’s
eye view of the youngest colony into five halfcolumns
of press.
Your article contains a number of truths; it also
unfortunately contains a number of half-truths, the
total effect of which is to produce a somewhat inaccurate
picture We need not enter into further
arguments on the motive behind cession although
the dollar earning capacity of Sarawak introduces
a new factor which had not previously been included
among the Machiavellian motives attributed to
Whitehall; nor is it entirely clear (since Sarawak
was always a member of the sterling group)) why
it was necessary to convert it into a Crown Colony
in order to ensure either the expansion of the oil
industry, not financed from the country's resources,
or the marshalling of these resources to increase the
dollar exchange. It is also a little difficult to
understand how a reduction, by recent losses of
control in Middle East oilfields, could have supplied
the motive for a sequence of events which concluded
back in the middle of 1946. These are perhaps
minor inaccuracies, Mr. Roth, but they are all the
more deplorable since they cannot be directly
attributed to the brevity of your visit to Sarawak.
Your picture of the pre-war regime, having to its
credit the defence of the primitive peoples against big
business exploitation and on the debit side the small
progress in the social developement of the social
services, especially education, may be generally
correct. Its accuracy is in any case unimportant,
since Sarawak today is more concerned and properly
so, with the future than the past, and it is in this
picture of the future, that you appear to have depended
upon somewhat inaccurate sources of
information.
Increased exports to the American market are
not a very high priority in Sarawak’s economic
development, although the Colony like every other
part of the Empire, is endeavouring to improve the
quantity and quality of its rubber exports. The
fact that some of these rubber exports earn dollars
is indeed a contribution to the sterling group’s
dollar exchange and the limitation of American
imports to which you refer is perhaps a small return
for the financial assistance—much more substantial
than your article indicates—which the United Kingdom
offers to this Colony. The other dollar-earning
exports which you mention, gold and jelutong, are
insignificant and certainly do not represent the
main-springs of the economic rehabilitation of the
country.
You are correct in your assumption that Sarawak
must at least for some considerable time continue
to be an agricultural country and that much of the
present effort has to be towards improving methods
of agriculture. It is not possible here to enter into
the wider aspects of this argument—the argument
whether or not we should attempt to perpetuate
the individualism of the present system—whether
the small independent farmer has a better, happier
and fuller life than the small wage earner—but the
very nature of Sarawak’s present economy makes it
essential to concentrate attention upon improvements
based on the present social and economic
structure rather than upon a complete social
revolution.
I do not think that the Sarawak Government, or
Whitehall, or the mosquito-like hordes of experts,
can reasonably be criticised for arriving at this conclusion.
You have however not been entirely
accurate in your statement of the conclusion. I
think the Director of Agriculture, as one of the
parties principally concerned, would flatly contradict
the statement that rubber is intended to
continue to be Sarawak’s main export. It will
probably have to be a main export for quite a long
time but there are a number of reasons, the principal
of which should certainly be clear to a citizen of the
United States of America, why Sarawak should
remove the majority of its eggs from the rubber
basket as quickly as possible and this in fact
represents one of the most immediate objectives—
an insurance against what the American synthetic
rubber industry may do to the world market in raw
rubber. The second principal objective, as you
point out, is at the moment self-sufficiency in food.
You have indicated the difficulties but I think you
have taken too depressing a view both of the
reaction of the majority of the population towards
wet padi production and of the inadequacy of the
funds which the United Kingdom has provided for
this and other development schemes. There has so
far been only one allocation of funds referred to in
your article but I think it is a little premature of
you to assume that this is the last that may be
made.
I am afraid also it is a litle irresponsible of you
to cavil at the prospects of increased taxation. You
write in some detail about the development of the
education and medical services and I think that you
under estimate the intelligence of the average
inhabitant of Sarawak by suggesting that he not
only does not realise that such services must be paid
for but that he is unwilling to make any personal
contribution thereto. One of the minor administrative
problems which has confronted Government
during the present year has been to keep pace with
Local Authorities' willingness to provide funds from
self-imposed taxes for the development of education.
Finally, as has already been suggested, I do not
think that anywhere in your article, particularly in
your final sentence, have you placed in the correct
perspective the relative value of this programme to
Sarawak and to Britain. Britain will certainly
benefit by the economic and social progress of this
Colony—the health of any part of an organism,
however small, must react directly upon the health
of the whole; but it is clear to those who work in
Sarawak and it should be clear even to the most
superficial observer that the main objective in this
programme is the benefit of Sarawak itself. You
may not believe this. Mr. Roth, but had you stayed
here a little longer, at least you could not have
disbelieved it.
Oil Production in Sarawak.
Introduction THE OCCURRENCE OF PETROLEUM.
The occurrence of Petroleum has been known and
utilised by man from very early times. History
records the use of bitumen as early as 3,000 B.C.
in the mortar used for building the walls of Babylon.
Nebuchadnezzar built a road of brick with asphalt,
and early Egyptians encased their mummies in
cloth impregnated with bitumen. A thousand
years ago the Burmese encountered oil and natural
gas while sinking wells for brine. However, it was
not until 1859 that Drake (not Sir Francis) drilled
the first well really bored with the intention of
finding oil at Titusville in Pennsylvania. The oil
was struck at seventy feet.
The Origin of Petroleum. The origin of Petroleum
is still undecided. Two theories as to its
origin have been argued over by chemists since the
eighteenth century.
The Inorganic Theory was originally recognised
mainly as a result of inorganic chemists such as
Mende’leeff who argued that oil could be synthesised
from inorganic elemente which existed in a
free state underground. Furthermore the necessary
conditions of temperature and pressure exist.
The Organic Theory is now generally accepted,
but there is still no definite information. Some
consider that both vegetable and animal matter are
the source, different conditions resulting in gas or
oil. There is however general agreement that oil
is formed by the decomposition of organic matter
in a very early stage after deposition. Evidence is
afforded by oil which has been found associated
with partially decomposed organic remains. Oil is
found in formations which were laid down in times
when there was an abundance of marine and
vegetable life. There is evidence of this in the
form of tiny marine fossils called “Foraminifera”
which are found in oilbearing formations.
The Nature of an Oil Reservoir. An oil reservoir
consists of a porous and permeable rock most commonly
of consolidated or unconsolidated sandstone,
but often of limestone. In the latter case the
reservoir fluid is held in fissures or weathered
cavities, but in a sandstone is held in the interstices
between the sand grains of the rock.
If this reservoir rock is in any way pressed into
a fold or domal structure by earth movements then
provided that there is, superimposed, a layer of
impermeable rock such as a shale, a suitable oil trap
is formed.
If an inclined porous and permeable rock becomes
trunkated by a fault due to earth movements, and
its elevated end becomes sealed by an impermeable
rock, again a suitable trap is formed in which oil
can accumulate.
As will be seen below, the Miri field is formed
by a combination of the above circumstances.
The oil normally contains gas under pressure, and
if over-saturated, the excess gas occupies a gas cap
in the crest of the structure.
Water is usually present occupying the sand body
as both connate water (wetting the sand grains in
the oilbearing section of the sand) and underlying
the oil layer.
A general picture may be obtained by regarding
these three phases as existing in zones; the water
layer superimposed by oil and the oil superimposed
by gas.
In practice these zonal contacts are not clearly
defined, there being a region of gradual change in
saturation of the separate phases at both contacts,
that at the water oil contact being the greater.
As wells penetrate a producing horizon, so
information is obtained as to the position of the
water oil and gas oil contacts in the structure. The
movement of these contacts is traced by the oilfield
engineer as oil is produced from the sand. He is
thus enabled to locate new wells so as to enter the
horizon in the oilbearing zone.
The method by which the oil is extracted from
the sand after a well has been completed, depends
upon the natural energy existing in the formation.
If the pressure is greater than that required to
balance the hydrostatic head of the column of oil
to the surface, then the well will “come in” flowing,
i.e. no external assistance is required to lift
the oil. If the pressure is insufficient for the well
to flow then oil may be extracted by pumping or
by gaslift. Gaslift involves the injection of gas into
the wellhead between tubing and casing, to lift oil
up the tubing. Whatever the original pressures
in the formation the wells towards the end of their
“life” will have to be put on the pump.
How an Oilfield is discovered. One of the first
questions asked by one who is interested in, but
uninformed oonaerning oilfield engineering is
“How do you know where to put your wells?”
This question cannot be answered shortly to cover
a wide variety of fields but the growth of a field
generally develops along the following lines :—
1. Local reports are received concerning seepages
of oil, gas or bitumen.
2. If these reports can be confirmed and an Oil
Company becomes interested, exploratory concessions
are applied for from the Government
concerned.
3. Exploratory rights having been obtained
geologists are sent to investigate surface formation
outcrops and try and deduce the subsurface structure.
At the same time an aerial survey may be
made.
4. If the geologists’ report holds forth pro-,
mise that subsurface structures which could form
oil traps may be present, geophysical exploration
parties are sent into the field to map subsurface
contours. Concurrently core drilling parties maybe
sent into the field to assist the geologists in
determining the age of the formations and obtain
further details of the subsurface structure.
5. The results of all this preliminary survey
having proved promising the geologists are asked
to indicate the most suitable location on the
structure to drill a test well.
As each new well is drilled, so more information
on the structure comes to hand and the field
gradually becomes delineated.
It is evident from the above that a very considerable
outlay of money has to be put down for
preliminary survey before there are any returns.
The above trend of development of a field can be
traced through the stages in the history of the Miri
field as outlined below.
Oil Production in Sarawak.
The earliest reference to oil in Sarawak is in a
report of Claude Champion de Crespigny, then the
Resident of Baram, dated July, 1882.
Charles Hose, who mentions this, on succeeding
to the Residency, himself collected much further
information about the occurrence of oil both in Miri
and in other parts of his division.
In 1907 he obtained permission from the Rajah
of Sarawak to enter into negotiations with the
Anglo-Saxon Petroleum Company, with the result
that in 1909, that Company obtained a concession,
with certain limitations, to explore for oil throughout
Sarawak for a period of 75 years.
Dr. Erb, the first geologist sent out, after
examining the known oil occurrences in the country
selected Miri as the most promising structure to be
tested by drilling.
The first well started drilling on August 10th,
1910, and was brought into production from 865
feet on 22nd December, 1910, making 13 tons of
oil per day.
Sarawak Oilfields Limited was formed as a
subsidiary Company to take over the development
of the Sarawak Concession as from 1st January,
1920. The fact that the field has from the start
been entirely under the control of one operator has
contributed greatly to its rational development.
Had the field been drilled under competitive conditions
between a number of operators, there is no
doubt that its complicated structure would have led
to a very greatly increased proportion of unproductive
drilling.
Situation and Topography of Miri Field.
The Miri Field lies beside the coast of the China
Sea in the Northern portion of Sarawak.
The main topographical feature is a strip of hillyground
rising to about 275 feet above sea level and
stretching from Tanjong Lobang in the South-
West to Pujut in the North-East, a distance of 5 1/2
miles. This strip of hills is flanked on both sides
by alluvial or swampy plain, or the sea, except at
the South-West comer where a strip of low elevated
ground extends behind the coast towards Baram.
In all other directions the flat and swampy ground
extends inland for many miles or to the sea.
Structure. Our knowledge of the geology of Miri
has been progressively acquired. Only over the
portion of the field which lies in hilly ground are
there surface outcrops. These outcrops, however,
permitted Dr. Erb who was the first geologist to
visit Miri, correctly to identify the structure as
essentially an "elongated, assymetric domeshaped
anticline.”
Stratigraphy. In general the succession has been
worked out largely from well to well correlations
aided in part by the characteristic analysis of the oil
of certain horizons.
The first series of detailed geological maps of the
field were compiled by Dr. Andrew in 1919, completely
revised by Dr. Schider in 1920 and 1921 and
subsequently the South Western end of the field
was remapped by Dr. Pollock in 1927. The final
revision of the field was made by Dr. Schumacher
in 1911. The knowledge obtained from surface
outcrops has been so much extended by information
from wells, that it is mainly upon the latter that
the stratigraphy and detailed structure of the field
is now based. Our knowledge of the extension of
the structure in alluvial areas outside the producing
field is chiefly derived from the results of Sullivan
core drilling.
The geological succession in the Miri area is as
follows :
1. Alluvium, Plateau Sands-Recent Age.
2. Upper Argillaceous Series (Long Lepak
Series, Upper Miocene-Pliocene Age).
3. Sandstone Series Middle Miocene Age.
4. Deep Shale
Oil Producing Levels.
With' a few relatively insignificant exceptions all
the production of the field has so far been obtained
from five distinct horizons :—
The Pujut Shallow Horizon.
C Sand—Main and Lower.
T Sand—Upper and Main.
456 Sand.
105 Sand.
sixth horizon, the 349 Sand, may also be
distinguished. The sand body extends from its cap
rock down to shale above the next lower horizon
and contains subordinate beds of shale and sandy
shale which cannot be correlated over any considerable
distance in the manner in which the cap rock
shales can be correlated.
Impregnation with oil is controlled by structural
conditions. Production is normally obtained from
the upper portions of the sand body only, but
under favourable structural conditions the lower
parts may also produce.
Geological History.
(a) Deposition of Beds. During the whole of
Miocene times, deposition was taking place under
geosynclinal conditions. The predominantly argillaceous
beds of lower and middle Miocene age were
succeeded by a dominantly thick sandstone formation
denoting an approach of littoral conditions.
During the close of the Miocene period and in the
early Pliocene, the beds deposited became again
more argillaceous.
(b) Earth Movements. The folding movements
appear to have started soon after the close of the
Miocene, and to have continued until recent times,
since we know in other parts of Sarawak and Brunei
that even the youngest Tertiary shows folding
and faulting and the raised terraces in Miri bear
witness to vertical adjustment of very recent date.
The movement in Miri may be divided into
1. A period of lateral compression giving rise
to the assymetric anticlinal form with its
associated thrusts which was succeeded later
by :—
2. A period of tension or readjustment to strain,
as a reaction to the compression after the
forces causing the compression had become
dissipated.
3. The final period of vertical adjustment would
appear to have had but little bearing on the
structural conditions from an oil point of view
except in so far as it may have affected
denudation. The plateau sands or raised
beaches are due to this most recent phase of
movement.
Surface Indications of Oil. Numerous seepages
and impregnations of oil occur at the surface.
Attention was first drawn to the presence of oil on
Miri on account of the strong seepages from which
the natives obtained oil which was used for mixing
with resin for caulking boats.
The majority of known seepages come from outcrops
of the Pujut Shallow and “C” sand horizons.
It is of interest, however, to recall that seepages
occur also on the flank of the North West plunging
end of the main anticline between Pujut and Lutong
in beds stratigraphically higher than any of those
from which production has been obtained.
Character of Oils in Relation to Structure. The
physical characteristics of the different oils encountered
bear in general relationship to the
stratigraphical horizon at which they are found.
Stated in general terms it may be said :—
1. The Oils of the Sandstone Series.
(a) The gravity of the oil decreases from the
upper to the lower horizons i.e. the highest
horizons contain the heaviest oil.
(b) The oil from the lower horizons is waxy.
2. The Oil encountered in the Deep Shale.
The oils are in general very light, both
waxy and no-waxy, but there is one instance
of a heavy waxy oil occurring.
Development and Production. The manner in
which a field under unit control, once proved, is
developed, depends very largely upon general policy
based on external economic conditions at successive
stages in ite history. The methods of applying
the group policy in force at any particular time to
the individual field must depend on the knowledge
of the potentialities of the field available at that
time, and the ability to put the policy into practice.
An extension of knowledge may result in a change
in the application of the same policy. Such policy
is translated into practice by an extension or contraction
of the drilling facilities for developing
known reserves and for discovering additional ones.
The immediate results may be seen in the footage
drilled and the number of wells completed, productive
and unproductive. The further response may
be seen from the production statistics of oil obtained.
The influences of policy and their results may be
traced in successive stages through the history of
the Miri field.
It was not until about 1926-1930 that the potential
production of Miri exceeded that which could
profitably be absorbed by the markets available. Up
to 1926 the general policy was to produce as much
as local circumstances economically permitted.
The principal factor controlling the rate of
development throughout this period 1910-1926 was
the extent of Proven Reserves in sight at any
particular time. It has already been explained that
the complicated structural nature and interrelation
of the various accumulations have only gradually
become clear.
Due to the 1914-1918 war and its aftermath, it
was not until 1920 that it became possible to carry
into effect a policy of progressive expansion. This
expansion continued until 1926 as far as was
justified by the reserves in sight, which were steadily
being expanded by the discovery of new
accumulations.
By 1926 production had been raised to about
2,000 tons per day. The extent of the field was
becoming delineated, and, in the world market,
supply was beginning to overtake demand and prices
for products were falling. The policy then adopted
was to avoid further expansion which might prove
to be shortlived, but to carry out sufficient drilling
to continue to maintain the production at a constant
level of about 2,000 tons per day. In 1928-
1929 the results of drilling however exceeded this
figure, and production was maintained at 2,000 tons
daily by shutting in wells and by reducing very
considerably the amount of drilling: later by reopening
this shut-in production to compensate
for the much reduced production resulting from new
drilling. Production was thus maintained at 2,000
tons per day until the middle of 1930.
The peak of field production was reached in this
period 1929-1930. From this time onwards, production
steadily declined. Known reserves were
gradually becoming drilled up and very few new
accumulations discovered.
By 1941 field production had fallen to 480 tons
per day, 597 wells had been drilled of which 408
were still producing oil.
On September 1st 1941, instructions were received
to shut down immediately all production in Miri
and to immobilise equipment. All pumping rods
and pumps were removed from the wells, tubing
laid down and cement plugs placed in the important
producing wells. Records of Japanese activity in
the field during their period of occupation from
December 1941 to August 1945 are incomplete, but
it is evident that no new wells were drilled. Repair
work was carried out on some of the existing
wells and they extracted a small production from
the field.
On reoccupation of the field, rehabilitation of the
prewar producing wells was commenced and still
continues. Up to the time of writing 131 old wells
have been rehabilitated and tested and 98 wells are
producing oil.
The first new well commenced drilling in
February 1947 and of four wells completed since
then two are producing oil. Field production has
now reached 150 tons per day and it is hoped to
increase this both by new drilling and rehabilitation
of old wells. Now, as after the 1914-1918 war,
however, shortage of equipment and transport are
retarding full scale rehabilitation and expansion.
The field has now reached a very mature stage
and known reserves are very limited. Exploration
for new reserves however is being undertaken both
in the Miri field and its neighbourhood.—(Contributed).
Law Report.
REX v. LIM ENG HOCK alias
ANDREW LIM.
Before His Honour Judge K. H. Digby.
December 4th, 1948. 9 a.m.
JUDGMENT.
(Those parts of the Judgment relating to the
first and second charges, on both of which the
accused was acquitted, have been omitted and the
report is continued with the third and fourth
charges. Mr. Cromwell prosecuted and Mr. Low,
with the permission of the Court, represented the
accused.)
I adjourned this case for a week to enable me
to give a written judgment as there are points of
considerable difficulty involved, and it is therefore
essential that I should clearly state the facts which
I have found and set out, I am afraid at some
length, the reasoning which leads to the conclusions
which I have formed. At the close of
the case for the prosecution I acquitted the accused
on the charge of rape but found that there was a
case to answer on the remaining three charges.
For the sake of convenience I shall in this judgment
continue to refer to these three charges as
the second, third and fourth charges, respectively:
the second charge being that of unlawful carnal
knowledge under section 3 of the Women and
Girls Protection Ordinance, the third charge being
that of buying a minor girl for the purpose of illicit
intercourse under section 373 of the Penal Code,
and the fourth charge being that of buying a minor
gid for an unlawful and immoral purpose, also
under section 373 of the Penal Code.
I turn to the third charge, which has troubled
me very greatly. Mr. Low occasionally placed
some emphasis on the word “bought” but this
does not worry me at all. It is common ground
that accused obtained possession of this girl in
consideration of certain payments of money made
by him. Perhaps when a, wife is acquired by
payment to her parents the use of the word would
properly be regarded as uncouth, but if the
prosecution has satisfied me that Lim Ong Ah
was acquired as a mistress and not a wife I do
not think I could have any doubt on the facts
admitted that she was sold for this purpose. In
any event it would have been open to me to find
that the accused had, in the words of the section,
otherwise obtained possession of Lim Ong Ah,
without formally amending the charge. Tn rriy
view the real difficulty lies elsewhere. For the
purposes of section 373 of the Penal Code “illicit
intercourse” is defined as follows : “ ‘Illicit
intercourse’ means sexual intercourse between
persons not united by marriage or by any union or
tie which, though not amounting to a marriage,
is recognised by the personal law or custom of the
community to which they belong, or, where they
belong to different communities, of both such communities,
as constituting between them a quasimarital
relation.” Now there is no dispute that
the accused acquired Lim Ong Ah for the purpose
of sexual intercourse, and the accused is not in
a position to contest that there was no valid
marriage between them, as marriages according to
Chinese custom in Sarawak depend for their
validity on registration, and the alleged marriage
between the accused and Lim Ong Ah was not
only not registered hut was, by virtue of section
6 of the Chinese Marriage Ordinance, incapable of
registration within the prescribed month. Accordingly
I have to decide whether the transaction
which has been under consideration in this case
amounted to a union or tie recognised by the law
or custom of the Chinese community as a whole,
or by the law or custom of the Teochew community
to which Lim Ong Ah belongs and the Hokkien
community to which the accused belongs, as
constituting a quasi-marital relation. If I had
thought that the onus was on the accused to prove
that such a union or tie was formed between him
and the girl I would have decided that he had
failed to discharge that onus. I am of the
opinion, however, that, in conformity with the
ordinary rule of criminal law which prevails in
the absence of express statutory provision to the
contrary, the onus is on the prosecution to satisfy
me that such union or tie was effected and I proceed
to inquire whether Mr. Cromwell has duly discharged
that burden.
It has not been suggested that the transaction in
question is sanctioned by the law of the Republic
of China and the only point for me to decide, therefore,
is whether it can find justification in Sarawak
Chinese custom or in the custom of the Hokkien
and Teochew communities in Sarawak. Unlike
law properly so-called, custom is a matter of which
knowledge is acquired naturally by the ordinary
citizen. I think that all the witnesses in this case,
except the doctor and possibly Lim Ong Ah herself,
are to some extent qualified to give evidence on
that custom. I have, however, had the assistance
of three witnesses called expressly for the purpose
Mr. Chan Kwee Chong: Mr. Tan Bak Lim ; and
Mr. Chan Kwee Yow who may not have had the
same experience as the two former gentlemen in
administering or advising on custom, but who
impressed me as an honest witness. I have
omitted mention of Mr. Wee Hok Siu as he was
not examined by Mr. Cromwell in this Court on
custom and I do not think that I have been asked
to take the view that he has any profundity of
knowledge on the subject.
Custom, as Mr. Low has sagely remarked, is a
mysterious and uncertain thing. Those of us who
frequently have to take questions of Chinese custom
into consideration when administering the law
sometimes feel that we could do with a little more
certainty and a little less mystery. It may be said
without qualification that no live custom is static ;
it is not fossilised. It is an entirely incorrect
approach to assume an arbitrary data one hundred
or five hundred or five thousand years ago and say,
“That is the date on which Chinese custom was
finally perfected and no deviations from it since
then can possibly have the sanction of custom.”
Custom grows and changes as communities progress
and ideas develop, because if it fails to grow
and change it dies. It has been continually
emphasised in this case that at the present time
Chinese custom in Sarawak is in a state of flux, and
I have understood that to mean that its growing
pains are now more than usually acute. It seems
that roughly speaking Chinese custom is now flowing
in two streams; the first stream struggling for
substantial conformity with what is believed to be
the law of the Republic of China, and the second
stream still plodding on in the old way but losing
a certain amount of directness in its progress and
occasionally being inclined to overflow its banks.
This Court is for the purposes of this case only
concerned with the second stream. I have said
already that no defence has been based on the law
of the Republic and in any event before this Court
could give any decision on such law it would have
to hear expert evidence from at least one Chinese
lawyer either of the professional or the academic
kind. Since vigorous custom must be fluid the
abandonment of certain conventions should not
necessarily be ascribed to the growth of bad habits.
Ceremonies and taboos which no longer serve any
useful purpose, or which for some other reason no
longer command the respect of the community with
which they are associated, are properly relegated
to the scrap-heap, and the fact that they have gone
increases rather than diminishes the value of the
hard core of custom which remains. Bearing in
mind these general principles I will now consider
some of the points of Chinese custom which have
been raised in this case. In so doing I shall from
time to time draw analogies from English law but
I am keeping firmly before my eyes the fact that
Anglo-Saxon rules, prejudices and methods of
reasoning are no sure guide to the beliefs and
customs of Asia and perhaps afford little assistance
in construing the inheritance of the far older
civilisation of the ancient Chinese race.
I am satisfied that there is a very strong
traditional antipathy amongst the Chinese to
a marriage between persons hearing the same surname.
It is a moot point whether this antipathy
amounts to a rule that such a marriage is absolutely
void, as for instance is the case of a purported
marriage between a brother and sister in England,
or whether such a marriage is merely regarded as
reprehensible, as some people in England regard the
marriage of first cousins. Probably what, in the
circumstances, I may perhaps call “the degree of
invalidity” of such a union varies as between races
and places. Some attempt has been made to show
that the Chinese only recognise such a marriage if
it is celebrated according to what has been called
“the new style”, meaning, I gather, a marriage
contract recognised as such by the law of the
Republic. It must, however, be pointed out that
when a specific case of a marriage between two
persons bearing the same surname was mentioned,
the prosecution, although indeed suggesting that it
was a “new-style” marriage, laid the greatest
emphasis on it being a marriage called by a Chinese
expression, which I will not venture to attempt to
pronounce, but which means a union between a
virgin husband and a virgin wife to which such
sanctity and importance is attributed by Chinese
ideas that no other woman can ever have the same
status with respect to that man for the remainder
of his life; a union, that is to say, conceived and
rooted in old Chinese custom. I am unable to hold
that a marriage, whether primary or secondary,
contracted between two Chinese persons bearing the
same surname is necessarily void according to
Chinese custom.
I reach roughly the same conclusion with regard
to the point taken about the absence of the father’s
consent. It is dear that the Chinese community
attaches very great importance to the consent of
the parents of both parties to a marriage, particularly
the consent of the bride's father. It is not
contested that the father of Lim Ong Ah did not
consent to his daughter’s marriage to the accused,
and in my opinion the accused is very much to be
blamed for his failure to take any steps to discover
whether the father had consented or not. I am
satisfied, however, that Chinese custom, quite apart
from the so-called “new-style” marriages, is
gradually attaching less importance to the consent
of the parents and more importance to the consent
of the parties. Accordingly I cannot hold that a
marriage without the prior consent of the bride’s
father, even when the girl is a minor, is for that
reason only necessarily void. With regard to the
attitude of the girl I am of the opinion that she
was acquiescent. She did not desire this union but
at the same time she did not actively resist it. She
was a liquid asset in the hands of the family’s
business manager.
Mr. Chan Kwee Chong gave vent to vehement
views on the question of marriageable age, but did
not really contend that any minimum age for a
girl's marriage was prescribed by ancient Chinese
custom. This matter is in my limited experience
almost invariably dealt with by popular custom as
being dependent on maturity. By Order No.
XXVII of 1911 the second Rajah laid it down that
the minimum age for a Chinese girl to marry in
Sarawak was 16, which seems to have been construed
as meaning 16 by Chinese computation.
Chinese custom in Sarawak consists, I think, of a
mixture of ancient Chinese tradition and modern
Chinese ideas, modified and moulded by local
legislation, and there is a great deal to be said for
Mr. Cromwell’s submission that the effect of the
enactment referred to has been to adapt Chinese
custom to the statutory rule. I am not satisfied,
however, that it can be stated that the marriage
of a girl of 14 is necessarily void according to
Chinese custom, but as shall hereafter appear, I
attach great weight to this matter of age as indeed
I do to the matters of common surname and the
absence of the father’s consent. In favour of the
defence it should be pointed out that the girl was
competent to contract a Church or Civil Marriage
as she was 14. and the evidence of Dr. Bucklev is
that she was sufficiently developed for intercourse.
Mr. Low is contending that because an assignation
was held in a Padungan coffee-shop, and ten
dollars was paid to the mother on account of it.
the whole transaction being called “sio-bin,” and
because a female third party was prepared to make
the necessary preliminary arrangements for the
seduction; and because ”tia” or sugar-money was
paid and two rings given to the girl’s mother on a
later date; and because $300 was handed over in
one lump sum, supposed to be divided in certain
proportions between “pengkim” and “feast-monev”
at a still later date; and because the consent of the
accused’s primacy wife was obtained to the whole
transaction; I must necessarily hold that here was
a valid quasi-marriage according to Chinese custom,
in my view, however, any such decision would
make evasion of section 373 of the Penal Code far
too easy. Naturally a man wishes to meet a girl
before he takes her as his mistress; the line
between the profession of “go-between” and the
profession of procuress sometimes follows an
unsteady course; a payment of money can be
called by any name; and some wives are willing
to be accomplices in the defilement of young girls.
To take a dangerous but illustrative analogy an
Englishman may give a gold ring to his intended
mistress: their friends may donate to the happy
couple expensive presents and shower them with
confetti on the occasion of their union; the lady may
adopt the surname of her paramour; and accompany
him on a holiday which they call a honeymoon ; but
none nor all of these things will convert a mistress
into a wife. It is, of course, essential that bona
fide marriages according to Chinese custom should
be protected from attack under section 373 of the
Penal Code. The section in any case refers only
to girls under 18 and the definition of "illicit intercourse"
extends specific protection to marriages
with such minors. That definition covers both
marriages intended to be registered during the
statutory month permitted after the ceremonies have
been performed and it also covers bona fide unions
recognised as quasi-marriages by Chinese custom
although they are never registered at all. I decline
to hold, however, that every transfer of a minor
girl of Chinese race to a Chinese man for the
purpose of sexual intercourse in consideration of
payments of money, with the connivance of the
man’s primary wife, at the instance of the girl’s
mother, and preceded or accompanied by certain
forms associated with duly contracted marriages,
falls outside the scope of section 373. In this
connection it may be pointed out that accused himself
admitted that another woman, in consideration
of whose promise to perform similar services he
had made similar payments, was merely sent away
by him when he discovered she did not possess the
qualifications which he sought; and it would appear
that at any rate in that case he did not consider
that the payments constituted a valid union. Can
it be doubted that, if the accused had discovered
on Thursday evening what the doctor discovered on
Saturday morning, namely that Lim Ong Ah was
not a virgin, this girl would have followed her
predecessor into banishment without further formality?
I think that by now I must have made it clear
that I am unable to accede in toto either to the
contentions of Mr. Cromwell or to the contentions
of Mr. Low. After digesting the conflicting counsel
that I have received I have addressed my mind to
the method whereby I should approach the very
difficult question in issue. I have decided that it
would be erroneous to apply ordinary English legal
tests. The distinction between a void and voidable
marriage, for instance, is well-known to English
lawyers, but is not, I think, appreciated by the
experts in Chinese custom to whom I have listened.
I am convinced that I should resist the temptation
to determine this matter as if I was dealing with
a question of English matrimonial law. I think
that the way to treat this case is to make express
findings on all questions of fact; to look at the
entire picture as a whole; and then to put to my
self the question whether the prosecution have
satisfied me that neither the customs of the Chinese
community in general, nor the customs of the Hokkien
and Teochew communities in particular, would
recognise the panorama thus revealed as constituting
a quasi-marital relation between the
accused and Lim Ong Ah. I understood by the
expression “quasi-marital relation” a union between
a man and a woman which does not amount in law
to a marriage but which confers substantially the
same rights and imposes substantially the same
obligations on each party vis- -vis the other as
would be conferred or imposed by a valid legal
marriage except in so far as custom permits a man
to have more wives, or a woman to have more
husbands, than might be permitted by law. I must
first consider this transaction as composed of all its
ingredients and then treat the question of recognition
or non-recognition by custom as a question of
fact to be answered “yea” or “no”. A girl aged
14, that is below the legal age of marriage by
Chinese custom, was transferred by her mother from
the house in which her parents lived together to
the house of the accused for the purpose of enabling
the latter to have sexual intercourse with her at an
early date. It was never intended by any party
that such intercourse should await the girl's attaining
the age of 15. The transfer of her person took
place without the knowledge or approval of her
father and without the active consent of herself.
The accused and the girl possessed the same surname.
The mother in exchange for her daughter
received $334 on different dates, the various sums
being called by names culled from Chinese Marriage
custom. The mother also received two rings. The
negotiations opened with a meeting in a coffee-shop
in conformity with the Chinese marriage ceremony
of "sio-bin". The accused had three accomplices—
the girl’s mother, who made a neat little profit of
over $200 and two rings; the go-between who has
never been able to make up her mind as to whether
she was acting as a real go-between or not but who
incidentally obtained repayment of a debt of $100
as her share of the spoils : and the woman who
regards herself as accused’s principal wife. The
circumstances of the removal of the girl to tbe
accused’s house were furtive. A dark deed is best
done darkly, and evening had shaded into night
when the bridal party set out on its journey.
Although the motor-car was at the gruel stall near
the house where the girl and her mother lived, after
the go-between had got tired of waiting at the place
of assignation along Rock Road, it was hastily sent
back whence it had come, probably in case the
father should notice and object to the abduction of
his daughter. Tbe girl and her mother proceeded
on foot to Rock Road where they entered the car.
When the car, after a short tour of the bazaar,
reached the accused’s house he was not at home, a
fact which Mr. Chan Kwee Chong considers is
unheard of at a proper marriage of a secondary wife
and for which the accused has offered an explanation
which is entirely inadequate. The girl performed
no ceremonies in accused's bouse of the nature
which a primary wife usually exacts from a
secondary wife on the occasion of the latter's wedding.
It is interesting to note that the woman
explains that these ceremonies would have been
performed when a feast, apparently unknown to
Chinese custom, was held on the following Monday
on which day the marriage would be registered,
while the accused gave the day intended for this
novel feast as the day after the girl’s arrival, that
is the Friday, and said, without making any
reference to the projected registration, that after
this final nuptial ceremony, selected by him but
unwarranted by custom, be intended to have that
intercourse with his bride which his moral sense
precluded him from enjoying before the feast.
Those are the facts of the matter; that is the whole
picture; and I must now ask myself whether the
prosecution has convinced me that the accused and
Lim Ong Ah were not thereby united by any union
or tie recognised by their personal custom as constituting
a quasi-marital relation. I decide that I am
so convinced. I am satisfied that the accused
intended to have illicit intercourse and that his
assertions of a secondary marriage are mere histrionics.
Having reached that conclusion I think
I may go further and say that, in my view, it
would be tantamount to a defamatory libel on the
Chinese people of Sarawak to hold otherwise. I
convict the accused of the offence of buying a minor
girl under 18 years of age with intent to use her
for the purpose of illicit intercourse under section
373 of the Penal Code.
I can deal with the fourth charge very quickly.
I have already found that the girl was 14 years of
age at the date of the alleged offence; that the
accused intended to have intercourse with her
before the date on which she would have become
15; that he had no reasonable excuse for overestimating
the girl’s age; and that lie bought her
for the purpose of illicit intercourse. It is clear,
therefore, that he also bought her for an unlawful
and immoral purpose. I realise that this is merely
a different facet of the act in respect of which the
accused has been convicted on the third charge.
I desire to add that even if I had considered that
the prosecution had not discharged the onus of
proof in respect of the third charge, I would still
have convicted the accused on the fourth charge,
since although I expressed a view to the contrary
during the hearing, I now bold that, however valid
the private custom alleged may be, that custom, if
it exists, which I have found it does not, is immoral
and so not sanctioned by public law. I convict
the accused of buying a minor girl under 18 years
of age with intent to use her for an unlawful and
immoral purpose under section 373 of the Penal
Code.
Finally I come to sentence. There is no power
under section 373 of the Penal Code to pass a
sentence of fine and to refrain from passing a
sentence of imprisonment, though a sentence of
fine might be passed in addition to a sentence of
imprisonment. The maximum sentence of imprisonment
prescribed by that section is one of ten
years. I agree with Mr. Low, however, that the
section is primarily designed to strike at a much
greater evil, and at an offence of a much more
serious nature, than that in respect of which I have
convicted the accused. It might well be contended
that after the charge of rape had disappeared the
offence alleged in the second charge was the most
serious of the three remaining in the particular
circumstances of this case. The maximum prison
sentence that could have been passed on a conviction
on the second charge, however, was one of
two years only. But this is no mere technical
offence. I consider that the conduct of the accused
has been disreputable and shameful and that he
took a contemptible advantage of the poverty of the
family of the girl, Lim Ong Ah. I sentence Lim
Eng Hock to six months’ rigorous imprisonment
on each of the two charges on which he has been
convicted, the sentences to run concurrently.
Accused applies for stay of execution pending
appeal. Stay granted on accused’s bond of $2,000
with two sureties for $3,000.
Stepping into Sim Kee Chong’s last week to buy
a bottle of Plymouth, I ran into Wilfred bending
over a row of tins. He said he was choosing some
food to take with him on leave.
“I’m off tomorrow,” he said, holding up a tin
of Ghee for further inspection, “I haven’t been
back there for a long time, and I don't know
whether I shall enjoy it, but one does feel awfully
out of it in conversation nowadays if one has nothing
to say against the old place.”
“Where are you off to? ”I asked.
“Oh, the U.K.” replied Wilfred, turning down
a cake of Lux soap.
“I see, England.” I said.
“Oh, surely old chap you don’t still call it that,”
said Wilfred looking at me in astonishment, “A
bit old fashioned and undemocratic aren’t you? If
you can’t say U.K., its Great Britain and Northern
Ireland now you know. Of course some of you
chaps who were out here before the war are a bit
out of date I know. There just isn't time to pronounce
all these words now-a-days. One has to
get on with the job.”
He added a tin of Mayfair Ham Loaf to his
collection, and looked at me speculatively.
Perhaps not quite the kind of ham they were
used to once,” I said, “but they certainly will be
delighted to have it now.”
Taking my bottle under my arm, I went home
thoughtfully. Wilfred had shaken me. I’m a
Scotsman myself, but somehow one had got into
the habit of thinking of leave as England. After
all one usually arrives there first. I’m going on
leave-myself shortly, and it struck me I had better
start revising my ideas a bit.
So I got down a few old favourites from my
bookshelf and began getting myself up to date right
away. I’ve been at it all this week, and I believe
I could get through any test without a mistake
now. One just has to get one’s mind working in
a slightly different way.
Take Shakespeare. Henry Vth. always seemed
to strike a note for me.
“And gentlemen in U.K. now abed,
Shall think themselves accurs'd they were not
here;
And hold their manhood cheap, while any speaks
That fought with us upon St. Crispin’s day.”
and,
“I see you stand like greyhounds in the slips
Straining the start. The game's afoot;
Follow your spirit: and upon the charge
Cry God for Harry ! U.K. and St. George.”
I tried over John of Gaunt’s speech about the
precious stone set in a silver sea,
“This earth, this realm, this U.K.”
There were some more favourite lines of mine I
made more modern too,
“Oh to be in U.K. note that April's there.”
I remembered Wilfred’s remarks when it came
to revising things like Nelson’s signal, because it
sounded better the other way I thought.
“Great Britain and Northern Ireland expects that
every man will do his duty.”
And some of my old tags needed revising too,
“A British and Northern Irishman’s home is his
castle.”
You know those nice girls one sees at home.
When he first sees them after a long time their complexions
leave a chap a bit stunned. Well, if I
wanted to get my usual remark right about that it
would be, “A typical British girl with a complexion
like a U.K. rose.”
But I soon got to wondering if Wilfred wasn’t
getting a bit old fashioned himself actually. That
song should be popular now, “There’ll always be
a Western Union.” Then looking rather far ahead
perhaps, what about, “The roast beef of old
Western Union?”
Of course there was a lot more I managed to fit
in, but I was most pleased with getting that old
fashioned, patriotic thing put right. I got that
rather neatly I thought.
“Breathes there a man with soul so dead,
That never to himself hath said,
This is my own, my native ZONE.”
It’s quite simple really if one just concentrates
on keeping up with the times.
D.
Letter from Ceylon.
Hastily and somewhat incautiously, before leaving
Sarawak on 20th October, I promised our Editor
an article from Ceylon on Co-operation in that
country. I have been travelling and studying the
Co-operative movement here for eighteen days now,
and consider that it is so vast and its activities
are so diverse that such a letter as this could not
do justice to it. On the other hand the underadvertised
wonders of old Ceylon and the beauty
of the inland scenery should not be omitted from
any letter, and so the rambling notes which follow
are without any main theme, but touch on all.
Less than a year ago Ceylon gained full independence.
Of the Ceylonese population, the Singhalese,
the indigenes as they regard themselves, are greatly
in the majority. Thus the Singhalese enjoy a great
majority in Parliament, but this does not mean
they are all of one party—Ceylon has its hidebound
capitalists and its rabid communists, but the
present Government is said to be slightly left of
centre, trying to steer a middle course, but allowing
itself to be pulled to the left out of regard for public
opinion.
To-day the onlooker's main question is—How is
Ceylon managing in self-Government? It would
be futile and presumptuous of me to attempt to
answer such a question after such a short stay in
the country, and anyway such an answer inevitably
must be influenced by one’s own political views.
But I am sure the Ceylonese are quite capable of
looking after their own affairs. They have confidence
in their own ability, and they appear to have
initiative. Their intellectual ability is beyond
question, and the leaders appear to have the confidence
of the people. The so-called democratic
ideals of which we hear so much from Europe and
America are no less forcibly propounded here, and
one would say that in Ceylon there is much more
determination to put them into practice.
I was fortunate to meet and talk with one Cabinet
Minister on two occasions. I found him enlightened
and wise, mild but determined. His knowledge
of the intimate affairs of one of his Departments
could not have been much less than that of the
Head of the Department, while his Under Secretary’s
practical knowledge and ability appeared as
great as his very considerable scholastic attainments.
Everywhere there seems to be a desire for social
progress, but whether or not this desire is being
directed along the correct lines remains to be seen.
To me, an inexperienced observer, it would seem
that too little attention is paid to health and too
much to education, but who can say as yet? Very
wisely much attention is focussed on rural development,
mainly to increase food production. The
plans are good and vast, and let us hope that before
long this country, after a lapse of centuries, once
aga n will become self-sufficient in food.
Another question which unfortunately is in the
mind of the onlooker is whether or not corruption
in administration will be on the increase now that
the British no longer have any say in Government.
Certain persons who maintain they have no bias
tell me it is, but I do not hold this to be proved,
and I believe that the Ceylonese gentlemen with
whom I have been in contact are as honest and
trustworthy as any British official. It is interesting
to note that at an Anti-Corruption Society
recently founded in Kandy, a speaker of public prominence
told his audience that formerly it was the
custom and pastime of the people to blame everything
bad onto the British; now they could only
blame themselves and they must see to it that
their house is put in order.
I arrived in Colombo on 28th October, and after
five days of examinations of Co-operative enterprises
there, an officer from Fiji and I took train to
Jaffna, which is at the extreme north of the Island.
With that efficiency for which the Co-operative
Department of Ceylon is noted, the Registrar had
prepared our programme, booked accommodations,
arranged transport and prepared all district officials
for our visit. Everywhere we went there was
someone to meet us courteously, to accommodate
and take us about.
Our four days in Jaffna were occupied in travelling
the province and meeting and discussing Cooperation
with society officials. Jaffna is hot and
sultry and has a concentrated Tamil Population.
The country is flat, sandy and very dry. We obtained
some little popularity because our arrival
coincided with the first rain for nine months. In
the dry weather all fresh water is obtained from
wells.
On the whole the Tamils are poor, as one would
expect because of the natural poverty of the soil;
but probably because of this they are hard-working
and honest, and Co-operation appears to come
naturally to them. It enters into the life of almost
every individual, and some 1,000 societies are operating
in the province. I will not attempt a description
of these but would like to mention one Society
of outstanding achievement although its functions
are not usually associated with the movement.
The Tamils are hard-workers, mentally as well
as physically. As a class they are the best educated
in Ceylon, and most of this education has been
obtained by their own diligence. In 1936 a group
of people under the leadership of scholarly, but
comparatively poor men decided that as Government
could not give them a hospital they would
run one themselves. They collected the people of
the Tholpuram District and registered a Co-operative
Hospital Society. The idea appeared hopeless as
a hospital is a costly institution and few members
could afford more than one or two rupees a year as
contribution. However, they collected what they
could and built a small dispensary. A medical
practitioner and two apothecaries gave their services
voluntarily and the Society worried along, gradually
expanding as membership increased. Expansion
was facilitated further by gifts of money later from
a few local well-to-do persons, and never at anytime
did the Society consider closing down. To-day
they have 1,004 members (each member representing
a family) with a share capital of Rs. 11,158.
During the last financial year 3,126 indoor and
32,013 outdoor patients were treated, while the sale
of medicine amounted to Rs. 173,042. There are
now four male and one female paid medical
practitioners on the staff, and one is in Edinburgh
on a post-graduate course. The hospital itself must
hold upwards of 150 patients, and Government has
now recognised the efforts of the people by voting
a building grant of Rs. 100,000. To me, the
courage and enterprise of the original members of
1936 is astounding, but these traits are found everywhere
among Co-operative Societies in Jaffna; in
cultivation, processing, marketing, transport, rural
credit, banking and so on.
From Jaffna we went by train to Anuradhapura
through forest country abounding in bird and animal
life. To digress for a moment, I was surprised at
the very large areas still under jungle in Ceylon,
particularly in the north, north-east and south. In
the highlands much of the country is now under
tea and rubber (and the adverse effects of erosion
are everywhere here to be seen) but the lowland
forests are almost untouched in the regions studied.
The trees though sturdy appear stunted and undergrowth
is not so profuse as in Sarawak. The
forests harboured elephant, tiger, bear, deer, pig
and so on in great quantity and travel at night even
on the main roads through the forests is to be
avoided.
Anuradhapura became the capital of the kingdom
of Lanka (even now the Sinhalese name for Ceylon)
in 437 B.C. where the first Sinhalese ruler ascended
the throne. I cannot attempt to repeat the history
of this city, except to say that it passed through
many and varied vicissitudes until, in 11th century
A.D. its glory had departed and it disappeared for
ever as a capital city.
The ruins of ancient Anuradhapura are to be found
for miles around the former palace. Large granite
pillars brought hundreds of miles from South
Ceylon, usually about 18 inches square and some
15 feet high, are to be found everywhere. Many
of them still stand in their original positions as
supports for the palace and temples, though in the
course of centuries some are no longer upright and
some have collapsed. Some excavation has been
done, but much remains and the nearby forest still
contains wonders yet to be uncovered.
Here is to be found the sacred Bo Tree, the
oldest historical tree in the world with an authentic
history of 2,250 years. It still grows above a
temple. Enormous and ancient Dagobas (Pagodas,
we say) are prominent above the forest, reaching
to upward of 250 feet from the ground. Beautiful
Buddhist monasteries, stone carvings, statues, royal
baths and many other sights are to be seen. Also
there are three enormous reservoirs (called “tanks")
near the town, the first one being constructed in
B.C. 437-407. The largest covers 2,960 acres and
the dam or bund is over four miles long and has a
maximum height of forty feet!
Eight miles away from Anuradhapura are the
ancient ruins of Mihintale to reach which one
climbs endless broad stone steps, still in good
condition.
We left Anuradhapura in an archaeological daze,
swearing that Rome and Athens were as nothing
compared to it. We had been met by an Assistant
Registrar, Mr. Thalakade, who was to be our tutor
and guide for the rest of the trip which would be
done by car.
On the road to Trincomalee we visited a Society
and saw some hot springs reaching that famous port
by noon. “Trinco” is still a naval base of great
importance, but except for the beauty of the harbour
we found it uninteresting, and soon we were on
the road again through familiar jungle towards the
mountains in the centre of the island.
Fortunately Co-operation took us to the second
famous ancient city of Ceylon, called Polonnaruwa.
It became the capital for a time after a fall of
Anuradhapura in the 8th Century A.D. and although
it cannot rival that place in the delicacy of its
architecture, nevertheless the ruins convey a picture
of a city of amazing splendure and culture. Some
of the temples and pagodas are still in good condition
though dearly not so ancient as those of the
first capital. To me the most remarkable sight
was that of three colossal images of the Buddha
carved in the vertical face of a large rock boulder.
We saw a recumbent Buddha forty four feet long,
another standing and twenty two feet high and a
third seated image of slightly smaller proportions.
A fourth and small Buddha is to be found in a
shrine cut deep into the rock.
At Polonnaruwa also are some of the finest
reservoirs of ancient Ceylon. Colonisation schemes
are now maturing to cultivate wet padi below the
bunds in land which was once the granary of Ceylon,
but which for centuries has been overrun by
jungle. Here we found the Department of Cooperation
active in promoting societies for the
farming of the freshly opened areas and for the
marketing of its produce.
Back we went onto the road again, seeing an
agricultural credit and marketing society bent on
improving the lot of its members who collectively
were also milling and parboiling their own padi.
Then we came to the wonder mountains of
Sigiriya, an enormous, bare, forbidding, apparently
inaccessible rock, overhanging on three sides, four
hundred feet in height, and with an acre or so on
the top. In the 5th century A.D., a wicked King,
a patricide, threw a wall far out around the base of
the rock, built a city on the lowland within the wall,
and ordered the impossible, that his palace should be
built on top of the rock. A stairway was built
around the crag, an enormous lion was built on the
only platform and steps cut into the remaining
upper part of the rock, almost perpendicular, enabled
his workmen to reach the top over one of the
most dangerous paths imaginable to effect the
impossible. The palace with its attendant baths
and reservoirs was built and the ruins are still to
be seen.
Today Sigiriya may be climbed, lower down by
means of the original stairway, and higher up,
along new iron stairways hung on the rock face.
Although protection is adequate, yet it is frightening,
and a glance at the visitor’s book shows that
many fail to complete the climb.
A short distance up the rock are some famous
paintings or frescoes of “the ladies of Sigiriya“,
found in the roof of an overhanging pocket. These
paintings, done with vegetable paint on plaster on
the rock, are remarkable for their beauty. They
are women only, and have no religious significance,
though a guide tried to tell me they had. Their
sensuous appeal told me other things.
The visit to Sigiriya was hurried. We arrived
at 4 p.m. climbed the mountain, and were off again
by dark. We might have stayed at the Rest House,
but I for one did not wish to stay, else the wonder
of the place should fade. To me a fairy story had
indeed come to life—a story of early childhood, of
a wicked king safe in his castle stronghold on a
crag, yet brought to death on the plain below by
justice in the form of a brother whom he had once
dispossessed and exiled.
We drove on westwards through the evening over
a goodly winding and rising road to Kandy, the
beautiful show city of Ceylon, and the last seat of
the Kandyian kings. In 1815 it was ceded to the
British. Here we stayed two days, examining the
Co-operative Central Bank for the province and the
School of Co-operation for Ceylon. The Central
Bank is one of the four provincial banks now in
operation. Some more are to be formed and plans
are well in hand soon to form an Apex Bank which
will control eight provincial ones. As all the primary
societies bank with the provincial banks, the turnover
each year runs into many millions of rupees.
From Kandy we went south through beautiful
terraced valleys and Swiss-like villages for some
twenty miles and then the road commenced to climb
steeply along the south east face of hills which are
cultivated with tea. As we rose we passed waterfalls
which seemed to increase in size until the last
one to be crossed near the saddle appeared to fall
some seven hundred feet to flatten out and wind its
way through the newly-planted terraced padi fields
below.
Once over the saddle we were in a fine wooded
plateau, and soon Nuwara Eliya appeared, some
6,000 feet above sea level. It was very cold, and
after a hot bath and a short time before the log
fire I retired dinnerless to sleep under several
blankets for eleven hours ’.
On again we went, still further south, to Bandarawela,
calling on the way at a self-contained
co-operative village having its own store, credit and
marketing societies. Here we were embarrassed by
garlands but soon forgot, this in our discussions
with the villagers. In all these country villages I
was greatly impressed by the faith of the people in
a movement which to them has meant relief from
the degradation of debt; yet saddened by their
honest gratitude to a Government which, like all
others, must pander to the demands of those who
ask the most and can only give to them, the salt
of the earth, little more than good advice.
At this same co-operative village we saw European
vegetables ready for the Colombo markets. Everywhere
on this plateau tomatoes, leeks, cabbages,
carrots, lettuce and so on grow luxuriantly, and
English flowers and trees are everywhere. Even
Australia is represented by blue gum and eucalyptus
among the tea plants.
At Bandarawela the rain commenced in earnest.
It was cold and damp but our open fire in the hotel
helped. It was here, too, that a Mr. Keeble
introduced himself to me as an old Sarawakian.
He was in Borneo in the twenties at St. Thomas’,
Kuching, and in North Borneo. He is now a
master in St. Thomas’ school, Colombo. Miss
Andrews, Dr. Le Sueur and Dr. Marjoribanks he
remembered well.
At Bandarawela also we saw some more Societies
and then my fellow student Co-operator from Fiji
bid us farewell and returned to Colombo to meet
his ship.
We continued eastwards in Mr. Thalakadis’ car.
This gentelman, an Assistant Registrar, knows
everything about Co-operation and is proving a
wonderful tutor and guide. He has a very fine
knowledge of his own country also, and I am most
fortunate to be in his company.
From Bandarawela we climbed deep into the
mountains now enclosed in fog and mist, over good
but dangerous roads. The fog at the higher levels
was so thick at times the drivers could not have
seen twenty yards ahead. Memories of the day a
friend of mine driving my car smashed it up in a
fog outside Doncaster! We came to a tea estate
Co-Operative Store serving some 1,500 employees.
I met the manager of the estate (a European) who
very kindly showed us over his large tea-factory.
His views on Co-operation were guarded. He
agreed that the Estate Store Society, of which he
is President “did a very good job,” but he doubted
the value of the movement in the more populous
areas.
Then down we went to another estate Cooperative
Store, and here we met another European
Manager and his Assistant. The Manager, a large
Scot, had no doubts about Co-operation. “The
finest thing in Ceylon,” “the only answer to
extremists Left and Right,” and so on. He then
gave us good advice upon how to improve the
movement which lost nothing by the fact that we
knew it already. Unfortunately Governments and
not people like ourselves, set the pace.
The Assistant (also Scots) asked us to tea, though
it was one p.m. We climbed 150 feet to his bungalow
to drink the finest tea I have ever tasted. His
house was on a promontory about 4,000 feet above
sea level and over looking a valley 1,500 feet below.
A wonderful view. He turned out to be an ardent
Co-operator, by no means dismayed because his
stores manager had just run off with 4,000 rupees.
Down we went to Badulla, a provincial centre.
It is from here, in the Rest House, that I am writing,
and here I stop. We plan to be in Colombo on
19th after travelling around the south coast, and
I catch a ship to Singapore as soon as possible.
J. L. NOAKES.
14-11-48.
The Lost Legion.
If, gentle reader, you think this title refers to
erring collar studs, trains you have missed of perhaps
to a foreign legion, I am bound to say “G.R.
you have it,” the last being so near the mark your
mental age would be stepped up near the cost of
living index. For these remarks deal with the
trials of a Tiadatha when bewildered in the bloodstained
Bornean jungle and the various try-ons
before he will see a “Tiger” beer again.
If one goes alone in the jungle and leaves the
path for some ten minutes one can almost guarantee
a prolonged absence from such gin and gingers and
“Saturday Evening Posts” as one has not taken
with one. It is nearly as uncanny how easy it is
to lose oneself as it is for the native to find his way
about; however much you may not like his morals
or the way he cuts his hair, you have to hand it
to him for his skill and be thankful that he is on
your side but I am by no means certain that his
sense of direction or bump of locality is a sixth
sense at all, far less that it is comparatively lacking
among the civilized as compared with the others.
The sun, vegetation, tree branches and other more
or less polar guides are of some avail occasionally
but the wandering Dayak makes little use of them
whether he goes for a morning stroll in the local
jungle or a two or three years rhinoceros hunt farther
afield. At any rate I have counted their senses
—with difficulty— and my own rather liquid ones
and find them to be about the same in number,
far from there being any special sixth sense, efficient
jungle “D.F.” is a result of the Dayak’s visual
reflexes being much better conditioned than ours :
it is utterly useless going off into the jungle and
trying to remember all one sees so as to be able to
find the way back again, conscious memory cannot
hope to retain such a mass of detail. It is equally
useless to blaze trees for the same purpose, an hour
of it will tire one out and two hours leave one with
a fellow feeling for death only experienced otherwise
in acute sea-sickness.
The native method of turning down a leaf or
snapping a twig is excellent but very apt to overdo
and become boring; nor is the well known device
to be despised of looking back over one’s shoulder
fairly often, for it is this view which one hopes
to see on the way back. But the prime requisite
of finding one’s way back solo is to make one’s mind
one complete blank—which is why the native is
so good at it—and try to remember nothing at all,
burden one's mind with an absolute minimum:
visual perception must be acute, a queer leaf, a bent
twig, rocks, stones, flowers, a twisted root, streams,
funny trees, anything—everything must be seen,
filed and forgotten, only to be remembered not by
any effort of will but by means of a chain of forgotten
sights which are recalled by a series of reflex
actions below the level of consciousness.
The native having got little else in his head will
store up endless chains of such reflexes for an indefinite
period, often only producing them years
afterwards giving the impression having once
travelled a trail he has never forgotten it, which is
quite true, for he did not memorize it in the first
place—he would be invaluable among some Office
File! Usually one is hopeless in the jungle at first,
guaranteed to be lost in the first few minutes but
as the reason for this begins to dawn it becomes
easy to practice trips into the jungle alone in the
mornings, involving ever increasing distances in
different directions until after much practice it is
possible to go into any jungle alone wherever one
may wish for a couple of hours and then turn round
to come out by the route taken in—not always in
time for tiffin, as mistakes do occur ! For more
than a couple of hours it is difficult to make ones
mind sufficiently blank or stimulate visual perception
sufficiently keenly but it is obvious the period
could be extended with practice and avoidance of
fatigue, the native starting with these advantages
at a very early age.
Having got as far as this I meant to stop but
after a pause for refreshment, station identification—
and apologies to Don Bell—but it seemed one
might as well continue the business of living
conditions in the jungle. Living among natives is
generally rather a messy business, in the houses the
children, the hens, the dogs make themselves at
home upstairs at all times, the pigs down below
even more so. In the little jungle huts where one
sleeps at night among the protection of one's coolies,
the next man always seems to have kurap, a kind
of ring-worm itch which makes him sit up every
hour or so for a scratch, leaving one to wake up in
the morning covered with flakes and scales, together
with the certainty of contracting similar troubles—
the infection is mildly valued by the community
since the sufferer wakes up so often in the night
he is more likely to spot approaching enemies. One
and all indulge in frequent clearings of the throat
followed by expectorations until one wonders at the
end of a trip if they will have either throats
or spittle left. All too suffer from intermittent
malarial fever and often through no fault of their
own are unable to shoulder their loads. Quinine
and mosquito nets notwithstanding, sooner rather
than later does every traveller start malarial bouts,
it is absolutely hopeless, as one sees in the murky
light of the hurricane lamp the hordes of mosquitos
buzzing from body to body among one’s coolies until
it is no exaggeration to say they line up outside
one’s mosquito net and hum until not only is sleep
impossible but the slightest tear or disarrangement
in one’s protective envelope admits a number of
“Fifth Columnists,” with the usual undesirable
effects.
Once away from infrequent villages travel becomes
a gamble, for rice—the main and only economical
form of sustenance—has to be carried and of this
it is impossible to carry enough for more than ten
days without replenishment. A man will eat a
gantang of rice in three to four days and can carry
no more than four gantangs, if someone else carry
his cooking pots, sleeping mats and personal effects,
so that it works out that no more than a dozen
carriers are an economical party, for additional ones
are only carrying the rice for those who are carrying
the rice for those who are carrying the impedimenta
of those who are carrying the rice and large
parties are impossible save over very short distances.
In this manner one may well run short of food and
be faced with the choice of returning the same way
ignominiously or pushing on in the forlorn hope of
finding sustenance somehow and in this way I once
spent three most unpleasant, foodless, days slipping
and sliding up and down the hills, wondering in
what order the carriers were going to collapse.
It might seem the scarcity of porters and the
difficulty of feeding them should be overcome by
travelling in boats which hold so much more but
here again the mile long rapids intervene, not so
much m their danger to navigation but to their
impassibility during the floods which follow every
rainstorm. In this way it is quite the usual thing
to have to wait some two or three days for the river
to fall before one can proceed up or down-stream
and I have had to wait as long as three weeks. If
as on this occasion it is impossible to replenish
supplies one has to spend the day felling such sago
palms as one is fortunate to find and prepare them
for food the next day, as dismal a diet as one can
imagine, eventually unrelieved by tea, sugar or any
of the luxuries of civilization; even fish were
unprocurable in the flood and game, never very
abundant, made itself scarcer still, just when
wanted.
Apart from this delay, rapids often claim the
most careful of navigators and few travellers have
not had to swim for it some time or another. This
and the loss of one’s food and personal effects is bad
enough, to which must be added the danger of
crocodiles which invariably lurk round the foot of
rapids such as these for the very purpose of seeing
what comes down. In this way a man trying to
save a goat in a boat accident was easily taken by
a large crocodile, which we were at the time in no
position to dispute; later he brought his victim to
the surface and sank to a fusillade of shots, the
resulting stench of his carcase polluting the whole
river on our return a week later.
Organized head hunting has of course died out
but wandering parties of Dayaks are never above
suspicion, since it is so easy to take a stray head
or so when the corpses may not be found for
a month or two afterwards. Successful efforts
immediately encourage others and if the party is
not caught quickly—by no means easy to do—
dozens of people may be out trying their hands, for
nobody who has seen the girls change into little
furies of excitement when a fresh head is brought
in. can doubt that the grim spectre of head-hunting
will raise its dismembered trunk on the slightest
relaxation of vigilance.
Such is the effect of this scare on local inhabitants
I once found a complete wooden stockade
round one long house, whose inhabitants had found
traces of a party of wandering Dayaks and it was
only by visiting their old camp fires, to show how
ancient they were, that the inhabitants were persuaded
to pull up the stockade and replant it round
a vegetable garden.
Amok is much more common than is frequently
supposed, only the fatal ones coming to light, for
every one of which three or four others are prevented
or nipped in the bud. It is all most disconcerting
to a stranger, for often an otherwise quite
sensible person—even a Government servant—has
long been smarting under some real or imaginary
grievance, until he can stand it no longer and usually
round about the full moon he wilt grab his gun
or his knife and sail into his opponent's wedding
party with deadly effect, usually leaving the surviving
relatives with just such another grievance,
which at any time in the next year or two will be
taken out of the late madman’s relatives.
Not only is there a Lost Legion awaiting a tired
Tiadatha in the jungle but what with the vagaries
of travel, food, supplies, the natives and their
curious habits, there are legions of other ways of
being lost.—(Contributed.)
The Large Mammals of Borneo.
(Continued)
4. The Honey Bear.
This is the only wild animal of which the native
peoples are normally afraid, and many have been
injured, some killed, by these animals when with
young or hurt or sometimes for no apparent reason.
It can be extremely bold, and is very strong. In
most areas it is quite plentiful. Recently one
attacked and wounded some Dayaks by the coast
road beyond Miri. The R.A.A.F. had a tame one
on Labuan in 1945 which attained a large size and
remained on good terms with those it knew, but
a menance to crockery, cookery and coolie morale.
Unless one saw the distinctive rows of claw
marks up the tree trunks, one would not believe
some of the trees this heavy and seemingly clumsy
beast can climb, usually in its passion for honey.
Only the Manis or Scaly Ant-eater can compete
with it as climber. But the Bruang will eat almost
anything, and in some areas is a menace to sweet
potato and manioc grounds, uprooting whole plots—
partly, it would seem, in play. In 1945 one opened
a parachuted container and totally destroyed wireless
sets, a medical outfit, and much else.
In some districts the gall bladder is hung up on
the long-house verandah, allowed to decompose,
drip and dry. It is then said to be an efficacious
cure for various diseases, including malaria. The
skin is extensively used for the decorative seating
pads men hang on their behinds to keep dry when
sitting down out of doors, or clean when sitting
down in a long-house rice-beer party. The flesh
is strong-scented and rather sweet, edible—and
much eaten !
5. The Clouded Leopard.
Another fine animal that has probably been much
reduced by pursuit—in this case for the value of
skin as seating mats, teeth as ear-ornaments, and
Chinese medical use. It is still, however, fairly
numerous in the far interior of North and Dutch
Borneo and Sarawak, though always extremely shy.
Only a very few dogs will scent it, and it shows
much skill in hiding in the wildest jungle (in the
tree-tops). Nobody fears tins huge cat, and there
are derogatory stories about its prowess, and many
leopard legends.
Up till now, the Sarawak Museum has had no
mounted specimens. In 1946 the present Curator
was presented with a fine skin obtained by Pangeran
Tanid, Chief of the Milaus (Muruts) on the Middle
Kerayan (Dutch Borneo), who had shot it with a
blow-pipe in a tree-top where it had been cornered
while clearing the rice field. This method of obtaining
animals is commonly used by the Kelabits and
Muruts when clearing; if a scarce species is seen,
the people promptly fell the trees all around to stop
escape. A special elaboration of this technique is
used on monkeys, when a favourite “roosting” tree
is located, the surrounding jungle felled at night,
and the monkeys picked off by gun and blow-pipe
next morning.
Another specimen now in the Museum collection
was cornered by dogs in the Ulu Baram early in
1947 and speared, and a third skin (incomplete)
obtained by barter from Punans. In about April
1946 the Magoh Punans obtained a very large pure
black leopard, though unfortunately, as they consider
it only of barter value, they chopped off tail
and feet. Luckily they had kept the lower jaw.
This skin caused intense astonishment throughout
the interior, where no one had ever seen a black
leopard before. Mr. Banks says that on Mt. Matang
"there is once supposed to have been a black one,"
apparently the only other record to date, though
the bigger Asian mainland species, Panthera pardus,
has a well-known black variety.
6. The Orang Utan.
Usually known hereabouts as Mias (Maias), there
seems little doubt that this great ape has grown
much scarcer over the past century. It is probably
most numerous in North Borneo and over into the
Sembakong area of north-east Dutch Borneo, where
several were seen in July 1945. There are none in
northern-Sarawak or north-western Dutch Borneo,
but numbers further south. Mr. Ian Urquhart
reports from Binatang on the lower Rejang River,
Sarawak, that the ape is said to have been present
in the immediate vicinity until fairly recent times.
Here again, the increase and expansion of the Sea
Dayaks has driven them further back from the
navigable rivers. But the Chinese were also a factor
in this case, as Mr. Urquhart points out in a
letter (September 1948) :
“As regards how many maias there used to be,
the answer appears to be ‘plenty.’ The whole
area was completely uninhabited, and it is the
Chinese from 1870 onwards who started developing
from the Rejang River towards the Second
Division boundary and the Dayaks from the Second
Division who came into the Julau River and
from there into Binatang District who drove these
animals into the only remaining areas of virgin
jungle. The Dayaks only started moving to the
Julau area after 1861.”
At present in that area it appears to be confined
to the headwaters of the smaller streams, Darau,
Narasit and Ilang. This is probably fairly representative
of the general Sarawak pattern of shrinkage.
Although fully protected—in common with Rhinoceros
and the remarkable Proboscis Monkey
(confined to Borneo and now abundant in certain
coastal areas)—by a new Sarawak Act in 1947, owing
to the unfortunate encouragement given to a
collector for the London Zoo earlier in that year,
numbers of young have been brought in by Dayaks
in recent months (and this generally means the
mother has been killed first). Despite the closest
attention, including penicillin, sulpha drugs and
vitamin treatments, it is difficult to keep Maias
taken as babies alive, and at least a dozen have died
in friendly hands during 1947-1948.
To the weird stories of alleged Orang Utan
strength must now be added the account of an
American film-man who met a monster specimen
in the Batang Kayan area of Dutch Borneo; it killed
his cameraman who was “broken, by one blow
from collar bone to abdomen” (“Black Borneo,”
London, 1946, p. 180). On this same day the
author, Mr. Miller, not only also photographed wild
oxen, but the first Proboscis Monkey (p. 167) ever
seen in the interior, an apparently previously undescribed
species called the Skunk Monkey (whose
smell caused “a Dayak (to) fall out of a tree as if
stunned.” p. 158), and “a flock of Argus Pheasants
with two-foot tail feathers.” Many observers have
spent years without seeing a single Argus, one of the
cleverest of birds at self-concealment.
Incidentally, of the seven big mammals of Borneo
(including the rusa), only this one—the Orang Utan
—is so far on display in the Museum. It is hoped
in the near future to remedy this.
The Orang Utan's smaller cousin, the Gibbon
(Hylobates cinereus) is also on display. And there
is a fine case of the big Proboscis or Long-Nosed
Monkey (Nasal is larvatus). The widespread dialect
name for this tall, ugly, boozy-schnozzled monkey
is rather rude to our island neighbours—“Orang
blanda.” Apparently news of this nickname came
us a shock to a distinguished Dutch visitor who
came round the Museum one day; he seemed quite
put out!
The Gibbon is not, of course, a monkey but an
ape, as is the Mias. It is best known in Borneo
by the native name “Wa-wa,” a felicitous one,
reflecting as it does those wild bubbling calls which
ripple through the jungle at the first faint touch
of dawn, thrilling animal music of the far-off hills.
No sound better expresses the difference between
the primitive path and the civilised urban in Borneo.
In Kuching, Jesselton, Pontianak, one awakes to
the crowing of Chinese roosters, the bickering of
curs, and the new day's first clamorous jeep.
Happily the Wa-wa is numerous in most areas of
virgin jungle, and really abundant inland in the
interior, although considerably hunted for its flesh,
and not infrequently kept as a pet. I have seen
a nomadic Punan in the upper Tutoh (Baram tributary)
suckle a baby son on one breast and a baby
Wa-wa on the other. They make the nicest of pets,
but are very susceptible to respiratory diseases, and
on this account should not be let to mix in with
crowds (e.g. taken on a ship).
Of the monkeys, there is another as well as the
Proboscis which is worthy of mention, though not
so large. This is the bright chestnut-coloured
“Jelu merah” (Dayak) or “Kelasi“ (this or some
variant is the usual inland name). This shaggy,
long-haired, ragamuffin animal is known to very
few white men, and has no common name for that
reason—scientifically it is Pygathrix rubicundus.
I have only seen it above 4,500 feet in the headwaters
of the Padas (North Borneo), Trusan,
Limbang and Baram, (Sarawak), Bahau and Batang
Kayan (Dutch). In the Kelabit country the Museum
collectors did not meet it below 6,000 feet.
If often moves alone, and is then generally shy; but
small parties may be encountered and then they are
usually quite tame. Round Mount Batu Lawi in
the head of the Limbang they are quite numerous.
As Mr. Banks has pointed out, in general this monkey
has a peculiarly irregular distribution and little
is known of it. Anyone who sees one (and it is
easy to identify as our only all “red” monkey)
should put the date and place on record, please.
Outside the strict scope of these rough notes on
Borneo’s big mammals is one which I include, nevertheless,
because I am so often asked about it:
“Where does the Tapir occur in Borneo?” The
Tapir is, of course, the striking black and white
banded animal, something between a big pig and
a baby elephant in appearance. The question is
very naturally inspired by a North Borneo one cent
stamp, which shows a Tapir; it was (Mr. Alan
Dant informs me) first issued in 1909, and appeared
in various guises up until 1939. Alas. Tapirs are
unknown anywhere in Borneo!
North Borneo is indeed an enterprising colony
philatelically, for as well as a remarkably exaggerated
Proboscis Monkey (4 cents) and an Argus Pheasant
which appears to have been crossed with a Peatock
(5 cents), the current stamp issue includes a
2 cent Cockatoo (though none are found anywhere
in Borneo); and a “Dyak” (their spelling);
15 cent, though that term is not applied in North
Borneo and the person shown is quite evidently a
Sarawak type, with clothes etc. such as are not to
be seen further north.
TOM HARRISSON.
Birds in a Bornean Garden IV.
The small Cinnamon Chestnut-Bittern was common
in and around the ditches and the smaller
Yellow Bittern was seen once. Very striking during
the monsoon was the Chinese Pond-Heron, a khaki
coloured bird with white wings most conspicuous
in flight and quite eclipsed as soon as the wings
were closed; they fed in. ditches of an evening and
were also seen on ponds and newly dug areas, halfa-
dozen or so roosting ir the trees at night. A
Malay Bittern was seen twice, a foxy-reddish
coloured bird with the rounded wings and uncertain
flight of an owl or woodcock. A few Grey Wagtails,
an occasional Eastern-Meadow-Pipit and once
or twice the Eastern form of the common Kingfisher
were seen around the ditches.
On the fish ponds the small Chinese Tern and
the larger Panayan Tern were seen a few times
hawking for flies during the monsoon, a Darter or
Snake-Bird visited the larger pond, being seen
fishing and drying its wings in characteristic
cormorant-like attitude. A single duck seen flying
between the ponds was probably a Shoveller. The
Great White Egret kept to the ponds or rested in
neighbouring trees, flighting to and fro from pond
to pond in early morning and late evening, sometimes
together with a single large Eastern Purple
Heron.
Birds of prey were numerous, from the tiny
Malayan Black-Legged Falconet bowing away in
the top of a rubber tree between casting for insects,
to the big all black Birds-Nest-Eagle and the large
changeable Hawk-Eagle, white with a speckled
breast and black wing tips as seen in flight from
underneath. The round blunt-headed Peregrine
Falcon was seen several times, just the opposite
shape to the very common Brahminy Kite, distinguished
in flight even at a distance by its
comparatively short tail and rounded stern when
compared with other birds of prey. A Serpent-
Eagle, once during a wild monsoon morning the
white-bellied Sea-Eagle, a. single Sparrow-Hawk
chasing the ground Doves, the smaller Hawk-Eagle
and two unidentified species were seen : of the last,
one took a large fish from the pond and may well
have been the Smaller Grey Fishing Eagle driven
from its haunts by the riverside as the waters flooded
with monsoon rains.
In the evening many Swifts paraded, the comparatively
long-winged Large Palm-Swift and the
Small Palm-Swift being prominent; the White-
Bumped Malayan House-Swift was present, and it
was possible sometimes to see the small Swiftlet
with a white vent which makes a mossy nest use
less to commerce in the not very distant caves.
The larger all-black White-Nest-Swiftlet and the
small all-black Black-Nest-Swift let also occurred in
the evenings, together with the Eastern Common
Swallow, usually on its way to the community
resting places down in the town. In the evenings
at certain seasons flocks of Bee-Eaters went by
calling to each other, occasionally resting in the
rubber trees and darting out to feed on passing
insects. Flocks of Glossy Starlings passed to and
fro mornings and evenings, occasionally a pair of
Mynahs, once a large Thick-Billed Green Pigeon,
a flock of Long-Tailed Parakeets, and a single
Love Bird or Loriquet.
Pied plumage was commonest among the birds,
Robins, Moorhens, Fan-Tail Flycatchers, Malayan
Swift. Palm Swifts, Mossy-Nest Swiftlet and even
the Chinese Pond-Heron, to mention examples.
Omnivorous birds usually iu family parties seemed
to do best and always dominate, the Robin, Spotted
Ground-Dove and Moorhens doing particularly well,
only die larger gatherings of grain-eating Munia
finches being able to compete. Purely insectivorous
birds were less agressive, seldom operating more
numerously than in pairs. Pied Cuckoo-Shrikes.
Fan-Tailed Flycatchers, Yellow-Vented Bulbuls
being rather easily “seen off” by other birds, only
the irrepressible Tailor-Bird and to some extent the
Wren-Warbler being unsquashable; Sun-Birds and
Flower-Peckers led such a precarious existence
between feeds on their particular flowers that they
could hardly be said to be moved on by other
species.
Nest territory was very marked among Robins,
often quite small in area, many pairs nesting close
together, chasing off other species and even each
other, but meeting on neutral cultivated feeding
grounds to go through their song and ecstatic display.
Nesting Spotted Ground-Doves also had
their own rubber trees for the possession and
retention of which the bowing, cooing and slap and
wing tickle acts may have been put on. Moorhens
had territory and spent a lot of time chasing each
other, not unusually ending up on the tops of
banana leaves or on bean sticks from which they
took off on comparatively long flights. Smallest
territory of all was owned by the Fan-Tailed Flycatcher,
ten yards each way would be an elegant
which, and when ejected by avian or other intruders
they would come and clown on neutral ground,
restlessly flitting and warbling away almost inaudibly.
Other animals were few. At certain seasons
Flying-Foxes passed over in numbers in a Southerly
direction and along with a Flying-Squirrel were
erroneously accused of stealing ripe papayas. The
culprit was the common Civet-Cat or Munsang
which was very clever at detecting ripe fruit,
pineapples and bananas, eating the inside out of a
couple of papayas at a meal, disdaining the snares
set for it by biting through the wooden fence
enclosing the bait of ripe fruit.
Snakes were common, one Hamadryad or King
Cobra (1) “tedong naga,” a family of young Black
Cobras (2) “tedong’’ in the black and yellow ringed
stage with traces of the spectacle on the hood. Two
very pretty specimens of a smaller “cobra,” black
with yellow rings and a hood with spectacle markings
were also taken. The only other poisonous
snake was a large Green Pit Viper (8) “Engkrudu”
with the characteristic triangular head. The harmless
“ular daun” (4) long and thin, of a very
beautiful shade of green, the head triangular with
sharp pointed snout, was found a few times; common
also was “ular lidi” (5) a long, thin, brownish,
small snake with a black eye stripe moving very
fast, from which it may get its name—“lidi”
meaning the shuttle of a loom. It hunted frogs
systematically, its head raised up looking right and
left, the frog trusting to its camouflage to escape
detection and departing in great bounds when the
snake was not looking; they had a characteristic
despairing croak beard after they had been caught.
In the ditches occurred ular rapang (6), large and
black with a few white markings on the side of the
neck, and “ular belui” (7) with dark green back.
Burrowing snakes were common in swamps, the
speckled Fordonia and the double-ended, viviparous
Sealing Wax (8) snake ular kepala dua, an allied
species smaller with yellow markings was dug up on
drier ground also the German Flag Snake (9), who
used to curl the red and black tip of his tail in a
raised U-shaped bend as a warning.
(1) Naia bungarus
(2) Naia tripudians
(3) Lachesis wagleri
(4) Dryophis prasinus
(5) Dendrophis formosus
(6) Coluber melanurus
(7) Xenelaphis hexagonatus
(8) Cylindrophis rufus
(9) Doliophis intestinalis.
THE END.
Sarawak Museum.
Acquisitions to the Museum this month include
beads for Borneo comparisons from Zimbabwe,
Rhodesia and from Kuala Selinsing, Perak, via the
Raffles Museum, Singapore, (by exchange); an excellent
specimen of Melanau head-pressing apparatus
from Mr. R. G. Aikman; a bar of “Sarawak silver”
from Mr. Augustine Chong and Mr. D. C. White;
a fine parang made by Anyi, the Kelabit headman
who has been working for some months as metal
instructor at Batu Lintang. presented by courtesy of
the Principal (Mr. M. G. Dickson); and the earliest
extant Kuching Fire Engine, a shining thing
of brass, from the Municipal Department.
Two new gifts are of particular scientific value,
though their economic value is nil. They well
illustrate the sort of thing which anyone can find
and give to the Museum and thus make a positive
contribution to knowledge. The first is a collection
of beads obtained by Mr. William Geikie of Sibu
during the clearing of an airfield at Bintulu during
the Japanese occupation. The site apparently
included an old Melanau grave-yard, and here the
beads were found within a small area behind the
present bazaar.
They include a remarkably wide range of types,
such as has not previously been found in one place.
Some closely parallel Kenya and Kayan value beads,
and have been described by the world’s No. 1 bead
scholar (H. C. Beck) as early Roman, Venetian etc.
Others are parallel to types previously collected by
the Curator in the Kelabit country which seem to
show close affinities with B.C. material from the
eastern Mediterranean. Others again are very close
to beads excavated at the famous Kuala Selinsing
site in Perak, and dated as buried there at 6th to 9th
centuries A.D. (but possibly of much earlier actual
origin). The collection will be worked out in due
course, and specimens are being sent to the Beck
Collection and elsewhere for further study. Meanwhile,
this gift emphasises the importance of those
who find such things acting in the same thoughtful
and generous way as Mr. Geikie. Beads have been
described as “the fossils of human culture,” and
they offer especial advantages in ethnological and
historical research. We need collections, both dug
up and in daily use from all over the country. Mr.
Geikie's beads are no longer to be found among the
Melanaus, and as they were buried deep, may be
of considerable antiquity in the site, as well as in
their initial origin.
The second gift of especial interest this month is
equally unspectacular to the unobservant eye, and
equally of interest to students in many lands. It
is a piece of bilian some 14 inches long and an inch
wide, with a handle, and shaped rather like a little
cricket bat. One side is incised with a series of
ovals. This stick was found by Mr. A. Richards
(now D.O. Bau,) on a cape at Nanga Simpang, Poi
River, Third Division, an area now inhabited by
Ibans. It is evidently a pottery “beater” for
impressing designs on earthenware, such as is still
in use to-day among the Kelabits and a few Muruts.
There has been controversy as to how such designs
have been impressed in Asia, and many ethnologists
supposed they were applied by matting or string.
The Kelabit practice of to-day lends strong weight
to the beater view, and this find is even more
interesting since the design is more elaborate than
anything previously known. The hardwood may
have lasted centuries, and Mr. Richards has
suggested that it may have been washed down river
from an area previously inhabited (as is known) by
Bukitans and other “primitive” people; this seems
a reasonable proposition. But be that as it may,
this beater—if such it is—raises lively problems for
further study. It further illustrates the value of a
casual find, which many people might have thought
“just a bit of wood—why bother?” The motto is :
“When in doubt, send it to the Museum.” We
won’t mind, even if it does by chance prove to be
useless.
The Museum aims to build up a collection of old
badges, buttons, medals, uniforms and insignia in
use in Sarawak. Gifts of such would be most
welcome. They reflect an important part of Sarawak
history, and the material in the Museum is
woefully weak. Mr. Archer was starting such a
collection shortly before his death, and wrote to
the Gazette about it, but unfortunately no trace of
his stuff can now be discovered. The insignia of
the Order of the Star of Sarawak are especially
desired.
A fine set of photographs of Malays, Ibans and
Kayans has been presented by Mr. Wong of Anna
Studios, and it is intended to display these in a
special frame now being prepared for the purpose.
Mr. K. E. H. Kay has also given some interesting
photos, including one of the remarkable “Monkey
Rock” near Lundu. Mr. H. Wyatt has taken and
presented other interesting photos.—(Contributed).
The Library.
BOOKS NEWLY RECEIVED.
This is rather heavier list than the Xmas one, as
befits our sober intentions (no doubt!) for 1949.
It must be fairly clear to all but the illiterate, who
presumably do not go much by this column, that
one cannot read every book from cover to cover.
After all, even the Curator has other odds and ends
of work to do each month. As many as possible
are read in full. But when a book has not been
fully read, the results of a quick glance through, and
a knowledge of the subject, should be of much
more assistance to library users than the mere listed
title. This additional labour has been incurred in
the hope that the service will be of benefit to
readers, both Kuching and outstation.
NOVELS
“Under the Volcano” by Malcolm Lowry.
Powerful stuff, deep into the mind of an alcoholical
British Consul in Mexico. For the discerning,
a minor masterpiece in literary craftsmanship.
“Answer to Question 33” by Christopher Sykes.
On the same theme as this brilliant writer's
“Four Studies in Loyalty.” He is one of the most
interesting and individual authors of our time, and
this tale of love and the late war is told with deep
feeling.
“Herb of Grace” by Elizabeth Goudge.
Gentle, feminine, family fancy.
“Scott-King's Modern Europe” by Evelyn Waugh.
His bitterest, least funny book so far. A naif
school master goes to chaotic cultural conference in
a corruptly chaotic dictator state. Light, bright,
and highly bearable.
“Golden Miles” by Katherine Prichard.
A fine Australian writer tells a long and exciting
tale of the gold fields and gold stealing, miners,
strikers, silicosis and sentiment, only marred by
over-long elementary political sermons.
“Coming Up for Air” by George Orwell.
Reprint of this clever satire on urbanised rural
England. Oh dear, alas how true!
POETRY AND LETTERS
“Lord, I was Afraid” by Nigel Balchin.
An elaborate play-mime allegory by one who can
never write badly or dully. Theme is the modern
dilemna of decent man.
“The Bedside Shakespeare” by Arthur Stanley.
A competent anthology from the editor of the
famous “Bedside Book,” covering a wide range of
poem and play.
“The Short Stories of Liam O' Flaherty”.
Twenty or so tales, grim and tender, (usually
grim), of O'Flaherty’s Eire, which, whatever else
it is, is never dull.
BIOGRAPHY AND POLITICS
“Beau Brummett” by Kathleen Campbell.
Overwritten and amateurish; but the “hero” is
so strange a figure that the books holds one on its
weired trajectory through the peak of glory as the
King’s boon companion to the wretched end in a
French asylum.
" The Sinews of Peace" by Winston Churchill.
Winston’s important postwar speeches, edited by
his son, Randolph.
"Mr. Attlee" by Roy Jenkins.
An uncontroversial, polite and informative biography
of a controversial, polite man. Nothing
startling, but most of what’s relevant.
"Lord Wavell" by Major-General R. J. Collins.
A big, solid, straightforward story of the great
soldier’s career. Well illustrated and mapped.
"From Smoke to Smother" by Douglas Reed.
This gloomy prophet of world disaster comes on
from where he left off in “Insanity Fair,” which
unfortunately, proved pretty fair as prophecy goes.
Some will find his reiterated prejudices tiresome,
and they tend to be so numerous as at times to
obscure the underyling strata of sense and sensibility.
Books have been generously given this month by Mr. E.
Banks, Dr. J. Clapham. Mr. J. Craig, Mr. A. R. Dee, Mr.
H. Lade and Mr. W. Witt. All but one of those reviewed
above have been purchased.
T. H.
Fifty Years Ago.
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, TUESDAY.
JANUARY 3, 1899.
Generally the past year has been somewhat
uneventful but, at the same time, prosperous..................
Last year we mentioned the trouble caused by
Bantin in the upper Batang Lupar : this trouble
increased to such dimensions that His Highness
was obliged to organize a punitive expedition,
which speedily quieted matters and, although the
principal offender escaped, there has been no
further disturbance.
As regards Finance, the year opened with a substantial
surplus of $60,000 and, we are informed,
that a similar surplus should be the result of the
Treasury operations of 1898. The revenue should
also show a very substantial increase and,
generally, the financial prospect is encouraging.
The present agreements for the Opium Farms will
expire in June and the new tenders should be
higher than the last. The new Pawn Farms also
will be an additional source of Revenue as also the
Bau gold.....................
The value of the rice imported during this period
was $282,683. We trust that now that the Hakka
colony has been started, the amount of money
leaving the country for the purchase of this staple
of food may become less and less: one of the most
satisfactory features of the year is the commencement
of rice growing on a large scale and we wish
it every success for the good of everyone in the
Country. The export of sago may show a small
decrease in value, but pepper still shows an upward
tendency....................
During the year there has been much illness
about, though not of a very serious nature, being
principally fever, and influenza.........................
Several changes must be noted in Public Works.
The new road, called Central Road, connecting
Rock road with Pig Lane, is now completed; the
roads from Pig Lane to Tabuan road and from
thence to Padungan are laid out though at present
not fit for traffic. A new bridge has been constructed
from the end of Gambier road to Kampong
Java and the new bazaar is rapidly approaching
completion. The Ice Machine is in full work; new
latrines have been erected on the Main Bazaar and
a new wharf for the p.s. Adeh is finished and has
proved a great convenience. In outstations besides
the usual upkeep, etc., several improvements have
been or are in course of being made. A new school
house was opened by His Highness The Rajah at
Bau and is now in use: a new light-house for
Baram is nearly ready for erection; and a new gaol
for Sadong has been completed. The telephone
between Kuching and Bau is in course of erection,
the route has been surveyed and the posts are
being placed.
The Naval Department has acquired the
s.l. L’Aubaine which is now on the Brooketon and
Labuan run. The s.s. Breid has been chartered
to run between Sadong and Singapore, the
s.s. Vyner not being of sufficient capacity.
With regard to Coal the prospects at Sadong are
decidedly hopeful. At present, thanks to good
management, the output amounts to 3,400 tons a
month. A new mine has been opened and the
necessary machinery is being erected and will probably
be working in a few days. When this occurs
the output should reach about 4,500 tons a month.
The coal of the new mine is of very fine quality
and should fetch a good price in the Singapore
market.
We would note the accession of the Kalahits of
Baram and other tribes to the Government of
Sarawak and the consequent opening up of fresh
districts to the advantages of regular Government.
During the year, also, the marriage laws have been
under consideration, with the result that marriage
and divorce amongst both Mohamedans and
Christiane have now been placed on a satisfactory
footing.
In conclusion we can only reiterate our remarks
of last year, namely that the past year continued to
show increasing prosperity and that the future bids
fair to be more prosperous than the past.
This Sarawak.
(WITH APOLOGIES TO THE NEW STATESMAN
AND NATION.)
I am sorry to make a complaint to you again
about the very troublesome and distructive pony of
............... I am not writing to him because it is a
waste of ink and paper.
His pony is let loose at night, every night as I
was told, to prawl about like a bandit of Malaya.
Strange sounds woke us up at midnight and to
our horror we found the pony fasting in our compound.—
A letter.
Greek Government troops are fighting for a
market in central Greek.—Sarawak Tribune.
These efforts are not entirely in pain.—A report.
................. he suffered from heart-failure..................
—A letter.
I am indebted to my common friend for the
favour of your address.—A circular letter.
The Commissioner of Trade & Customs,
Kuching, Sarawak.
Dear Sir,
This may seem like an odd request but if you
would reach into your waste-paper basket and send
me a few of the stamps that are sure to be there,
I would appreciate it very much.
Trusting this causes no inconvenience.
A letter.
(The Editor is unable to follow the example of
our illustrious contemporary and offer a prize for
the best entry in this column. Contributions from
all parts of “This Sarawak” will, however, be
warmly appreciated and the most favoured will be
given pride of place.)
Sibu Bowling Averages—November.
CORRESPONDENCE.
NEWS FROM LONDON.
23rd November, 1948.
The Editor,
Sarawak; Gazette,
Kuching.
DEAR MR. EDITOR,
May I refer to a remark in “News from
London” in the Sarawak Gazette October issue.
Mr. Dant mentions his meeting in “Smithy's”
office. While I appreciate his kind reference to
myself, and quite understand what is meant, it is
a little unfortunate as the Rajah pays the rent, etc.,
and there is a note in the hall of this building
“Rajah of Sarawak’s Office.”
I hope you will be able to find room for this
letter. I would like to say I am glad to see the
reference to my welcome to all old friends but I
would add that I hope any newcomers to Sarawak
will look in here when calling at the Crown Agents
(which is next door practically) or in the vicinity,
the best time being soon after 11.30 a.m.!
Yours faithfully,
J. A. SMITH.
ESSEX ,
November 29th, 1948.
The Editor,
Sarawak Gazette,
Kuching.
SIR,
Having just read Mr. Dant’s interesting
article about England in the October copy of the
Gazette, I would like to make just one comment.
He states that the food is not as bad as he has
been led to believe and perhaps rather gives the
impression that we in England have been
exaggerating.
As a member of the medical world I think I can
safely say that a large percentage of illnesses
treated in this surgery are due, either directly or
indirectly, to lack of sufficient food of a nutritive
value. People who can afford to eat out or stay
in hotels naturally fare better than those who
cannot afford to do so. May I suggest that when
a member of one’s family returns on leave, we save
up beforehand for many weeks to celebrate the
occasion! Thus giving a false impression of plenty
perhaps.
I would like to end by expressing my gratitude
for all the kindnesses and hospitality shown to me
by everyone during my recent stay in Sarawak,
and especially in Kuching.
Yours, etc.,
“RANJE.”
DAYONG LALANG,
OFFICE OF
SECRETARY FOR NATIVE AFFAIRS,
KUCHING, SARAWAK.
December 15th, 1948.
The Editor.
Sarawak Gazette,
Kuching.
SIR,
It has been suggested to me that some of your
readers would be interested to know more about
that famous Baram figure Lalang, whose death
was briefly announced in your issue of the First of
November last.
Her original name was Usun the daughter of
Lejau and she was born somewhere between 1880
and 1885. Her father and mother were Ipun Uma
Kayans of “royal descent,” but her mother died
while she was still almost a baby, and she was
adopted by an aunt, also of Ipun Uma “royal
descent.”
This aunt was also a famous Baram figure, by
name Balu Ulau, or the widow Ulau, and became
a Penghulu in the time of the late Mr. R. S.
Douglas; probably the first woman ever to be made
a Penghulu in Sarawak.
It was from Balu Ulau that Lalang inherited the
caves which gave her a comfortable income from
the collection of the edible birdnests, and the valuable
beads and other heirlooms which gave her the
name of the “Dollar Princess.”
Balu Ulau gave the young Usun Lejau in
marriage to another Ipun Uma Kayan, named
Anyi Wan, and they had one daughter, by name
Tijan Anyi.
Tijan Anyi married Ilun Ajang, eldest son of
another famous Baram figure, Aban Jau, a Long
Tikan Kenyah Chieftain, who almost started a war
between the Tinjar and the Baram many years ago.
when he ran off with the wife of a Tinjar Chief.
The marriage of these two was almost dynastic in
effect, uniting as it did the chief Kayan and
Kenyah families.
After many years of married life Lalang. (who
was then known as Tina Tijan. the mother of
Tijan), divorced Anyi Wan, who married an Uma
Akeh Kayan girl. After they had been divorced
about a year. Lalang recalled Anyi Wan and
remarried him paying the requisite fines. This
second innings, however, only lasted for about two
years and they again divorced.
It was at the time of the second marriage that
Lalang became a Dayong, or medicine woman and
assumed the name of Lalang.
After the final divorce from Anyi Wan, Lalang
married Akam Deng who survived her.
The liberation found her a changed woman. She
bad lost much of her old gaiety and charm and
had undoubtedly suffered privation and hardship,
especially while the guerilla warfare was going on.
She made efforts to entertain on big occasions,
but she was obviously very sick and her death came
as no surprise.
Yours faithfully,
D. C. WHITE,
Acting Secretary for Native Affairs.
News from Far and Near.
FIRST DIVISION.
Commenting upon a visit to Lundu early in
November, the Honourable the Resident, (Mr.
White) writes : “I was most impressed with the
success of the mixed school for Malays and Dayaks
and hope that the projected Local Authority will
be an equal success. The Sebuyaus, Selako and
Jagoi Dayaks were all anxious to try the experiment
but the Malays were rather doubtful.................... ”
The Honourable the Resident writes: “The
Divisional Advisory Council was held on the 26th,
but little of real note cropped up and it is obvious
it is going to be difficult to get delegates to speak
on the important affairs that come up. Many of
them are still parochially minded.”
In his November report, the District Officer,
Bau, (Mr. Richards) comments “The main interest
during the month was the renewed collection of
birds’ nests. Collecting began by the beginning of
the month and an auction was held on the 10th.
Considerable effort had been made to revise the
register of owners and to put the caves on the map.
Seven out of about fifteen named caves provided
nests for this auction to a total of 777 1/2 katis. The
average price was $1.15, and they varied from 90
cents to $2.20. The prices reflect quality and the
reasons are not known except that Meraja (90
cents) has been much visited for guano.
Other auctions are to be held on 10th December
and probably 10th January.
The Dayaks depend on omens and cannot always
therefore arrive on a given date. Each collector
may receive $10 for ten or fourteen days’ work and
this is swallowed up in debts resulting from the
omen feasts held before collection.”
The following is extracted from the monthly
report of the District Officer, Bau: “The contractor
for the Krokong Road Bridge No. 2 started
work and expected to finish in the first week in
December. Posts slipped sideways or split on
driving and it was found that there were rocks
covered by the built up embankment that forms
the road. Sleepers had to be inserted under the
posts and extra bracing provided as in the old
bridge. This bridge provides an outlet for the
water from Krian Lake. I am told that the two
Jebung Lakes went through a hill and into Krian
before the dams were broken. Jebung was built
by the grandfather of the present Capitan China
but is now a ruin, and the water helps to flood the
land between there and Jambusan.”
THIRD DIVISION.
October, 1948.
Commenting upon Court work during the month
of October, the District Officer, Lower Rejang,
(Mr. Snelus), writes: “Some of the civil cases—
land disputes—called for a decision on an interesting
point which..............................has. long needed an
authoritative ruling, viz. for how long a claim over
“temuda” can be held to subsist without user of
the land. The ever increasing demand of the
Chinese for land for padi planting has led, as
mentioned in earlier reports, to natives claiming
as theirs land over which they or their ancestors
acquired hereditary rights perhaps fifty years ago,
but which they may not have used for the past thirty
years.”
Readers may recall previous mention in these
columns of the death of Pulang Gana. The
District Officer, Lower Rejang writes : "I am told
that those Dayaks living near the Hulau also
mourned the death of Pulang Gana for three days
recently, but others living in the down-river areas
had not heard the news and were worried on hearing
it to think they had not taken appropriate
measures to avoid a crop failure. Penghulu
Nyambar's people, living in the middle area, however,
offered a variation of what had happened.
Their story had it that Pulang Gana had quarrelled
with Pulang Kampong and so had refused to live
with him any longer. Pulang Gana then returned
back to the padi fields, but he was in such a vile
temper that he needed to be propitiated handsomely
if good crops were to be expected.”
The District Officer, Lower Rejang, comments
that more Chinese than ever before seem to be
planting padi this year. Pepper planting also
proceeds apace and the perpetual cry of Sarikei
gardeners is the shortage of land available and suitable
for production of this crop. As for the rest
they were busy tapping rubber or trading.
On the 28th October Tieh Muk Ung, a Foochow
of Sungei Peradom was convicted in the 2nd
Circuit Court of causing sudden death by a
negligent act.
The accused had been out shooting pig with two
friends. Believing he saw a wild pig he fired, only
to discover that he had shot and killed one of his
friends.
The District Officerr Sibu, (Mr. Dilks) reports
that the Mufti of Sarawak visited Sibu at the
beginning of the month in order to settle a dispute
between rival political factions over the use of the
Mosque. A meeting was held in the Mosque on
the 10th, but non-attendance of members of the
PPM rendered the meeting rather abortive.
No further trouble has arisen, however, and it
appears that the PPM have taken the Mufti’s
advice, at least temporarily.
The District Officer, Mukah, (Mr. Morris)
reports that sago prices averaged round about $3.50
a passu for wet flour throughout the month. Dalat
prices generally were higher than those prevailing
in Mukah and on the 22nd October Dalat prices at
$3.60 were 80 cents higher than Mukah.
The District Officer adds that labour at Government
rates is, for all practical purposes, unobtainable.
There has been a remarkable increase in the
number of applications for new sago land. In
Mukah alone these totalled thirty-one applications
for 267 acres, a considerably greater figure than for
the whole of the post war period, September 1945
to September 1948.
The District Officer, Kapit, (Mr. Rennick)
reports that there are signs that the seasonal trade
in rotan is starting. One Kapit dealer is handling
fairly large quantities of wild pepper root.
FOURTH DIVISION.
In his November report, the Honourable the
Resident, Miri, (Mr. Gilbert) writes : “November
16th was observed as a Public Holiday to celebrate
the Royal Birth. The parade and the football
match had to be cancelled due to bad weather.
Members of all communities attended the
announcement which was made at the Junior
Service Club, after which the healths of the infant
Prince and the Royal Family were drunk.”
The following is extracted from the monthly
report of the District Officer, Miri, (Mr. Shaw :
“It has been reported that Kedayans who originally
settled nearer Miri, have felled hill slopes between
the 4th and 5th miles Riam Road. Chinese now
occupy land the Kedayans farmed nearer Miri.
This is one of the several instances which appear to
bear out T.K. Muip’s contention that Kedayans
are quite as serious a menance to the land as
Dayaks and should be controlled in the same way.
Proposals for controlling Kedayans were put forward
at the District and Divisional Councils held
on 15th and 17th November respectively.”
The District Officer, Miri, writes : “It is hoped
to carry out an experiment for simple irrigation of
padi fields at Tanjong Panjang, Niah under the
guidance of T.K. Merbut. A model of one of the
many types of country made pumps used in
Southern India has been produced by a local
Indian. Only wood and canvas or buffalo hide are
needed for the pump and there should be no
difficulty in operating it in suitable surroundings.”
Storms at sea were responsible for two groups of
castaways being landed at Miri. On 23rd November
nine Javanese arrived by tanker having been
rescued off the coast of Java after being in the
water for three days. They were travelling to
Bataria on a small schooner which sank in rough
seas. Eighteen others abroad are missing. The
second group, three Philippines, landed in Miri
from a cargo boat on 28th November. Their sailing
boat with five others aboard sank off the coast
of Luzon and they say they were thirty day s on a
raft before being rescued. They were in a very
weak condition when they arrived.
The District Officer, Baram, (Mr. Griffin)
reports that a party of nineteen Dayaks from the
Merit Ulu Rejang arrived in Marudi with three
hundred pikuls of damar—the result of spending
ten months in the Ulu Tinjar. They all appeared
very fit, their diet, they said, had been wild sago
and pig.Giant African snail very nearly found its way to
the Kelabit plateau. A Kelabit who had been one
of a party who had accompanied the Government
Ethnologist to Kuching returned to Marudi with a
live snail amongst his belongings. He was persuaded
to part with his pet, so the Kelabit country
has been saved from this particular pest for the
time being.
The District Officer, Bintulu, (Mr. Jacks) reports
that in the early hours of the 2nd, one Mawan anak
Belaka, Dayak, while out hunting near Tanjong
Sebungan, was accidentally shot at by Ting Lik
Siaw. another hunter, who mistook him for a pig.
Fortunately he was only hit on. the heel, and a
pellet, which had embedded superficially therein,
was removed by the dresser at the Bintulu hospital.
FIFTH DIVISION.
October, 1948.
The Honourable the Resident, Fifth Division.
(Mr. Anderson) in his October report writes that
as a result of the buffalo census, the Agricultural
Development Board advised the reduction (since
agreed to by Director of Agriculture, subject to
review in a year’s time) of exports of buffalo from
forty-five head per month to twenty-four head per
month, (twelve to Kuching, and twelve to Miri).
There are said to be only about 1,000 male
buffaloes in the whole Division.
The Assistant District Officer, Lawas. (Mr.
Smith) reports “The regular running of the m.v.
Alcyone direct from Singapore to the Fifth Divis
ion is having a beneficial effect on the bazaar, not
only is the freight on rubber reduced by direct
shipment to Singapore, but the costs of imported
goods also are decreasing owing to lesser freight
charges and breakages en route. ”
The Cadet Officer, Limbang, (Mr. Harper) also
comments upon the beneficial effects of this
service.
Notice.
Notice is hereby given that I, the undersigned
SIM JIAK LANG, have on the 6th January, 1949.
retired from my partnership in the business heretofore
carried on under the Style of The Sarawak
Press Company at No. 19, Rock Road, Kuching.
As from the date of my said retirement, I shall not
be responsible for all liabilities due by the said
Sarawak Press Company incurred before or after
my retirement.
SIM JIAK LANG,
6th January, 1949.
Notice.
January Rice Ration.
The basic Rice Ration for January is 20 lbs.
per person per month of either Siam Whole Rice
or Siam Al Broken Rice.
Heavy and Special Workers get an additional
10 lbs. per person per month of either of the above
qualities.
Kuching Market Price List.
Monthly Average Market Price from 20th
November to 20th December, 1948.
