 Vol. LXXVII.
No. 1125.
PRICE
KUCHING, Friday, December 28th, 1951.
50 CENTS
Contents.
Page.
Awang, George Cross	...	...	...	233
Promotion	...	...	...	234
His Excellency Address to Council Negri	... 234
Now and Next Year	...	...	...	239
After the Burial of Y. T. M. Duli Pengiran Bendahara anak Haji Mohamed Yassin, o.b.e. ...	... 240
A Question of Audit	...	...	...	240
The Museum	...	...	...	242
The Rambutan	...	...	243
Correspondence	...	...	...	243
Sarawak Club	...	...	...	244
Island Club	...	...	...	244
The Races	...	...	...	245
Kuching Market	Price List ...	...	...	249
The Sarawak Gazette.
FRIDAY, DEC. 28th, 1951.
Awang, George Cross.
The London Gazette of November the 20th, 1951, announced the award of the George Cross to Awang anak Rawang, a 28 year old Iban from Skrang in the second Division, for the highest gallantry whilst serving as a tracker with the Security Forces in Malaya. We are all very proud of him and very pleased that he has fully recovered from his severe wounds. We congratulate Awang on gaining this tremendous honour and we publish below the official citation followed by the text of the congratulatory telegram sent to him by His Excellency the Governor.
CITATION.
On the morning of the 27th May, 1951, 10 Pl. of “D" Coy 1st Bn. The Worcestershire Regiment were ambushed by opproximately 50 bandits. No. FF/978 Awang anak Rawang (Iban Tracker) was moving behind the Section Commander of the lead-ing section. When the ambush was sprung the leading scout was killed instantly and the Section Commander fatally wounded. Awang anak Rawang was hit through the thigh bone but the bullet passed right through the bone without shattering it. At the same time Pte Hughes, moving behind Awang
anak Rawang, was hit below the knee, the bullet completely shattering the bone. Awang anak Ra-wang though wounded and lying exposed under heavy rifle and automatic fire, collected his own wea-pons and that of Pte Hughes and dragged Pte Hughes into the cover of the jungle. Awang dis-regarding completely his own wound in view of the impending bandit attack took upon fire position to de-fend Hughes. There he remained firing on every attempt made by the bandits to approach, kill him-self and Hughes and secure their arms. Due to this determined and courages conduct he successfully drove off several such attacks. Ultimately Awang was again wounded, the bullet shattering his right arm and rendering further use of his rifle or parang impossible. Despite loss of blood from his undressed wounds, he dragged himself over to Pte Hughes, took a grenade from his pouch and with his teeth pulled out the pin. He resumed his position on guard the grenade in his left arm and defied the bandits to approach. So resolute was his demeanour that the bandits who had maintained their attacks for some forty minutes withdrew leaving Awang in possession of the battle-field.
The coolness, fortitude and offensive spirit display-ed by Awang anak Rawang is of the highest order. Despite being twice severely wounded, he disregard-ed completely his own wounds and his life, showing the utmost self-sacrifice, courage and resolution to continue the fight and protect Pte Hughes to the end.
There can be no question that by his own actions he saved the life of Pte Hughes, who required all his strength to keep a tourniquet on his shattered leg, he saved his own life and he prevented their weapons falling into bandit hands. His conduct is an example of the highest courage. The devotion to duty and disregard of his own life shown will inspire all who hear of it and is most worthy of recognition.
Telegram from His Excellency the Governor to Awang, G.c.
"I congratulate you most sincerely on the high honour which His Majesty the King has seen fit to confer on you. The George Cross is the high-est decoration which is open to civilians and is awarded only in cases of conspicuous courage and gallantry in circumstances of extreme danger. The whole country is proud of you and you have added great distinction and honour to the name of Sarawak and the Iban people."
234
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, DECEMBER 28, 1951.
Promotion.
The Secretary of State for the Colonies has approved the promotion of Abang Openg bin Abang Spi’ee to the Sarawak Senior Service as an Adminis-trative Officer with effect from 1st April, 1951, and of Mr. Chin Shin Sen, o.s.s., to the Sarawak Senior Service as a Principal Assistant Secretary in the Secretariat, Kuching, with effect from the same date.
Abang Openg, who was educated at the Govern-ment Malay School, Kuching, and at St. Anthony's School, Sarikei, joined the Sarawak Gorvernment Service as a clerk on 24th November, 1924. He was transferred to the Native Officers' Service on 1st June, 1932. He was appointed Native Officer, Special Appointment, in 1940 and delegated the powers of a Magistrate of a 2nd Class in February, 1946. He has been a member of the Council Negri since March, 1940. He was acting District Officer, Limbang, prior to his promotion and it is learned that he will continue to serve as such.
Mr. Chin Shin Sen, who was educated at St. Thomas's School, Kuching, joined the Sarawak Government Service on 20th March, 1930, and per-formed the duties of Clerk to Supreme Council for many years in addition to his other duties. He was promoted to the Special Appointment Grade in the Junior Service on 1st October, 1946, and to the post of Assistant Secretary, Secretariat, on 1st April, 1948. He acted as a Principal Assistant Secretary in the Secretariat for about 2 years before his promotion.
His Excellency’s Address to Council Negri.
Before beginning my address to Council I would like to read you a message which the Secretary of State handed to me three days ago in Singapore and asked me to give to you and the people of Sarawak. The message reads as follows :—
"I much regret that, because I must on this occasion concentrate upon the urgent needs of Malaya in the fight against the terrorists, I can-not during my present visit to South East Asia come to Sarawak. I have been very glad to see how satisfactory a year the territory has had in 1951 and trust that the new year which the Council Negri is about to begin will be in every way as successful. In these troubled times the peace and progress of Sarawak are matters for pleasure and congratulation, and I send to all its people my warm good wishes for their continuing happiness and prosperity in the future."
Although we would very much like to see the Secretary of State here and would have given him a great welcome, I think we can take it as a com-pliment that an extremely busy man feels he can quite safely leave us for the time being to our own devices. It shows confidence in our ability to remain a bulwark against the evils of communism and an indication that we are progressing along the right lines.
Around us in S.E. Asia the pattern of things is little changed since last I spoke to you. In Korea the United Nations still hold at bay the sordid hordes of communist aggression. The Government of China prompted no doubt by tbe prods and pro-
mises of her masters in Moscow deny to her people the peace which they craved. Although the progress of the United Nations has been slow and although the battle is not won in Malaya or Indo-China the forces which face communism in the world grow in determination, in numbers and in strength. In Indo-China, in Siam and in Indonesia a new vigour and resolution, a new defiance has revealed the true spirit and determination of the people South East Asia to resist the invasion of foreign creed. We in British Borneo, though we are spared the horrors of banditry or war, must show the enemies of civilisa-tion tha they can make no headway in this coutnry; that their doctrine of violence and domination, of slavery of the souls of men will never be accept-able to the people of this country. We must show to our friends where we stand in this fight. Let our neighbours be in no doubt that we in Sarawak will stand four-square with them in their difficulties and in their dangers and in their struggle which they maintain on our behalf. Communism must be defeated wherever it appears. This is a common struggle in which so far we have only been called upon to play a minor part. How can Sarawak help? What more can we do to succour our neigh-bours and lend aid to our friends?
Firstly, and I think our greatest contribution is to relieve them of anxiety on our behalf. Let them feel confidence in our integrity and internal strength. This we can achieve in a variety of ways. We must make sure that our system of education is sound; that the youth of Sarawak is being brought up in the best tradition of this country : that they are taught to honour loyalty and service : to respect the cus-toms and laws of this land and to have pride in the achievements and faith in the future of the land of their adoption or birth. I was told the other day that three children in a Chinese School were asked in what country their school was situated. One said Borneo, another said England and the third said China. That is a grave reflection on us all, Govern-ment school masters and parents alike. We must be jealous of our traditions. The guidance and up-bringing of the young is not the responsibility of the Department of Education alone. It is the respon-sibility of every good citizen of this country, of every member of this Council, and particularly, of every parent. You may have read in the papers that the Secretary of State said in Singapore the other day that the first and most fundamental duty of a Government is to maintain law and order. So also it is the first duty of the citizen to uphold and obey the law of the land; so also the first lesson that youth must learn is the hard one of the discipline and respect for authority. As I said in a previous address, we must ensure that our Police Force is adequate and competent. I am still not satisfied with the numbers and quality of the recruits who are coming forward to serve their country in this manner. I hope therefore that members of this Council will continue their efforts in this regard.
I have already conveyed on behalf of the Govern-ment our deepest sympathy to the Federation of Malaya on the tragic death of Sir Henry Gurney the High Commissioner. The cold and brutal murder of a beloved servant of the people of Malaya has brought home to all the bestial ruthlessness which we fight. I hope they feel in Malaya that our hearts are with them and that we here will do everything in our power to help and sustain them.
I know that they are very grateful indeed for the assistance of the Dayak trackers who have served throughout the year with the security
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, DECEMBER 28, 1951.
235
forces. Both the late High Commissioner and the Commander-in-Chief have repeatedly informed me how grateful they are and what a very substantial contribution these trackers make to the success of the operations against the bandits. It was with feeling of great pleasure and pride that I and I am sure the whole country recently received the news that one of our Dayak trackers had been honoured by His Majesty the King by the award of the George Cross which is the highest distinction for gallantry which can be awarded to a civilian. The name of Awang anak Rawang is already famous amongst his comrades in Malaya and in particular amongst the officers and men of the Worcestershire Regiment with whom he fought and in whose com-pany he earned this high distinction. Awang comes from the Skrang in the Second Division, but the news of this award will, I am sure, reverberate throughout all Sarawak and in particular where there are Ibans who have friends or relatives still fight-ing in the jungles of Malaya. The Award of this Medal signifies not only an act of great bravery and fortitude but honours too the many Ibans who have served with endurance and skill amidst the dangers and hazards of the jungles of Malaya.
We have had casualties both killed and wounded, and only recently three more of our men died fight-ing gallantly side by side with their British comrades. As they fought side by side, so now they lie side by side in the same cemetery, and we in Sarawak, while mourning their loss, can indeed feel proud of the part our young men are playing in the fight for freedom.
We have this year paused in our expansion of Local Government to consolidate our existing Local Authorities and to make plans for the future. It is becoming clear that the small racial authority is denied, by its composition, too many sources of revenue to be economically sound. Our future efforts will, therefore, be directed towards the establishment of Local Authorities based upon a geographical area rather than upon the individual races living within such an area.
Next year, district Local Authorities consisting of all races are to be started in Sibu, Mukah and Limbang, and they will be established in Sibu in the form of an Urban District Council and a Rural District Council. These authorities will constitute one of the most important ventures that we have yet undertaken, because more than 34,000 Chinese will be brought within the sphere of Local Authori-ties. Changes will be necessary in the assessment of Government financial aid to Local Authorities, but for the time being they will apply only to the Authorities which embody several races. The new measures are experimental only and they will be explained in connection with the draft estimates.
This is a time of experiment in the field of Local Government and no doubt mistakes will be made, but I am confident that the Malays, Dayaks and Chinese, and other races will work in harmony to make their new mixed Authorities a success.
The continuing state of insecurity in many countries of Souh East Asia makes it essential that the Sarawak Constabulary—our only force for securing our internal security—must be raised to the highest possible state of efficiency, The introduct-ion of new salary scales in May 1951 acted as a spur to recruiting, but insufficient men of good education were attracted; it is disquieting that no acceptable applicants for direct appointment to the Inspectorate have come forward.
The structure of the Constabulary has been strengthened by the re-establishment of the Crimi-nal Investigation Department. When the staff of this Section have been fully trained I am confident that much progress will be made towards the application in this country of modern methods of crime investigation. With the great increase in road traffic and the alarming rise in accidents, it will in the very near future be necessary to set up a separate Traffic Branch of the Constabulary.
The Government Information Service has sub-stantially expanded its distribution of English and vernacular newspapers, magazines and other suit-able publications in both town and country areas, and our cinema units have likewise expanded their field of activity.
Plans are being evolved for the establishment of a local broadcasting system, towards the capital cost of which His Majesty's Government has offered a most generous financial contribution under the Colonial Development and Welfare Acts. In this connection we are receiving valuable advice and assistance from experts in the Colonial Office, the British Broadcasting Corporation and Radio Malaya. It is hoped that this important service will in time give to the peoples of Sarawak and Brunei the entertainment, the education and the information which they desire.
Sarawak, together with Brunei and North Borneo, is participating—by means of a joint pavilion—in the Colombo Plan Exhibition which is to be held in Colombo, Ceylon, in February 1952. We intend to reveal, in the most telling manner we can, how best this country's urgent needs can be provided for, by this bold and imaginative scheme for exter-nal aid and development.
Our finances in the last two years have, owing to the continued inflation and shortage of manpower, followed a similar pattern; that is to say, revenue has greatly exceeded expectations and expenditure has fallen short of them. The final figures for 1950 show a surplus of $13,634,000 where a deficit of $2,311,000 was estimated. The revised estimates for 1951 show a revenue of about $60,230,000 and expenditure of perhaps $24,211,000; but revised estimates of expenditure drawn up at this stage are notoriously unreliable.
We can expect to finish this year, however, with a surplus of at least $36,000,000, having estimated one of $978,469; and we shall have achieved surplus balances—not counting sums already transferred to the Development, Welfare and Reconstruction Fund —of $54,487,000.
For this we can thank mainly the phenomenal prices attained by rubber and pepper during 1950 and part of 1951—prices that have already fallen away to some extent, so warning us that the money gained from them was a windfall and must not only be disposed of with caution, but aslo cannot be relied upon to repeat itself in future years.
I must leave it to the Financial Secretary, when he introduces the estimates, to explain the basis of them and the policy for future development-finance and for reserves against future setbacks which they embody. I should, however, mention one point which I think is worth making at this juncture.
At our last Meeting, in July, you agreed to a considerable improvement in the rates of cost-of-living allowances for all public employees, and also improvements in the salaries of many of the Established ones. The financial effect of these
236
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, DECEMBER 28, 1951.
changes will be obvious in the very large increases in the 1952 provisions for Personal Emoluments, enhanced as they are by modest increases of staff and by the expectation that you will accept the principle of automatic increase of the allowances with permanent increases in the food-price index, which is palced before you now in a Sessional Paper. I do not think you will begrudge the cost of paying Civil Servants wages which are still below those which many of them could get outside the public service.
The price of rubber has remained high throughout the year and in consequence Customs and Excise duties have been buoyant and may yield around $36 million, as compared with $9,744,000 in 1949 and $22,764,000 in 1950.
The first substantial crop of white pepper since the war is now coming forward in quantities that suggest that the revenue from this source will exceed expectations. The quality is not yet up to pre-war standards but is nevertheless fairly good, and Sarawak is set fair to gain her pre-war pre-dominance in the pepper markets of the world.
The Departments of Trade & Customs and Agri-culture have and will continue to devote much time and energy, working in close co-operation, to improving and maintaining the standard of our sago flour exports. The sago industry continues to flourish, and it is hoped that the care and attention which the grading of this commodity is receiving will result in Sarawak sago maintaining and, indeed surpassing its pre-war reputation on the world’s markets.
The Excise Ordinance is now in full operation. Revenue from the three distilleries in Sarawak may approach $1,000,000 as compared with the $374,520 collected under the old system of monoplies.
Agricultural development has been limited by a continued shortage of field staff, but existing pro-jects—which now form a sound basis for rural deve-lopment in Sarawak for many years ahead—have made good progress. The mechanised rubber factory and modern smoke house at the 12th Mile, Simang-gang Road, is now in full operation and points the way to what, after padi growing, is the most import-ant need in our rural economy—namely, the improvement in the quality of the rubber produced from our small-holdings to a point where it will be fully competitive in world markets in the event of a fall in prices.
While the Agricultural Department's scheme for intensive wet padi production by irrigation and controlled drainage has been consolidated and ex-panded, the production of padi in Sarawak remains disappointing. We are still dependent upon the import of some 30,000 tons of rice to make up the difference between home production and the 93,000 metric tons which it is estimated are con-sumed in Sarawak every year.
Indeed there is a serious world shortage of rice and the Consultative Committee which includes India and all the great rice consuming and producing countries may well decide that these countries which are physically incapable of producing sufficient rice to feed themselves must first be satisfied before such as Sarawak who could with care produce a far greater tonnage if she tried.
The requirements of rice importing countries are as great as ever and we will still import one-third of our rice. Such a position cannot be viewed with equanimity for, whilst Sarawak may have more money than ever with which to buy rice, it cannot
be guaranteed that rice will continue to be obtain-able.
However, the prospects for Sarawak’s rural industries are bright. Increasing numbers of farmers are following the excellent example of better farming which agricultural stations such as Tarat, Bijat, and Rantau Panjang provide. With the pro-cess of the Niah/Sibuti padi scheme and the Baram Agricultural Station at Tanjong Tahap, this advice and example should spread in the large and import-ant Fourth Division. Farmers to-day have more ready money than ever before, and it is pleasing to see that this wealth is to an increasing extent being expended on agricultural machinery. There is undoubtedly great scope for the development of farm mechanisation in certain directions, and the Department of Agriculture, aided by grants from the Colonial Development and Welfare Fund, is engaged in a long term scheme for testing new machinery and methods. It is to be hoped that farmers will be able to see for themselves this new machinery and adopt it where they judge it suitable to their own farming conditions.
The general prosperity of the rubber and pepper industries has eased the pressure on native padi farm-ing land by non-native squatters. When there is increased interest again in padi planting the com-pletion of the First Division re-settlement scheme and the progress made in the Lower Rejang scheme this year will have ccntributed greatly to the per-manent establishment of the non-native agricultural community and cleared the way for further occup-ation of padi land in a more orderly manner than was possible in the years following the liberation of Sarawak from the Japanese.
Good progress has been made in the aerial photo-graphy of the Colony. The coastal area extending over 17,000 square miles has been photograhed, as has also about half of the 26,000 square miles comprising the interior.
The trading community can look back with satis-faction on the progress made in the rebuilding of old and war-damaged bazaars on sites planned and laid out for them by the Department of Lands and Surveys. In particular, Miri has repaired its war wounds and created a town both aesthetically pleas-ing and most suited to its needs as a centre of trade.
Systematic geological surveying has continued in West Sarawak and such work is likely to be the main task of the Geological Survey Department for many years to come. Road development plans called for a search for suitable stone and quarry sites. The possibilities of obtaining good road stone have been investigated, with initial success, in the Sibu area and a good quality stone has been examin-ed on Pulau Triso and Triso Darat and offers a possible source of supply to "stone-hungry” areas such as Simanggang, Sibu and the Rejang estuary.
In response to the local demand for fertilizers, the Geological Survey Department has almost com-pleted a survey of phosphate-containing guano deposits, and it is calculated that about 30,000 tons of phosphate are available. Farmers will derive a further benefit from the soil investigations carried out in conjunction with the Agricultural and Forest Departments. From a knowledge of the main rock formations it will be possible to indicate the main soil types on a regional basis, giving information of immense value to an agricultural community.
The systematic examination and protection of the Colony’s valuable timber resources continues to be the main task of the Forest Department. Surveys
237
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, DECEMBER 28, 1951.
were made in the Simalajau, Niah, Nyalau and Sungei Dalam forests. In the Niah Protected Forest, the survey revealed an unexpectedly fine stand of belian scattered over most of the area and estimated at approximately 90,000 tons.
A survey of the peat swamps from the Batang Igan eastwards to Balingian by interpretation of air photographs, combined with extensive checks on the ground, is expected to be completed this year. These surveys will be of great value in deciding the correct use of the land in this very difficult swamp country.
The constitution of permanent forests has con-tinued. During the last six months an additional 2,925 square miles have been added to Sarawak's 3,466 square miles of Forest Reserves and Protected Forests and a further 2,366 square miles are under preliminary notification. These permanent forests serve the valuable purposes of protecting the soil and headwaters of rivers, of preserving supplies of timber and jungle produce, and include a number of areas that are being reserved purely to satisfy the domestic needs of the surrounding population.
Timber exports during the first half of the year were checked by an acute shortage of shipping. In recent months, however, there has been a revival and exports in 1951 should not be less than those of 1950. Great Britain, a negligible buyer two years ago, has become Sarawak's leading customer, followed by Australia and Hong Kong. New Zea-land, Singapore, Japan, Brunei and Indonesia have also taken a small quantities. There are signs of a demand for our timber in other countries. notably South Africa, which may require the type of hard-wood that Sarawak can supply.
The task of the Public Works Department has been seriously hampered by world and local condit-ions which have made labour and materials scarce and expensive. The cost of building construction has increased by 50 per cent since the 1951 Estimates were prepared and the many shortages have seriously delayed progress.
The building of Junior and Senior Service quarters has been given the highest priority, and work on buildings for the Medical Department in Sibu, Simanggang and Miri is in hand. It is hoped to start work on the Health Centre in Kuching early next year. Two much-needed buildings of hand-some appearance—the new Printing Office at Kuching and the Government Offices at Miri—have been completed and are in use; but the proposed Customs Import Godown in Kuching is still await-ing the delivery of steel.
Progress on the reconstruction and expansion of Sarawak's road system has been poor. The com-pletion of the survey of the main section of the trunk road to Simanggang is long overdue because of the difficulty of recruiting suitable labour. Com-mencement of work on the first new section awaits the arrival of the necessary earth-moving equipment. You will find that provision of just under $10 million appears in Part II of the draft estimates for the five-year scheme for reconstructing existing roads, which I mentioned in my Address to this Council in May.
Provision has also been made on a substantial scale for work in connection with additional water supplies for the town of Kuching and for the renov-ation of supplies in other parts of the country.
The construction of the gravelled runway at the Sibu Airfield is progressing satisfactorily and it is expected that it will be open for traffic early in the
new year.
The Public Works Department and Sarawak as a whole suffered a great loss on the retirement this year of Mr. R. E. Edwards, Director of Public Works since 1940. Teddy Edwards will long be remembered with affection and gratitude in this country.
H.M.S. "Dumpier" has completed a hydrographic survey of the coastal waters between Miri and Tatau. Numerous reefs have been found, some of consider-able danger to shipping. These reefs may impede the "off shore" loading into ocean carriers of logs and timber for the Bombay Burma Trading Cor-poration's concession at Sungei Similajau, but it is expected that safe courses and tracks will be laid down.
Government has acquired a 104 ft. cargo coaster capable of carrying 150 tons dead weight of cargo. This vessel will be used to carry stores to various parts of the country and so released the overworked M.v. "Lucile", in order that the latter vessel may maintain a regular service between Kuching and the Fifth Division.
Work on the renewal of the major lights has been accelerated by the arrangement of a lighthouse engineer. Lights at Po Point and Tanjong Sirik are now working satisfactorily with new electrical equipment. A number of Day Marks have been erected in the Rejang River from the mouth to Tanjong Mani. These works on lights, buoys and marks are financed from the special fund accumul-ated from the collection of buoys and Lights dues from shipping using the Colony's ports.
The school population is steadily increasing. In June this year the enrolment in all schools was more than 3,000 above the figure for December 1950. A number of new schools have been opened and the managements of many existing schools have erected additional accommodation or put completely new buildings. At both the Mission Girls' School in Kuching new classroom blocks have been added and Domestic Science rooms are being planned; Science Laboratories are being equipped at both Boys' Schools, and other improvements made. At the Chinese Middle School, new buildings have been erected to cater for the Senior Middle Department. These efforts to extend and improve school buildings deserve praise. In outstations and rural areas there has also been commendable activities in enlarging school accommodation.
In the present boom of trade, schools in some areas have found difficulty in recruiting staff, and it has sometimes been necessary as a temporary measure to register teachers with lower qualifica-tions than are normally required. However, the main urban Mission Schools have been able to strengthen their staffs considerably. To assist the Mission Schools, Government grants-in-aid have been paid during the current year at an increased rate over those paid during 1950.
Improvements in the staff position are making it possible for these schools to widen their curricu-lum and to introduce various desirable changes in organisation. Candidates are now being prepared to take the General Science paper in the Cambridge School Certificate examinations and special per-mission of the Cambridge Syndicate has been obtained for the examination in this subject to be held in Kuching next year. This is a big step for-ward, since a grounding in science is essential for those who are to proceed to higher studies in agri-culture, medicine, forestry and some other subjects.
238
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, DECEMBER 28, 1951.
Chinese Schools in the Third Division have co-operated successfully to form a Common Examina-tions Board. Last year the Board conducted its first Primary Examinations and this year for the first time will, in addition, conduct a common Junior Middle Examination. The examination syllabus has been extended to include the history and geography of Sarawak.
The Chinese Schools of the Third Division have given a practical example of friendly co-operation among themselves, and with the Education Depart-ment, which should contribute effectively towards the development of education in Sarawak, and which I hope will be copied elsewhere.
During the last six months, fourteen more schools have been either opened or taken over by Local Authorities, bringing the total number of schools managed by these Authorities to 90 as compared with 67 at the end of 1950. Discussions which take place at the meetings of these Authorities reveal an increasing understanding of the problems of attendance, equipment, curriculum and other educational matters which face the Authorities and, in many cases an imaginative and deter-mined approach to these problems. Nonethe-less, it is clear that more guidance and supervision by staff of the Education Department is required if Local Authority and other schools are to progress along the right lines. The approved establishment of the Education Department has, therefore, been increased by two Education Officers. Local staff will also be selected to assist in the supervision of primary schools.
Ten booklets in the Sea Dayak language, some of them instructional and others designed for entertainment, have been produced during recent months and put on sale in various centres in the Second and Third Divisions. It is hoped that the provision of this vernacular literature will stimulate interest in literacy among adult Sea Dayaks, as well as provide reading material for adolescents who have recently left school.
It will not be possible to judge the results of the Kanowit Rural Improvement School until the ex-pupils have had time to demonstrate the success of their methods and to exert an effective influence in their neighbourhood. But the present indications are pomising.
At the end of November, 31 Sarawak Students left the Batu Lintang Training Centre as certifi-cated teachers and they will take up their duties next year in Local Authority, Mission, Government and Private Schools. Until now only three Chinese students have been trained at Batu Lintang, but in conception Batu Lintang has always been an inter-racial training centre and it is very much to be hoped that Chinese applicants will now come forward for the higher course for students with a minimum qualification of Standard VII for training as teachers of English in Chinese Schools, which it is hoped to establish there next year.
The rapid expansion of the co-operative movement has for the moment been checked, partly by short-age of staff and partly by the need to consolidate and guide existing societies. There are now 77 register-ed societies, 36 of which are Sea Dayak, 14 Melanau, 13 Malay, 4 Land Dayak, 3 Chinese and 7 multi-racial.
An approach road is under construction to the new Sungei Tabuan Village site near Kuching and plans are under consideration for the installation of a water supply. It is to be hoped that the Heng Hua
Co-operative Village and Better Living Society Limited will commence building during the next two or three months, and a most hopeful experiment in co-operative living by some of our most hard-working citizens will then be under way.
In the First Division both the Kuching Stores have made steady progress and have increased their membership. Outside Kuching progress has been satisfactory. Two new Land Dayak Societies have been formed and more may follow. The Malay Rural Credit Societies are going ahead, and the Sebuyau Village of Tanju has made really remark-able progress.
The Second Division, particularly amongst the Sea Dayaks, continues to lead the Colony. Most of the existing Co-operative Societies have made pro-gress. Four new Stores Societies, one Savings Society and one more Milling Society have been registered. The Sungei Paku Padi Milling Society intends to open a branch mill in the near future, and a Padi Savings Society is being formed in the Rimbas River. Such interest in co-operation has been shown by the Malays and Dayaks of the Kalaka District that it has been decided to transfer a Co-operative Officer to Saratok.
In the Third Division it is planned to transfer a Co-operative Officer to the Matu and Daru sub-district. The Foochow farmers around Sibu have shown a lively curiosity in co-operation and pre-liminary meetings have been held with three interested groups.
The Medical Department is attacking the scourge of tuberculosis to the limit of staff resources. A Medical Officer attended an international Congress on B.C.G. vaccination held in Rangoon during September, and much information was obtained which will be of value in the devlopment of anti-tuberculosis work in Sarawak. Another event which promises well for the future of this work was the inauguration of the Anti-Tuberculosis Association of Sarawak. This Association has been very active indeed and has already raised a sub-stantial sum with which it intends, in the near future, to erect a building to accommodate the Government's Chest Clinic Service.
Arising out of the need to accommodate tuber-culosis cases, a small hospital— to the capital cost of which Messrs. Sarawak Oilfields Limited are generously contributing—is to be built next year in Miri. Simanggang hospital is also expanding and by early next year this hospital will have approxi-mately fifty beds.
I must, however, remark that our health and medical services cannot be maintained solely by the generous gifts of public spirited persons and Corpo-rations nor solely by the provision of buildings from public funds. Staff of the highest devotion and skill are required to man our hospitals and the Medical Department has continued to suffer from staff shortages in all grades. No further medical or senior nursing recruits have been obtained. Local nursing recruits have only just sufficed to make good normal wastage and there has been only a slight gain in the number of hospital assistants. Nevertheless, the staffing of the hospitals has been improved by the employment of additional assistant nurses in Kuching, Sibu and Simanggang.
Sarawak's prison population has remained pleas-ingly low. A prison camp has been established at Batu Lintang, where long service prisoners who are within three months of discharge can live and work on a vegetable garden which is part of the camp.
239
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, DECEMBER 28, 1951.
Here there is little prison supervison, discipline is light, and thus prisoners can accustom themselves to normal social standard before being discharged.
The Curator of the Sarawak Museum conjointly with the Director of Lands and Surveys and a team of Kelabits, Sebops and Punand, investigated a large area of previously unexplored and unmapped land between the Tinjar and Rejang rivers. At one stage the party travelled for twenty-six days through completely uninhabited country. The expedition has added more than one thousand square miles to our map and shown that a very extensive population once cultivated this now uninhabited tableland.
This year's hatch of turtles eggs has been excel-lent and it is expected more than two million eggs will have been collected by the end of the year. Experiments are in progress in the rearing of young turtles in tanks with a view to protecting them whilst young from their many natural enemies, and in this way to conserve and maybe increase their numbers.
It had been hoped to bring before you two Bills of major importance—the Kuching Municipality Bill and the Town and Country Planning Bill. The former will convert Kuching into an autonomous Local Government entity which will confer upon that Municipality the greatest possible independ-ence, although it must be appreciated that Kuching cannot yet hope to achieve complete financial independence and will be dependent on Government grants for many years to come. The Town and Country Planning Bill will make provision for the orderly and progressive development of land in Sarawak, for which task existing legislation is inadequate. We are fortunate in Sarawak that we can introduce this legislation while the country is still young; in many lands Town and Country Planning has been introduced at too late a stage in its economic development to be of practical benefit.
These two Bills have been withdrawn from the Agenda of this meeting in order that they may be published and circulated to interested parties. In particular, it is hoped that the Kuching Municipality Bill will receive the close examination of those people whom it most closely affects, and that the Town and Country Planning Bill will be discussed throughout the country.
I must draw your attention to the Rent Control (Amendment) Bill, which contains a number of controversial provisions, and which I have no doubt will be thoroughly debated by Members.
A number of considerable amendments to the Criminal Procedure Code will be submitted to Mem-bers in this session, as also amendments to Native Courts Ordinance. In the case of the latter, no changes are made in Native Law and Custom but the law is to be brought into line with existing practice.
In my speech at the Budget Session of this Coun-cil a year ago I referred to the intention of the Governments of Sarawak, North Borneo and Brunei to bring into operation a Unified Judiciary for the three territories, in order to increase the effciency of the administration of justice and to ensure uniformity of practice in accordance with modern procedure. Part of the legislation which is before you at this Meeting is of a consequential nature, resulting from the carrying into operation of that intention with effect from 1st December, 1951.
It was with great regret that we said good-bye to our Chief Justice a month ago. Dr. Hedges, in
addition to his duties as Chief Justice, undertook the onerous task of a complete revision of our laws. This work has now been completed and published. It may not be generally known that Dr. Hedges has sinne the war done more than any one else to reorganise and resuscitate our social welfare ser-vices and his inspiration and energy in this regard will be sadly missed. I am glad to say that his successor and the first Chief Justice of our Unified Judiciary is no stranger to us. We welcome Mr. Justice Brace and his family to Sarawak and we hope that they will be happy here.
Our relations with our neighbours in British Borneo have been most cordial and happy. Frequent meetings between the executive officers of the three territories have ensured the closest co-operation in matters of mutual concern to us. In May this year some of us were privileged to witness an occassion of unforgetable splendour and colourful pageantry in the coronation of the Sultan of Brunei. We in Sarawak sent our greetings and prayers for a long and glorious reign. We sympathise with His Highness and the State Council in the loss they have sustained by the sudden death of the first Minister Pengiran Haji Mohamed Yassin—the Bendahara of Brunei.
The Commissioner-General and his officers con-tinue to take a close and personal interest in our progress and in our problems, and we are most grateful for their help and guidance which is always so readily available to us.
I think Mr. President that you and your Council can look back upon 1951 with some satisfaction. It has certainly been a year of material prosperity, and, which is unusual, a prosperity which has been shared by most of the population and not achieved at the expense of a section of the community. Our political advance though slow has been sure, and I think on the right lines.
Many of the scars of war have been healed and many of the misunderstandings and dissensions of the past have been forgiven and forgotten. For me at any rate it has been an extremely happy year and nothing in it has given me greater pleasure than the news Mr. President that your outstanding services to Sarawak had received recognition by His Majesty the King.
I thank you Mr. President and members of Council for your attention. May God guide your deliberations.
Now and Next Year.
(We publish below a short extract from the Financial Secretary's Budget Speech, which will, we think, be of particular interest, as a record, to our overseas readers. Editor).
Before I embark upon the policy and details of the Draft Estimates I should first say how our finances have fared up to now. Briefly, we are better off in terms of cash than at any time in history or than anyone had ever dared to dream of. The cautious view of the rubber market’s future on which the 1951 Estimates were framed was com-pletely belied, and only now is the price beginning to drop below twice what we were then reckoning on. For a long time the price was well over $2 a pound. At the same time we found that our expectations of the company tax yield were far below the probabilities. We knew little about the
240
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, DECEMBER 28, 1951.
profits of our principal mineral industry, and we are gratified to find that they are not inconsiderable.
Well, the general prosperity and inflation which have prevailed this year are expected to bring in the unprecedented revenue of nearly $56,867,000 in 1951. The figure you see in the Draft Estimates is over $60 million, but that includes the appro-priation of part of the Currency Fund surplus and drawings from the Home Government for War Damage payments, neither of which can count as part of our regular earnings although they have actually been received in 1951.
Against this we have had to incur more expen-diture than we expected, both because of the great increases in local and world prices and because of the increases in Civil Service pay which these increases have made necessary and inevitable; we have also committed ourselves during the year to new works and new staff, which we did not a year ago expect to be able to afford. The official revised estimate of expenditure, which I believe to be well over the mark, is $24,211,000.
Thus you see, we can expect a surplus of at least $32,656,000 for the year, and will have brought our free surplus balances up to naarly $54,488,000. That figure excludes, of course, the balances remain-ing in the Development Welfare and Reconstruction Fund; but it does include a fairly large sum drawn in anticipation of War Damage payments which are to be made next year; and so the effective figure is $1,300,000 or so less—say $53 million.
The Revenue we have decided to anticipate for 1952 is $39,632,055; but out of that about $2,900,000 is further drawings on account of War Damage re-imbursements and $186,000 is other Extraordinary revenue. The ordinary revenue is placed at $36 million.
Out of that, $6,400,000 is for Income Tax and nearly $23 million is for Customs and Excise. The Income Tax is on the profits of limited com-panies only, at the rate of 20%. There were strong arguments in favour of raising this rate to 30% in line with our neighbours in Malaya and North Borneo and many other parts of the Common-wealth, but for various reasons we decided that we would not take this step at present.
We have also not made any advances in the direct-ion of a tax on personal incomes. We have two rough-and-ready substitutes, neither of them popular but both more acceptable than income tax—I mean the rubber and pepper export duties and the trade licensing fees—and they are yielding a revenue which is comparatively little trouble and expense to collect and which does definitely help to reduce inflation. The sliding-scale rubber tax, as I said last year, acts like an income tax upon that very large section of the population which makes part of its living from rubber production. Though I was premature in saying that it was being imitated by Malaya, I can now say that North Borneo has adopted it and so paid us the sincerest form of flattery.
Neither this tax nor the trades licensing is, I admit, completely fair to the individual, and if the public demands a fairer substitute it would, of course, have to be some kind of income tax.
One more word about inflation before I pass on. Prices of local produce and work have continued to rise, but not so fast as before. Prices of imported goods, however have risen faster. In fact, world inflation is supplanting local inflation, and the local
inflation has been slowed down by the dropping off of rubber and pepper prices. The currency issues which are a rough guide to what is happening, show that we put into circulation only $9 million of new notes and coins this year as against over $16 million last year, and that the tide began to turn in September since when 2 of those 9 million have returned to the currency vaults.
After the Burial of Y. T. M. Duli Pengiran Bendahara anak Haji Mohamed Yassin, o.b.e.
Ganesh is there like a stallion in the clouds, in the milk-rose setting of the sun; Himself of cloud He prances trumpeting above the rain.
While before I did not think the grave had been wetted enough now it will be; the clay will clog together and the ground will seal again. Almerhom Duli Pengiran Bendahara. The tombpost has tiny white flowers tied upon it and his sons sprinkled it, His Highness watching, with water and jasmin mixed. Islamic rites are very gracious.
The Rain wets it properly now, so Ganeshji will soon vanish into the apricot sunset . . . grey Elephants blow into other grey shapes. lf the White Silk Umbrella is no longer required let the serene tasselled pomp of it keep other men cool.
R. K.
A Question of Audit.
(The characters in this narrative are entirely fictitious.)
There lived in Kuching a sea-faring man of good family and ancient lineage called Hussein, who had an only child, a daughter called Fatima, who was the light of his eyes and the joy of his declining years. The forbears of Hussein had held high office at the court of Brunei, one Ali in the eighteenth century being the admiral who com-manded when Sambas was stormed and put to sack. A portion of the spoils from this memorable exploit founded the fortunes of the cadet branch of family in Kuching, which continued the naval tradition by its pursuit of armed commerce. With the advent of more peaceful times their commerce became less armed and less lucrative, so that the last of the line, Hussein, was master only of a modest sampan with which he plied a trade in firewood on the Sarawak River. Nevertheless, though not a man of afflu-ence, he was highly regarded in the kampong by reason of his good family and ancient lineage.
His daughter Fatima was upwards of thirty years of age and so richly endowed with all the virtues that she was held up by the matrons of the kampong as the paragon of maidenhood and was commonly referred to as the virtuous Fatima. Unfortunately, though richly endowed by grace, Fatima had bben but churlishly served by nature. Her vision was disordered by a violent squint of both eyes, so that those with whom she con-versed were wont to look over their shoulders thinking that she was addressing someone else. The timbre of her speech was rasping in the extreme, recalling the interplay of two saws, and
241
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, DECEMBER 28, 1951.
her tongue was gifted with such asperity of address that, were it not for her lofty virtues, she would have surely taxed the forbearance of her neighbours.
At the time of these events there arrived in the kampong a new man named Ahmat, who was a parvenue without name or family, but possessing considerable wealth. How he came by this was a matter of much speculation; his enemies asserted that he had gained it by an illicit traffic in turtles eggs, but this was never proved, and the source remained a mystery. He had an only child, a dis-solute youth named Isau, whose chief concern was to squander his father's substance in riotous living.
Ahmat being of advanced years was desirous of spending the evening of his life in respectability, and therefore saught to acquire a position in society; at the same time he wished to marry the dissolute Isau to a wife who would bring some order into his irregular courses. What more natural then than that he should seek to affiance him to the virtuous Fatima? By means of intermediaries, therefore, negotiations were opened, and after Hussein had held very high language on the impossibility of marrying his daughter to a youth of base decent, a brian of $500 was agreed upon, which was paid over in one cent pieces, and the date of the marriage was fixed for six months hence.
The dissolute Isau had meanwhile contrived privily to meet the virtuous Fatima, and was so appalled at the prospect before him that he used every eudeavour to frustrate the match. He sub-orned a worthless youth in the kampong to debauch her affections, even buying him a gambus to play under her window. She, however, received him very ill and poured swill upon his head. Defeated in this approach, the dissolute Isau now caused to be noised about the kampong exaggerated rumours of his own misdemeanours, of how he had tumbled diverse maidens in the babas, of how he was given to violent assault and battery, of how he was liable to apprehension for innumerable crimes, and so forth. But these failed of their purpose, for the virtuous Fatima, like many plainly favoured young women, had a Misdion, which was to reclaim dis-solute young men to the paths of grace. Meanwhile these rumours attracted the attention of a young man named Bujang, recently recruited to the Con-stabulary, who displayed great zeal in the expectat-ion of promotion. He began to enquire into the antecedents of the dissolute Isau, which had the effect of quickly putting a stop to these insinuations.
About sixteen years before these events a daughter had been born to an estimable Dayak family in the Saribas, and as she had been born in Holy Cross Day they, being Christians, had named her Hierusalema. Now she came down to Kuching with her parents, and meeting the disso-lute Isau at a place of public resort, fell violently in love with him, which sentiment he most heartily reciprocated. Both approached their parents with requests for marriage, and both met with stern refusals. Hierusalema's family was richly endowed with landed estate in rubber, and compared with their wealth, as evidenced in outboard motors, clocks, sewing-machines, bicycles, and a large balance in the bank, the ill-gotten gains of Ahmat were a mere pittance. Her parents therefore dis-missed the proposal. Ahmat, on the other hand, sought above all respectability and a position in the kampong, which the marriage of Isau with the vir-tuous Fatima would secure for him, whereas in the high living of Saribas society he would cut but a sorry figure as a poor relation of dubious antecedents.
He also dismissed the proposition and the star-crossed lovers were left to seize what solace they could.
After an interval the parents of Hierusalema returned to the Saribas, and she, after a harrowing parting with her lover, accompanied them. It chanced that their return home coincided with the arrival in the district of a new cadet officer named Calder, a young man with bright red hair and copious freckles, with which Hierusalema now fell violently in love and quickly forgot the embraces of the dissolute Isau.
Hierusalema's disport with young Calder lasted some three months and would, no doubt, have lasted longer, had not that officer wholly given him-self over to dalliance to the abandonment of his duties. Justice was no longer administered, the revenue no longer collected, and births and deaths passed unrecorded. At length the Chief Clerk in despair locked up the office and went with the rest of the staff to seek help from the Resident of the Division. Manwhile the irregularity of Mr. Cal-der's accounting, or rather the lack of it, had aroused the suspicions of the Audit Department, and one morning a cousin of Hierusalema's brought word from Kuching that Mr. Kong Tai Ping of that dreaded body would shortly arrive to hold inquisition into the affairs of the station.
Young Calder recked not a jot of this sombre intel-ligence, so far gone was he in his infatuation, but Hierusalema knew that the advent of Mr. Tai Ping portended dismissals, imprisonments, and worse, for was it not popularly said that the scalps of six administrative officers hung at his belt? Mr. Tai Ping would pursue delinquents through jungles of figures and swamps of returns with implacable persistance, and in the end always got his man, nor would he be turned aside from his course by any considerations human or divine, so austere was his inflexibility. "The Sea-Green Incorruptible" com-mented one victim whom he ran to earth at Sebuyau at the height of the landas.
Hierusalema now devised a strategem by means of which she hoped to save her lover. She caused a letter to be written to the dissolute Isau in terms of the warmest endearment, but complaining that Mr. Tai Ping had been persecuting her with his attentions, and was even now about to leave Kuch-ing in pursuit of her; unless he were prevented, she faced a fate worse than death, so that at all costs he must be intercepted and diverted. Knowing that the dissolute Isau's endowments lay elsewhere than in the head, she gave him detailed instructions of the course he was to follow. He was to approach the crew of the launch on which Mr. Tai Ping would travel and to arrange with them that the engines would break down at the Kuala Saribas. There he must lie in wait with a small prau and must come alongside the immobilized launch with offers to paddle Mr. Tai Ping to his destination. These would certainly be accepted by that inflexible gentleman, who would allow nothing to stand in his way. Isau, having got him into the prau, was to paddle him into the nipah swamp and abandon him at some remote place, he was then to paddle up-stream where his beloved would reward him with every comfort. This letter she sent swiftly to Kuching by the hand of her youngest brother.
The dissolute Isau was overjoyed when this com-munication was read to him and hastened to the Shipping Office where he learned that the Magda-lena would in a few days' time oonvey Mr. Tai Ping on his fell errand. Now the under-greaser of the
242
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, DECEMBER 28, 1951.
Magdalena was a cousin of the virtuous Fatima, so the dissolute Isau waited upon her and spoke at length of their forthcoming marriage, stressing the urgency of his going to fish at the Kuala Saribas in order to secure provender for the feast. He therefore besought her to ensure that the engines of the Magdalena would break down there (for he purposed to travel unobtrusively on that vessel), so that a full store of fish could be obtained. He pro-mised to return the following day and to implement the marriage within the week. The virtuous Fati-ma therefore admonished her cousin the under-greaser that the engines of the Magdalena must break down at the Kuala Saribas, and as her relatives invariably obeyed her behests, it came to pass as she wished.
As the Magdalena approached the Kuala Saribas her engines stopped, nor could they be made to go again, for the under-greaser had carried cut exten-sive dismantling operations. The inflexible Mr. Tai Ping was much riled to find his schedule thus disordered, and when a stranger (none other then the dissolute Isau) came alongside in a little prau and offered to paddle him to his destination, he readily accepted. Somewhat to the astonishment of the crew Mr. Tai Ping disappeared into a nipah swamp.
In due course the dissolute Isau reached his be-loved and was by her received with rapturous affect-ion, which she explained to young Calder, was most natural for he was her elder brother newly returned from abroad. She established him in a house in the kampong, telling him that as she was now a steno-grapher much of her time must necessarily be spent at the house of her employer, the young Calder. This he readily accepted, and so thanks to the obtuseness of the one and the infatuation of the other, she was able to retain both her lovers at the same time; an arrangement much to the comfort of all parties concerned.
But it is not given to man in this life to enjoy such bliss for long. A few days later a small prau arrived bearing the inflexible Mr. Tai Ping, his forbidding countenance much inflamed by mosquito bites. By the same tide arrived a vessel bearing the Resident of the Division, the Chief Clerk with the office key, and diverse other crows that had come home to roost. The melancholy fate of young Calder is too well known to need relation, in any case my concern is not with him, but as justice took its course Hierusalema returned to her parents, and the dissolute Isau hastened back to Kuching where he lay concealed in his father's house.
I now returned to the virtuous Fatima, who, with that acumen which is not confined to virtuous maidens, began after the lapse of some days to sus-pect that she had been deceived in her lover. Her suspicions were confirmed when she learned that he now lay hid in his father’s house with the hue and cry after him, for the inflexible Mr. Tai Ping had sworn a deposition against an unnamed youth of debauched appearrance on a charge of trepanning. Further, the investigation was being conducted by the young man Bujang, whom I have mentioned as having been recently recruited to the Constabu-lary and being noted for his zeal and expectation of promotion.
The virtuous Fatima now sought out her way-ward lover and gave him the choice between immediate marriage or ten years in gaol. His apprehension by the zealous Bujang was, she said, due to take place within the hour, and there was no
escape, for her cousin, the under-greaser had just removed his prau. If he accepted the former alternative, she would so order matters with the young man Bujang that the case would be dropped; if he chose the latter she would annually send him flowers. Faced with the choice between a life sentence and one of ten years, albeit in gaol, the wretched youth chose the former, and they were espoused forthwith. The zealous Bujang was so comforted by Fatima that the case was dropped, and nothing remained to cloy the bliss of the newly-wed.
Except, perhaps, Hierusalema, now married to a young Dayak gentleman named Wat, who possessed a considerable prooperty in rubber and was able to maintain her in that state of affluence to which she was accustomed. A short time after their marriage she began to take an interest in the management of their estate and set about hiring new coolies. Amongst tbese whom she so engaged was the hitherto dissolute Isau who arrived now accom-panied by the virtuous Fatima. Alas for the hopes of Hierusalema! A short period of marriage disci-pline under Fatima had so reformed the wretched youth that he was now good for nothing but tapping. Hierusalema therefore summarily dismissed him for incompetence, and so their paths finally parted.
About this time Hierusalema told her husband of a dream, in which it had been revealed to her that one of their children would have red hair, and would thereby bring then exceedingly good fortune. In due course she was brought to bed of a son, who had such flaming red hair, and was so suffused in freckles, that Wat was overjoyed at the speedy confirmation of the prophecy. He wished to call the child Imong after an uncle of his, but Hierusa-lema, ever of a theological bent, insisted on Theodosius; and so this relation ends on a suitably high moral note.
H. Pomfret St. Auben.
The Museum.
Travelling.
As the Curator and other members of the Museum staff have been travelling in Sarawak and Brunei during most of the past month, there has been no opportunity to prepare this column in the usual way.
Research and collecting parties have been working in the Niah region and the Fifth Division. Results will be reported next month, by which time the Curator should have returned from an overland trip starting inland up the Limbang and emerging on the coast about Sibuti. The main objects of this expedition are to inspect bird's nest caves around Mt. Mulu, Long Laput and Gunong Subis; to study the Tutoh Berawans; to seek old house sites in the unvisited headwaters of the Tutong (in Brunei); and to collect native arts and crafts for the Colombo Exhibition due early in 1952.
The Cow House!
Recently Mr. H. P. K. Jacks brought a Second Division man down to Kuching on a visit. Asked what he most wished to see in the capital, he said :
“The big house with cows in it.”
After exploring all avenues of interest in the Agricultural Department, Sikh quarters, and so on, with nil response, it eventually emerged that the
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, DECEMBER 28, 1951.
243
building in question was the Museum. The "cows" are the two wild oxen in cases near the entrance.
The same visitor was asked, near the end of his stay, if he had seen the Astana. He replied :
"Oh. I haven't had time to go along there yet."
So long as such amiable nnd kindly sentiments exist in the outstations, there will be nothing much the matter with Sarawak.
Mr. A. B. Ward.
We hope to print a full acconnt of Mr. Ward’s archives gift in next month's Gazette.
(Contributed).
The Rambutan.
A Sarawak Poem.
Now that the English speaking peoples of the world are less conversant with Indian words than they used to be, it seems a good time to alter slightly some of the foreign words of EDWARD LEAR'S inspiring 'The Cummerbund, an Indian poem". The English words have not been altered at all.
(I.N.A.U.)
I.
She sate upon her Dhobi,
To watch the Evening Star, And all the Payongs as they passed, Cried, 'My! how fair you are !' Around her bower, with quivering leaves, The tall Pengkallans grew, And Penghulus in wild festoons
Hung down from Towkays blue.
II.
Below her home the river rolled With soft meloobious sound,
Where golden-finned Saripahs swam, In myriads circling round.
Above, on tallest trees remote
Green Amahs perched alone, And all night long the Tuak moan'd
Its melancholy tone.
III.
And where the purple Chickchaks threw Their branches far and wide,—
And silvery Jagaluans flew
In silence, side by side,—
The little Barang's twittering cry
Rose on the flagrant air,
And oft the angry Jamban howled
Deep in his hateful lair
IV.
She sate upon her Dhobi,—
She heard the Changkol hum,— When all at once a cry arose.—
'The Rambutan is come!'
In vain she fled :—with open jaws
The angry monster followed, And so, (before assistance came,)
That Lady Fair was swollowed.
V.
They sought in vain for even a bone Respectfully to bury,—
Tbey ssid,—'Hers was a dreadful fate.' (And Echo answered 'Very.')
They nailed her Dhobi to the wall, Where last her form was seen, And underneath they wrote these words, In yellow, blue, and green :—
Beware, ye Fair! Ye Fair, beware!
Nor sit out late at night,— Lest horried Rambutans should come, And swollow you outright.
CORRESPONDENCE.
19th November, 1951.
The Editor,
Sarawak Gazette, Kuching.
Dear Sir,
A London illustrated daily recently published a picture of an "Iban Scout" serving against the Malayan terrorists. The "Iban" was obviously a Sarawak Dayak.
There seems to be an unfortunate bent in modern times to class the Sea Dayak as "orang Iban" with-out I think, any justification. The name was origin-ally applied by the Kayans to roving bands of Dayaks who entered their country seeking jungle produce. The word Iban or lvan means a wanderer, or rover. The term was further encouraged by Charles Hose who constantly alluded to Ibans in his writings Hose was inclined to be contemptuous of the Sea Dayak because from a cultural and social point of view they may have been inferior to his idols, the Kayans, but to those who know the Dayak there is no race in Borneo to equal them in vigour and progressiveness. The appellation "Iban" probably spread from the Kayans to the Rejang Dayaks and thence to other tribes, but I never remember Dayaks of the Skrang, Undup or Saribas calling themselves "kami Iban". “Daya” has been the traditional name for generations, and as Dayaks they were known to the great authorities of the past. James Brooke, Wallace, Sir Hugh Low, St. John and others, and it will be a great pity if an imported designation is allowed to creep in and supplant the old name with which we are all familiar.
Yours faithfully,
A. B WARD.
North Borneo,
Sandakan, 27th Nov., 1951.
The Editor, The Sarawak Gazette, Kuching.
Dear Sir,
I wonder if you too have noticed the extreme difficulty of getting anything universally known in this region?
I had a good example of that a few days ago. A European business-man resident here told me that he had not known of the existence of your paper, but knew Sarawak and Brunei well, and had frequently stayed in Kuching! Some people are strangely unobservant.
244
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, DECEMBER 28, 1951.
With kind regards, though possibly we have never met.
Yours sincerely, T. F. Vaughan.
The Sarawak Club.
Bowls Averages For October, 1951.
Average.	Name. Ladies.	Highest No. of.	Score.	Rolls.
111	Mrs. F. A. Clarke-Hunt	136	11
107	Mrs. S. F. Smith	121	11
103	Miss E. McLeod	127	6
103	Miss D. M. Evans	140	11
101	Mrs. V. Nicol	121	14
99	Miss W. Dixon Lennett	126	13
99	Mrs. J. E. Ogden Men.	120	14
156	C. F. Birt	174	5
156	G. B. Newton	178	11
151	D. J. King	168	9
150	T. V. Courtney Dr. H. W. Harcus	158	5
148	190	5
144	W. L. P. Sochon	158	5
137	M. Steele	192	13
133	T. J. M. Baltus	165	8
126	G. F. Taylor	143	11
125	R. J. A. Lee	150	5
124	D. St. J. Forrer	146	7
122	C. J. H. Blake	190	12
120	J. Nicol	155	19
118	G. S. Smith	156	15
113	F. C. Ogden	145	14
112	B. A. Hepburn	134	6
108	M. J. Hurley	125	9
103	M. B. McCabe	129	9
96	I. Berry	136	5
96	P. A. Garland	104	5
OCTOBER BOWLS COMPETITION.
Name.	Score.	Handi-cap.	Total.
Ladies.	Mrs. V. Nicol	125	59	184
Miss D. M. Evans	103	58	161
Mrs. S. F. Smith	104	55	159
Miss E. McLcod	83	58	141
Mrs. F. A. Clarke-Hunt	82	52	134
Men.	B. A. Hepburn	284	102	386
G. F. Taylor	295	81	376
C. F. Birt	339	36	375
T. V. Courtney	327	45	372
D. J. King	325	43	368
C. J. H. Blake	277	87	364
W. L. P. Sochon	306	54	360
J. Nicol	268	90	358
M. B. McCabe	240	115	355
D. St. J. Forrer	269	84	353
T. J. M. Baltus	278	70	343
G. S. Smith	243	93	336
M. Steele	270	64	334
G. B. Newton	291	36	327
M. J. Hurley	216	108	324
R. J. A. Lee	215	82	297
Island Club, Sibu.
BOWLING AVERAGES FOR OCTOBER, 1951.
No. of Rolls.	Handi-
Players.	Average.	cap.
D. R. Lascelles	30	187	-11
J. G. C. Kirby-Turner	38	181	- 2
A. C. Waine	5	179	2
A. Webb	31	177	5
E. P. Spencer	44	176	6
G. T. Myles	19	176	6
G. H. Rackham	17	167	20
D. F. Henderson	39	164	24
M. Martin	10	161	29
N. A. Lucas	10	157	35
H. F. Rafter	14	156	36
P. F. S. Spencer	5	154	39
P. A. Heslop	9	150	45
G. H. B. Shepherd	9	149	47
A. L. Proctor	6	148	48
C. Lightley	15	144	54
C. L. Miles	8	141	59
Mrs. G. T. Myles	23	140	60
Mrs. Murray	11	139	62
D. Dickerson	6	137	65
Mrs. Lascelles	15	138	63
Mrs. Waine	7	129	77
J. A. Anderson	7	121	89
Mrs. F. Luson	4	115	98
L. K. Morse	3	161
OCTOBER MONTHLY ROLL.
Score.	Handi-cap.	Total.
N. A. Lucas	376	35	411
Mrs. F. Luson	305	98	403
C. Lightley	339	54	393
J. G. C. Kirby-Turner	384	-2	382
D. F. Henderson	341	24	365
A. Webb	355	5	360
Mrs. Myles	288	60	348
P. F. Spencer	305	39	344
Mrs. Murray	277	62	339
G. T. Myles	331	6	337
Mrs. Lascelles	246	63	309
Bowling Averages For November, 1951.
No. of	Handi-	Players.	Rolls.	Average.	cap.
A. Webb	35	190	-15
E. P. Spencer	15	177	4
G. T. Myles	28	174	9
H. Sandford	14	174	9
G. H. Rackham	29	170	15
D. R. Lascelles	4	169	16
J. G. C. Kirby-Turner	39	166	21
J. Hacking	33	162	27
D. F. Henderson	30	161	28
N. A. Lucas	5	160	30
P. F. S. Spencer	13	159	31
C. Lightley	21	158	33
M. Martin	5	158	33
P. A. Heslop	19	150	45
Mrs. Murray	9	148	48
A. L. Proctor	12	143	55
D. Dickerson	20	140	60
Mrs. Myles	26	139	61
Mrs. Waine	11	136	66
Mrs. Lascelles	7	135	67
Mrs. F. Luson	24	124	84
J. A. R. Anderson	7	121	88	THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, DECEMBER 28, 1951.
245
November Monthly Roll. (5th December, 1951.)
Score.	Handi-cap.	Total.
Mrs. Myles	375	61	436
D. R. Lascelles	410	16	426
A. Webb	405	-15	390
C. Lightley	352	33	385
Mrs. F. Luson	293	84	377
J. G. C. Kirby-Turner 344	21	365
N. A. Lucas	312	30	342
G. T. Myles	323	9	332
Mrs. Lascelles	234	67	301
P. A. Heslop	251	45	296
Sarawak Turf Club.
Winter Meeting, 1951.
First Day, 1st December.
Race 1. The Landas Scurry. Class II Div. 2 Ponies. 3 furlongs.
The Lim Sisters'
1.	Miss Kudat	10.9 Tan Tau Enn
2. Lordship	9.9	Lundu
3.	Phoenix	9.7	Usop
4.	Bujang Samsu	8.12	Samsudin
5.	White Crest	7.12(7.7)	Keram
6. Happy Ending 9.3(8.12) Tambi
7.	Smoke Screen	9.4	Marrup
8.	Lintang Lad	9.6 (9.1)	Bujang
9.	Bintang Barat	8.9 (8.10)	Numbek
Scratched : Auster 7.12.
Won By: 3 lengths, length, 1 lengths.
Time: 45 4/5 seconds. Tote $1.50.
(Record).
White Crest was first away but was quickly over-hauled by Miss Kudat who led the field for the rest of the way. White Crest was overtaken by Phoenix and Lordship a furlong from home and Lordship later overtook Phoenix to gain 2nd place.
Race 2. The Lindak Tanah Stakes.
Class II Div. 1 Ponies. 5 furlongs.
Messrs. Ong Guan Tee
& Tan Kui Choon's
1.	Hot Spur II 10.9 Tan Tau Enn
2.	Mongol 8.8	Usop
3.	The Moke 7.12	Sebi
4.	Suiyuan 10.9(10.4) Liben
5. Victory Parade 9.5	Medin
6 Larry 10.2	Samsudin
7.Golden Jack	10.9(10.4)	Sa’ee
8.	Oriental	10.1(9.10)	Then Joon Loi
9.	Kaswari	10.8	Lundu
10.	Cabaret	10.4	Lohor
11.	Marili	7.12 (7.8)	Eddie
12.	Bintung Aru 9.4(7.13) Omboy
Won By : 2 lengths, 1 length, 3 lengths. Time: 1 min. 21 sec. Tote: $4.80.
Hot Spur II was smartly away and led from beginning to end. Bintang Aru and Oriental were left. Larry, Mongol, Kaswari and The Moke followed Hot Spur II until the distance when Mongol and The Moke came up to gain 2nd and 3rd places respectively. Suiyuan was a fast-finishing 4th.
Race 3. The Lee Mah Handicap.
Class I Ponies. 5 furlongs.
Messrs. Tan Tai Chua
& W. J. Chater’s
1.	Chienlimah 7.12(7.13)	Asing
2.	Lucky Boy 10.11 Tan Tau Enn
3.	Bintang Timor 9.7	Samsudin
4.	Gobi 8.12	Medin
5.	Bintang Selatan	10.12(10.7) Abun
6.	Kudat Prince	10.11(10.6) Lamat
Won By: length, 8 lengths, 2 lengths. Time: 1 min. 16 seconds. Tote: $3.10. (Record).
After some delay, Lucky Boy and Bintang Timor got the better of the start followed by Chienlimah and Bintang Selatan. Kudat Prince was last. At the Padungan Gate, Chienlimah closed in and at the bend into the home straight raced neck and neck with Lucky Boy. furlong from the Winning Post, Lucky Boy swerved and interfered with Chien-limah, but the latter came up again to beat Lucky Boy by length. Bintang Timor was 3rd.
Race 4, The Landas Sprint.
Class II Horses. 5 furlongs.
Mr. J. H. Ellis’
1.	Mr. Chips	8.5 Teo Ek Pah
2. Flight	8.5	(8.8) Samsudin
3.	Aurora	10.2	Lundu
4.	Neptune	9.8	Tan Tau Enn
5.	Intan Sarawak	10.2	Asing
Scratched: Cherith 10.2, First In 9.11, Heaven & Earth 7.12.
Won By: 5 lengths, Neck, 3 lengths.
Time: 1 min. 5 4/5 seconds. Tote: $2.50.
Off from a good start it was Neptune from Aurora, Mr. Chips and Flight. At the Padungan Gate, Aurora hit the front and led comfortably by 4 lengths to the bend where he ran very wide. Mr. Chips look the lead in the centre of the course to gain several lengths from Flight. Aurora came up very fast again under the distance but had lost too much ground and could not catch the leaders.
Race 5. The W. K. C. Cup Trial.
Class I Horses. 5 furlongs.
The LOCO Kongsi's
1. Brightstar Minstrel 10.7	Usop
2.	Heretic	9.12	Teo Ek Pah
3.Tara	7.12(8.0) Marrup
4.Ramu 10.7	Samsudin
Scratched: Unicorn 10.7, Craughan 8.13.
Won By: 3 lengths, Neck, 4 lengths.
Time: 1 min. 2 3/5 secs. Tote: $4.00. (Record).
Ramu was first to break the line from Tara, Heretic and Brightstar Minstrel. At the 4, Tara took the lead which she maintained for 2 furlongs from Ramu and Heretic. Brightstar Minstrel was last.
At the bend into the straight, Tara was still leading with the rest bunched up and gaining ground. Under the distance, Brightstar Minstrel forged ahead on the outside to win by 3 lengths. Heretic came up to beat Tara by a neck for 2nd place.
246
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, DECEMBER 28, 1951.
race 6. The Chatered Bank Cup.
Class II Ponies. 4 furlongs.
The Lim Sisters'
1.	Miss Kudat	8.13(9.6)	Mat
2.	Lintang Lad	7.10(8.3)	Bujang
3.	Suiyuan 11.7	Liben
4.	Hot Spur II 11.7(12.0) Lamat
5.	White Crest	7.0 (7.4)	Keram
Oriental 10.13 Then Joon Loi
Victory Parade	10.3	Nani
g	Mongol	9.6	Numbek
- Lordship	7.13	Putit II
Phoenix	7.11	Sintak
K	Smoke Screen	7.8(7.11)	Tambi
Happy Ending	7.7	Sebli
Bujang Samsu	7.2 (7.3)	Eddie
14.	Bintang Aru	10.2	Zain
15.	Kaswari 11.6(11.13) Abun
16.	Marili	9.0( 9.7) Omboy
Scratched: Golden Jack 11.7, Cabaret 11.2, Larry 11.0, The Moke 9.0, Sunny Boy 8.13, Bintang Barat 7.1, Auster 7.0.
Won By: 5 lengths, length, Neck. Time: 1 min. 2 seconds. Tote: $1.80.
Miss Kudat jumped smartly away from White Crest. Suiyuan, Phoenix, Mongol and Hot Spur II with the rest strung out in a long line and Bintang Aru and Marili last. Miss Kudat was never troubled throughout the race and went on to win comfortably. 2nd and 3rd places were fought out between Lintang Lad, Suiyuan and Hot Spur II with only length and neck between them. The rest were in a bunch behind with Bintang Aru and Marili trailing the field.
Race 7. The Malayan Breweries' Challenge Cup.
Horses Open. 1 Mile.
Mr. T. F. Stone's
1.	Craughan	8.5	Marrup
2.	Rex II	10.12	Samsudin
3.	Cherith	7.12	Asing
4.	Gay Bird 10.12 Teo Ek Pah
5. Unicorn	10.12	Usop
Scratched: Heretic 8.6.
Won By: 8 lengths, 1 lengths, 3 lengths.
Time: 2 min. 12 1/5 seconds. Tote: $15.90.
(Record).
Passing the Stand for the first time, the horses were in line, with the exception of Unicorn who was 2 lengths behind. At the Sekama Gate, Craughan took the lead followed by Gay Bird, Cherith and Rex II close on her heels. At the Jubilee Hall, Craughan established a comfortable lead which she held to win comfortably by 8 lengths and pay the highest dividend of the day. Rex II and Cherith fought out 2nd place. Unicorn was last a long way behind.
Race 8. The "Black Pirate"—Tan Siang Kim Memorial Cup.
Presented by Mr. Tan Tai Chua.
Class I & Class II Div. I Ponies. 1 Mile.
Messrs. Tan Tai Chua
& W. J. Chater’s
1.	Chienlimah 9.5(9.7) Then Joon Loi
2.	Bintang Timor 10.9 Samsudin
3.	Atom Boy	9.0	Asing
4.	Gobi	9.13	Medin
5.	Golden Jack	8.5(8.7)	Usop
Larry	7.12(7.10) Bujang
Scratched: Suiyuan 8.5.
Won By: 1 length, 4 lengths, 2 lengths.
Time: 2 min. 45 seconds. Tote: $2.50. (Record).
Off from a good start, the field raced neck and neck for the 1st furlong, after which Chienlimah drew ahead closely followed by a bunched field. At the Paddock, Larry ran offf the course and took no further part in the race.
At the Jubilee Hall, Bintang Timor drew level with Chienlimah, but the latter, under whip, again went ahead to establish a 2 length lead. Bintang Timor gained ground at the finish but could not catch the leader. Atom Boy and Gobi fought out 3rd place.
Second Day, 8th December, 1951.
Race 1. The Petanak Stakes. Class II Div. 2 Ponies. 4 furlongs.
Mr. Phillip Soh Fu’s
1.	Happy Ending	9.1(8.10) Sebli
2.	Lordship	9.12 Lundu
3.	Bujang Samsu	8.11 Samsudin
4.	Bintang Aru	9.12(9.7) Bujang
5.	Phoenix	9.8	Usop
6.	Lintang Lad	9.4 Tan Tau En
7.	Smoke Screen	9.2(8.11)	Tambi
8.	White Crest	7.12(7.7)	Keram
9.	Bintang Barat	8.4(8.1)	Numbek
Scratched: Auster 7.12.
Won By: 1 length, 3 lengths, 1 length.
Time: 1 min. 5 secs. Tote: $60.
Race 2. The Serian Handicap.
Class II Div. I Ponies. 6 furlongs.
The Triple Kongsi's
1.	Kaswari	10.6	Lohor
2.	Suiyuan	10.9	Medin
3.	The Moke	8.4	Perhi
4.	Oriental	10.0(9.9)	Then Joon Loi
5.	Marili	7.12(7.7) Eddie
6.	Larry	10.2	Suinsudin
7.	Golden Jack	10.0(9.9)	Sa’ee
8.	Mongol	9.3	Usop
Scratched: Cabaret 9.9, Victory Parade 9.5, Sunny Boy 9.5
Won By : 3 lenghs, 2 lengths, 5 lengths.
Time: 1 min. 9 secs. Tote: $7.80.
Race 3. The Winter Handicap.
Class II Horses, 6 furlongs.
Chanel Kongsi’s
1.	Cherith 10.4	Asing
2.	Mr. Chips	8.12	Teo Ek	Pah
3.	Flight 7.13(8.3) Samsudin
4.	Aurora 9.6	Lundu
Scratched: Tara 10.12, Perambulator 9.4, Intan Sarawak 9.2, First In 9.0, Heaven and Earth 7.12, Neptune 7.12.
Won By: 4 lengths, nose, distance.
Time: 1 min. 20 secs. Tote: $2.80.
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, DECEMBER 28, 1951.
247
Race 4. The Wee Kheng Chiang Cup.
Class I Horses. 6 furlongs.
The LOCO Kongsi's
1.	Brightstar	Minstrel	10.0	Usop
2.	Ramu	8.7(8.8)	Samsudin
3. Rex II	9.2	Medin
Craughan	8.5(8.6) Marup
5.	Gay Bird	10.0	Teo Ek Pah
Scratched: Unicorn 10.0, Heretic 8.7.
Won By: 3 lengths, 1 lengths, distance. Time: 1 min. 18 secs. Tote: $2.30.
Race 5. The R. W. Chater Memorial Cup.
Presented by Mr. W. J. Chater.
Class I Ponies. 1 Mile.
The Lim Sisters'
1.	Lucky Boy	10.3(9.12)	Mat II
2.	Bintang Timor	10.7(10.2)	Putit I
3.	Atom Boy	8.8	Asing
4.	Chienlimah 9.12(9.7)	Then Joon	Loi
5.	Gobi	9.8	Medin
6.	Hot Spur II	7.12(7.7)	Eddie
7.	Miss Kudat	7.12(7.7)	Keram
8.	Bintang Selatau 8.12	Usop
Won By: 6 lengths, 2 lengths, distance. Time: 2 min. 9 secs. (record). Tote: $7.10.
Race 6. The Landas Rumput & Padi Stakes. Ponies Open. 4 furlongs.
"131 Kongsi's”
1.	Cabaret	8.10	Lundu
2.	Suiyuan	9.5	Medin
3.Lordship	8.5	Asing
4.Lintang Lad	8.2(7.11) Bujang
Larry	8.12 Putit I
Oriental	8.11	Marup
Golden Jack	8.11	Sa'ee
The Moke	8.7	Perhi
Bintang	Aru	8.7(8.2)	Numbek
Smoke Screen	8.1(7.10) Sebli
Bujang	Samsu	7.12(8.3)	Samsudin
12.	White	Crest	7.1(7.4)	Keram
13.	Kudat	Prince	9.7(9.2)	Mat II
Won By: length, 3 lengthe, 1 lengths. Time: 1 min. 10 2/5 secs. Tote: $25.80.
Race 7. The Landas Hay & Corn Stakes. Mr. K. S. Leeston-Smith's
1.	Tara	7.11(8.2)	Samsudin
2.	Heretic	9.11	Teo Ek	Pah
3.	Aurora	7.11(8.4)	Lundu
4.	Neptune	7.7(7.8)	Asing
Won By: 1 lengths, 8 lengths, 3 lengths.
Time: 1 min. 19 secs. Tote: $2.90.
Sarawak Turf Club.
Results—Winter Meeting, 1951—1st and 8th December, 1951.
TOTALIZATOR,
Race. 1st Day 1.12.51.	Dividend.
1.	MISS KUDAT	...	$	1.50
2.	HOTSPUR II	...	4.80
3.	CHIENLIMAH	...	3.10
4.	MR. CHIPS	...	2.60
5.	BBIGHTSTAR MINSTREL ...	4.00
6.	MISS KUDAT	...	1.80
7.	CRAUGHAN	...	15.90
8.CHIENLIMAH	...	2.50
Race. 2nd Day 8.12.51.	Dividend.
1.	HAPPY ENDING	...	$60.00
2.	KASWARI	...	7.80
3.CHERITH	...	2.80
4.	BRIGHTSTAR MINSTREL 2.30
5.	LUCKY BOY	...	7.10
6.	CABARET	...	25.80
7.	TARA	...	2.90
$1.00 COURSE CASH SWEEP.
Race. 1st Day 1.12.51.
1. 1st No. 2210 $566.—2nd No. 2242 $283.— 3rd No. 1015 $141.—Acceptors Nos. 2027; 1007; 1041; 1154; 1511; 1088 each $23.
2. 1st No. 1760 $819.—2nd No. 3502 $409.
—3rd No. 2075 $204.—Acceptors Nos-2776; 1675; 2388 ; 3005 ; 2920; 1769; 2904 ; 1501; 1439 each $22.
3. 1st No. 2188 $1.041.—2nd No. 1769 $520.
—3rd No. 3728 $260.—Acceptors Nos. 2771 ; 3827 ; 4215 each $86.
4. 1st No. 3278 $1,201.—2nd No. 4770 $600.
—3rd No. 1865 $300.—Acceptors Nos. 1108; 4582 ; 4355 ; 3542 ; 2137 each $60.
5. 1st No. 3759 $1,015.—2nd No. 1208 $507.
—3rd No. 2528 $258.—Acceptors Nos. 1441; 1449 ; 2063 each $84.
6. 1st No. 3293 $939—2nd No. 1610 $469. —3rd No. 1988 $234.—Acceptors Nos. 2906 ; 3356 ; 2817; 1114; 1706 ; 3733; 1759 ; 2142; 1479; 1481; 1314; 2549; 2943 each $18.
7. 1st No. 2665 $700.—2nd No. 3114 $350.
—3rd No. 1216 $175.—Acceptors Nos. 3125; 2286 each $87.
8. 1st No. 2450 $590.—2nd No. 3270 $295.
—3rd No. 1906 $147.—Acceptors Nos. 1764; 1901 ; 2389 each $49.
Race. 2nd Day 8.12.51.
1. 1st No. 1733 $1,015.—2nd No. 3197 $507.
—3rd No. 2972 $253.—Acceptors Nos. 3103; 3548; 2953 ; 2810; 4467; 1895; 1017 each $36.
2. 1st No. 1466 $1,186,—2nd No. 4406 $593.
—3rd No. 1845 $296.—Acceptors Nos. 2643; 1395; 1798; 3389; 2308; 3184; 3776; 2481 each $37.
3. 1st No. 3595 $1,300.—2nd No. 3380 $650.
—3rd No. 3585 $325.—Acceptors Nos. 1754; 3989; 1335; 3570 ; 2721; 4304; 3144 each $46.
4. 1st No. 3844 $1,330.—2nd No. 2757 $665.
—3rd Dead Heat Nos. 3886 ; 4426 each $166.—Acceptors Nos. 4351; 3498; 3228 each $110.
5. 1st No. 2940 $1,210.—2nd No. 4314 $605.
—3rd No. 4031 $302.—Acceptors Nos. 1715; 3203 ; 4388; 1860 ; 2300 each $60.
6. 1st No. 3490 $1,160.—2nd No. 3577 $580.
—3rd No. 3216 $290.—Acceptors Nos. 3288 ; 2730 ; 3031; 1215; 3912; 1461; 1242; 1469 ; 3597; 1155 each $29.
7. 1st No. 1155 $839.—2nd No. 2457 $419.
—3rd No. 2848 $209.—Acceptor No. 3254 $209.
248
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, DECEMBER 28, 1951.
$1.00 UNLIMITED SWEEP.
Drawn on Race 5 Second Day—8.12.51.
VALUE OF SWEEP	...	... $68.500.00
Less : 10% Government Tax $6,850.00
25% Club's Commission 17,125.00	23,975.00
POOL DIVISIBLE ... $44,525.00
Horse	Number Price
FIRST	LUCKY BOY	10174	$22.262.00
SECOND	BINTANG TIMOR	18641 11,131.00
THIRD	ATOM BOY 60776 5,565.00
STARTERS CHIENLIMAH	71044	1.113.00
GOBI	39753	1.113.00
BINTANG SELATAN 24788	1.113.00
HOTSPUR II	44995	1.113.00
MISS KUDAT	68253	1.113.00
A. P. MERRELLS, Treasurer.
HENRY ONG, Asst. Secretary, Sarawak Turf Club.
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, DECEMBER 28, 1951.
249
Kuching Market Price List.
20th October to 20th November, 1951.
RICE—(per gantang)
Local, White milling	...	...	...	$2.00
Govt.	Siam, White	...	...	...	1.98
Broken	...	...	...	1.38
,,.	Pulut	...	...	...	1.98
Local	Milled Broken	...	...	...	—
Dayak (Pounded) ...	...	... —
SUGAR—(per kati)
Java (white) Govt. ...	...	...	.51
Commercially white ... ... ... .56
Procured Brown	...	...	...	—
Nipah Sugar	...	...	...	.35
SALT—(per kati)
Coarse	...	...	...	...	.10
Fine	...	...	...	...	.15
FLOUR AND BREAD—
Wheat Flour, per kati	...	... .30
Bread per loaf ...	...	...	.07
MILK—(per tin)
Milkmaid	,..	...	...	.70
Golden Wheel	...	...	...	.65
EGGS—(each)
Duck, fresh	...	...	...	.22
salted	...	...	...	.18
Fowl	...	...	...	.22
EDIBLE FATS—(per kati)
Coconut Oil	...	...	...	.90
Pork Fat No. 1	...	...	...	2.60
,, ,, ,, 2	...	...	...	2.20
PORK—(per kati)
Lean No. 1 ...	...	...	4.00
Lean with fat 2 ...	...	...	2.60
BEEF AND OTHER MEATS—(per kati)
Mutton (Australian)	...	...	...	Nil
Beef, steak	...	...	...	3.24
Beef, curry meat	...	...	...	1.80
Buffalo No. 1	...	...	...	8.40
curry meat ... ... ...	1.80
Kambing (daging) ...	...	... 3.25
POULTRY—(per kati)
Capons	...	...	...	3.40
Duck	...	...	...	2.21
Fowl, Chinese breed	...	...	...	3.00
Fowl, Dayak breed	...	...	...	2.59
FISH—(per kati)
Fresh fish No. 1 ...	...	...	2.31
,, ,, ,, 2 ...	...	...	1.21
,, ,, 3	...	...	... .66
Prawns 1	...	...	...	2.00
,, ,, 2	...	...	...	1.60
Crab 1	...	...	.	1.20
2	...	...	...	1.00
Salted fish 1	...	...	...	2.37
,,	2	...	...	...	1.20
,, ,, ,, 3	...	...	...	.70
roe ...	...	...	2.20
VEGETABLES—(per kati)
Bangkuang (Yam beans) ... ... $	.20
Bayam	...	...	...	.40
Bean Sprouts	...	...	...	.30
Cabbage Imported	...	...	...	.80
Changkok Manis	...	...	...	.40
Daun Bawang	...	...	...	1.60
Ensahi Puteh	...	...	...	.80
Bunga	...	...	...	.60
French beans	... ...	...	1.20
Garlic, fresh ...	... ...	.69
Kachang panjang	...	...	...	.31
Kangkong	.... ...	...	.40
Keladi (China)	...	...	...	.45
Ketola	...	...	...	.40
Kribang	...	...	...	.12
Kundor	...	...	...	.20
Labu	...	...	...	.20
Ladies Fingers	...	...	...	.50
Lettuce (per tie)	...	...	...	.10
Lobak (Chinese radish)	...	...	.35
Lobak, salted, imported	...	...	.60
Onions, Bombay	...	...	...	.36
Onions, small	...	...	...	.60
Ptatoes, Bengal	...	... .32
Pria (Bitter Gourd)	...	...	...	.60
Bamboo shoots, salted	...	...	.40
Trong (Brinjals)	...	...	...	.30
Yams	...	... ... .22
Cucumber (timun)	...	...	...	.34
Ginger	...	...	...	1.28
Chillies (red)	...	...	...	.67
(green)	... ... ...	.40
Sauerkraut, imported	...	...	1.00
local ...	... ... .52
Tamarind	...	...	...	.40
Tomatoes, fresh	...	...	...	1.26
TEA—
Tea, Lipton per lb.	...	...	3.70
Chinese per packet	...	...	.80
COFFEE—(per kati) Raw, Java No. 1	...	...	...	2.80
,, Java No. 2	...	...	...	1.90
FRUIT—
Pisang Umbun ... per kati	... .15
Pisang Tandok	...	each	.10 to .20
Pineapples	...	per kati	...	.10
Papayas	...	,,	...	.19
SUNDRIES—
Bean Cnrd	...	per 6 square piece ...	.10
,, Cake (white) ...	per piece ... .15
,,	(yellow) ... ,, ...	.24
Kerosene Oil	...	per tin	...	5.00
,,	...	per bottle	...	.25
Charcoal	...	per pkl.	...	12.00
,, semi-converted ...	...	6.00
Sauce (kitchup) ... bottle (1) $1.00, (2) .70
(8) .50
Blachan	...	per kati	...	.76
Dried prawn	...	,,	...	4.57
Coconut, fresh	...	each	...	.20
Bako Wood	...	per panchang ...	$2.00
Gambong salted imported per kati ...	.62
Sepat, salted ...	...	...	98
Cigarettes:
Players ...	...	3	sticks	for	...	.12
Craven "A"	...	3	...	.12
Rough Rider	...	4	...	.10
Berkeley ...	...	3	...	.10
State Express	...	1 stick	for	...	.06
Naturalisation.
Notice is hereby given that SHAIKH SALIM bin SHAIKH MOHAMED AHSAMIT, of Kampong Pamukat, Limbang, is applying to the Chief Secret-ary for naturalisation, and that any person who known any reason why naturalisation should not be granted should send a written and signed statement of the facts to the Chief Secretary, Kuching, Sarawak.
[2—1]
Vol. LXXVII.
No. 1125.
PRICE
KUCHING, Friday, December 28th, 1951.
50 CENTS.
Subcription and Advertising Rates for The Sarawak Gazette. (Published monthly.)
Single copy	...	...	...	50	cents.
Subscription	for one year (local) ...	...	$6.00
Subscription to Outstations and abroad ... $6.50 or 15/-
All subscription are payable in advance and will not be renewed unless notice of renewal is given.
Changes of address should be notified to the Government Printing Office in writing.
Advertisement Rates.
Payable in advance..
(Column width 3 ", length 11".)
1	2	3	6	12
month months months months months Column $ 6.00 $10.50 $15.00 $22.50 $37.50 Column 10.50	20.25	30.00	45.00	75.00
1 Column page 18.00 29.25	45.00	67.50	112.50
Full Page	22.50	41.25	60.00	90.00	150.00
Where special display is required, necessitating extra work, the above charges may be increased up to 25%.
Change of copy which necessitatcs resetting the advertise-ment will be charged for at the rate of a first insertion.
Small advertisements 20 cents per line with minimum charge of $1. For every Domestic Occurrence $1.
N.B.—(50 cents to cover Bank Commission should be added to all cheque drawn on banks outside Sarawak.)
All communications intended for insertion in the Sarawak Gazette must be directed to the Editor, Kuching. They should reach the Office at least ten days before the publication of each issue.
Note.—Subscriptions and advertisemeut matter should be addressed to the Sarawak Gazette, C/o. Superintendent. Government Printing Office.
Letters and other contributions must be authenticated by writer's name sent privately to the Editor.
We cannot undertake to return rejected communications, or to give reasons for not inserting them.
Residents at the Outstations will confer an obligation by forwarding to the Office early intelligence of all matters of general interest in their respective neighbourhoods.
DECEMBER, 1951.
ALMANAC.
ADVERTISEMENTS.
[Dec. 28, 1951.]
ii
[12-11]
iii
ADVERTISEMENTS.
[Dec. 28, 1951.]
[6-4]
ADVERTISEMENTS.
iv
[Dec. 28, 1951.]
[12-7]
V
[Dec. 28, 1951.]
ADVERTISEMENTS.
[Dec. 28, 1951.]
ADVERTISEMENTS.
vi
vii
ADVERTISEMENTS.
[Dec. 28, 1951.]
ESTABLISHED IN SARAWAK OVER 90 YEARS.
IMPORTERS AND EXPORTERS.
RUBBER AND PRODUCE MERCHANTS.
GENERAL SECRETARIES.
SHIPPING AND AIRLINE AGENTS.
TRUSTEES UNDER WILLS.
ALL CLASSES OF INSURANCE.
TIMBER WORKING AND EXPORTERS.
BANKERS.
KUCHING
SARAWAK.
SARIKEI
SIBU
MIRI
MARUDI
BINATANG
KAPIT
BRUNEI STATE.
LIMBANG.
BRUNEI TOWN
KUALA BELAIT
NORTH BORNEO.
JESSELTON
SANDAKAN
LABUAN
Also branches throughout
MALAYA and SIAM.
[12—10]
Printed at the Government Printing Office, Kuching, Sarawak, by W. J. Chater, Government Printer.