 Vol. LXXIX.
No. 1139.
PRICE
KUCHING, Friday, 30th January, 1953.
50 CENTS
Contents.
Page.
Notes and Comments	...	...	...	1
Comings and Goings ... ... ... 4
Sibu Letter	...	...	...	4
The potentialities of Sarawak's dry padi varieties ... 6
Mr. Chips	...	...	...	7
The Dream Excise	...	...	...	8
1943-46, Fifth Division, Sarawak	...	... 11
Reports from the Lower Court	...	... 13
The Palm Tree and an Old Woman ...	... 13
The Festive Season in a Sarawak Outstation ... 14
Communique	...	...	... 15
Sarawak Club ... ... ... 15 Island Club, Sibu	...	...	... 15
The Sarawak Gazette.
FRIDAY, JANUARY 30th, 1953.
Notes and Comments.
Kuching experienced phenomenal rainfall on 6th
and 7th January, and the floods caused are said to be the worst in 20 years. According to the rain-gauge at Kuching Airport, 5.82 inches of rain fell between 8 a.m. on the 6th and 8 a.m. on the 7th, and 12.45 inches fell during the following 24 hours, 6.20 inches of it between 8 and 11 o'clock on the morning of the 7th. The road between Kuching and the Airport was impassable for several hours and parts of the Serian Road were impassable for 2 or 4 days. As may be seen from the photos we reproduce, parts of Kuching Town were flooded to a most unusual degree. Batu Kitang and Batu Kawa were under 10 feet of water and Siniawan. Buso and Tondong were extensively damaged. Severe damage to crops like pepper was caused and heavy losses of livestock occurred. Some bad slips were caused on the roads, a particularly heavy one occuring between Bau and Buso where traffic was halted for several days. It is reported that up-river quite a number of buildiugs were swept away by the floods.
We are pleased to relate that, by a Proclamation issued on the 16th January, the Emergency in the First Division has been lifted.
There seemed to be no end to social events in Kuching during the month. On the 9th Mr. Wee Bok Hee of the Land and Survey Department was married to our popular Miss Tan Sai Hua, who is attached to the Secretariat of Chinese Affairs and who has done such a lot of good social welfare work in Kuching. The reception was held at the Chung Hua School in Tabuan Road. We trust their married life will be very, very happy.
And then on the evening of the 12th a truly lavish pre-nuptial reception was held at Batu Kinyang, the residence of the late Mr. Ong Tiang Swee. The occasion was the marriage of Mr. Yong Chong Chung, the third son of Mr. and Mrs. Yong Khow of Miri, to one of Kuching's beautiful young ladies,
Miss Elizabeth Ong Siok Yan, the third daughter of Mr. and Mrs. Ong Hap Leong. All of Kuching seemed to be there and many had to park their cars more than a quarter of a mile away from Batu Kinyang so thick was the stream of traffic converg-ing on that part of Kuching. After two hours of solid feasting and drinking, the floor was cleared for dancing, which went on till close on 2 a.m. We offer our sincere wishes for great happiness to the bride and bridegroom.
On the 20th His Excellency the Governor per-formed the opening ceremony of the new premises in Khoo Hun Yeang Street of the Oversea-Chinese Banking Corporation. Champagne and an excel-lent buffet were provided. It was quite appropriate for His Excellency to perform the ceremony as he comes from a long line of distinguished bankers.
On the 25th, at Sarawak Union Club, Mr. Law Suang Pheng, the third son of Mr. and Mrs. C. P. Law, was married to Miss Goh Wan Sze, the youngest daughter of Mrs. Goh Joo Tong and the late Mr. Goh Joo Tong of Singapore. Once again Kuching society turned up in full force. A notice-able feature at the reception was the number of smart hats worn by the Indies. A very striking dress in tangerine was worn by the wife of one of the legal fraternity. To this young couple we also
offer our wishes for a long and very happy wedded life.	During the month we went to the Sylvia Cinema
to see the much discussed film "David and Bath-sheba". We were looking forward to seeing some-thing really wicked but frankly we were rather bored most of the time. Gregory Peek seemed to be continually mumbling away under his breath. However Susan Hayward has her points or perhaps one should say curves.
On the 12th a rather interesting craft arrived in Kuching in the shape of the motor vessel “La F e",
2
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, JANUARY 30, 1953.
having been brought over from Singapore by Mr. Blease, the Acting Shipping Master, Mr. Culshaw, Senior Ships Surveyor, and Mr. Baker of the Con-stabulary. "La F e is a Police Tender and has normal accommodation for two Senior Officers, a crew of ten and cots for 18 police; but if necessary she could carry about 40 police on short trips. She is 75 feet long, draws n little over 7 feet and can cruise at 10 knots. She carries an outboard motor boat capable of at least 19 knots for use as a chaser. On the trip over from Singapore "La F e" behaved very well and those who are versed in sea lore describe her as a lively but good sea boat. We reproduce a picture of her on another page in this issue.
Our roving reporter has sent in some particulars of Operation Face-Lifting which took place in the Land and Survey Office at Kuching on the day before the arrivnl of their lady barrister. Apparently the place was hoovered, all tables, chairs and counters were moved to new positions and even the Director's safe was moved twelve feet. Also we now notice that besides the Director, who always wears a tie, the other Senior Service Officers are taking to ties. This makes us wonder if men's
fashions in Kuching will ever return to those of pre-war days, when it was de rigueur to go to the office, at least in the morning, wearing a coat and tie; and many also sported those uncomfort-able articles of headwear which are still worn by the “Mad dogs of Englishmen" at Elstree. The only day in the week when a little slackness in office dress was by custom allowed was on “P.W.D Day" i.e. Friday, when Residents, especially in out-stations, were supposed to pop into the P.W.D. store and see how many scythe hones the mowers had got through during the week and also walk around the station and inspect major works like the building of a foot-bridge in the kampong. On "P.W.D. Day" it was quite in order to go down to the office in khaki slacks; but in Kuching the last Resident to carry out this ritual on Fridav was Mr. W. F. Dick, who was Resident, First Division, 1934-35 and Acting Government Secretary in 1936.
We sometimes think that it would do no harm to return to the dress fashions of those pre-war days for many an undignified figure was made to look at least presentable in the eyes of the public by wearing a coat and tie, even though he usually took his coat off as soon as he reached his office.
The flood waters in Rock Road, Kuching.
Central Road, Kuching, during the floods.
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, JANUARY 30, 1953.
3
Near the junction of Rock Road and Ong Tiang Swee Road. “Dear me! I simply must get home and prepare my husband's lunch."
Stores and dwellings under water at Panchor, 27th Mile Kuching-Serian Rd.
Rock Road with Junior Service Quarters in background.
4
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, JANUARY 30, 1953.
The Police Tender M.V. La F e.
Comings and Goings.
January has been a brisk month for comings and goings and it will, perhaps, be best if we start off on this occasion by enumerating those who have arrived in Sarawk during January.
Those returning from leave comprise Dr. H. W. W. Harcus—accompanied by Mrs. Harcus—our Dental Officer, who resumes duty at the General Hospital, Kuching; Mr. G. E. Wilford, Geologist, returning from furlough to continue his duties with the Geological Survey Department: and Abang Othman bin Abang Haji Moasili who has been on a course at the Police College at Ryton-on-Dunsmore for the past six months or more and who is going to Sarikei as Officer Superintending the Sarikei Constabulary Sector. We should like to take this opportunity of welcoming to Sarawak Mrs. Harcus and to say how grateful we know a number of people will be at the retnrn of her husband.
New arrivals are Miss B. J. Smith, Sister Tutor, who comes to the General Hospital, Kuching: Mr. J. R. Sandison, Chief Broadcasting Engineer, who was here for a short time during the first half of 1952 and who is to supervise the establishment of our Broadcasting Station: Mr. C. R. Boucher who has arrived on transfer from Sierra Leone to take up the position of Assistant Treasurer, Kuching: and Miss B. K. Searle. a barrister, who is taking up the appointment of Registrar, Land and Survey Department, and will be stationed in Kuching. Finally, an old friend returns to us in the person of Mr. K. E. Michniewicz who resigned from the Service whilst on furlough in Australia and who, having decided that Sarawak is not a bad place after all, has retired to the fold and has gone to Miri to take over as Superintendent of Lands and Surveys, Fourth and Fifth Divisions.
Mr. I. C. Gorden, accompanied by his wife, has arrived to take over the managership of Messrs. Sime, Darby & Co. Ltd. Kuching: and Mr. B. T. Joyce, accompanied by his wife and child, has arrived to take the place of Mr. G. S. Smith as the local manager of Harrissons & Crosfield (Malaya) Ltd. Yet another new arrival is Mr. J. D. Adams, who is here to take over the position of Manager
of the Chartered Bank of India, Australia & China in Sarawak in place of Mr. J. Robertson, who has been temporarily filling the vacancy caused by the departure last year of Mr. H. D. Mackay.
To all these we should like to offer a warm welcome to Sarawak and hope that they will be happy in this country.
Departures during Jsnuary were more than usual and comprised Mr. J. H. Ellis, Deputy Chief Secretary, who is going on furlough, and Mr. R. H. Hickling, Assistant Attorney-General, also on furlough. We who scratch our heads every month to find copy for this Gazette will be hard pressed during the coming months, as one of our most valued and regular contributors is leaving us in the person of Mr. Hickling. Articles of all kinds— learned, serious and humorous—have flowed regu-larly from his facile pen. Mr. and Mrs. J. Shannon left Sarawak in the first half of the month. Mr. Shannon is proceeding on leave prior to retirement, and both he and Mrs. Shannon will be very much missed in Kuching and we wish them all good fortune in the future. Mr. T. G. Dewhurst of the Public Works Department, accompanied by Mrs. Dewhurst, also left during January.
Two well-known members of the local business community departed in January—one for the United Kingdom and the other for Kuala Lumpur. Mr. A. D. Dant, local director of Messrs. Sime, Darby & Co. Ltd., accompanied by his family left in the "Rajah Brooke" on the 24th January en route for Great Britain. We understand Mr. Dant's departure has been occasioned by the fact that he is obliged to undergo an operation of an unusual and difficult type after his arrival at home. We hope that Mr. Dant will recover rapidly from his operation and return to Kuching before very long. Mr. and Mrs. G. S. Smith and family have gone to Kuala Lumpur where Mr. Smith is to be posted in future.
Sibu Letter.
"The period under review"—as the best corres-pondents would say—covers that Season which from
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, JANUARY 30, 1953.
5
time immemorial has always been designated as "festive". This is a little misleading in Sibu where few if any seasons could ever be described as non-festive but we refer of course to the period of Christmas and the New Year.
Christmas is especially a busy time for the clergy. For the Anglican Church the Reverend Father Lees came over from Kuching and in addition to taking 2 very well attended services in the Council Chamber, Sibu, also found time to visit Sarikei and was made welcome on his return to Sibu at a special gathering of Old Thomians. The Roman Catholic Church of The Sacred Heart had been most effectively decorated by the Nuns with a beautifully designed crib. Brothers Austin and Charles came over from St. Joseph's School, Kuching, and the congregation for Mid-night Mass was so large that some hundreds failed to gain admission. On Christmas Day the Church was again crowded. The last Mass at 9.00 p.m. was followed by the Bene-diction. The Methodist Church were equally active. Up at Kapit there were special Christmas cele-brations in 3 long houses and down in Sibn apart from Services in the Church there were parties of most energetic waits who started Carol singing at 2.30 a.m. on Christmas morning and continued until dawn!
On Christmas Eve afternoon the Island Club staged its annual children's Christmas Party. Some 19 children enjoyed games, eats, drinks and some particularly ear-splitting whistles (next year's Com-mittee please note—no whistles!). Father Christ-mas had intended to arrive by reindeer but it was deemed inadvisable as his reindeer had had no previous experience of "jelatongs" and "batangs" and so instead he appeared rather mysteriously (but quite understandably) from behind the bar. He proved extremely popular, spoke with a marked Irish accent and announced his firm intention of returning to Tipperary that night, which only goes to show that despite all our modern advances in the science of jet propulsion we still have a long way to go to challenge the supremacy of reindeer traction! There were several Carol parties in the early evening and later there was a most enjoyable dance at the Sarawak Recreation Club. Despite these diversions and activities many people seemed to find it extremely difficult to get to sleep at all on Christmas night even with the aid of such powerful soporifics as Chinese crackers ignited under the floor boards of their bedrooms.
Strange things too happened at the police station where it is rumoured that some confusion of thought led to the lockers up and the locked up reversing their customary roles! The ubiquitous casuarina, the turkey, the Christmas pudding, the mince pies and the heavy slumber were much in evidence on Christmas Day and that night Louise and Ian Pembarton staged one of their inimitable parties at Bank House, despite the fact that Louise herself was still officially in hospital after an operation. She made a very gallant and welcome appearance carried across the threshold by "Doe" Niblet with a solicitousness and skill which delighted all beholders and even induced one Borneo Company guest to murmur something about taking a short course at the Royal College of Surgeons on his next leave. A sumptuous respast was followed by a dis-tribution of presents from the tree, each guest in turn being required to do a short "turn" before qualifying, and many and varied were the turns that resulted! Games, songs and other light heartedness
followed in quick succession until the party broke up in hilarious confusion in the small (but rapidly increasing) hours of the morning.
Not so very long after that the Island Club held its Annual General Meeting and took nearly 2 hours and an unsually large number of soft drinks to get through a very modest agenda. During the meeting, one member, delighted with the discovery that he was so far recovered as to be able to write his own name, proceeded to do so on every scrap of paper that he could see with the result that he found himself elected to the Committee by an all time record majority.
On the 27th of December the Anglican Church organised their annual children’s party. The Foochow Association very kindly lent their premises and this year over 1400 children attended and received gifts from a very busy Father Christmas. Apart from games and refreshments there was carol singing by a small choir specially trained by Thelma Niblet, and dressed in a most attractive pixie costume, community carol singing, a procession past the Crib and to end up with a film show operated by Jim Bettison.
The same evening the Borneo Company held an excellent dance. Two bars were provided and an ingenious system of coloured bulbs guided patrons from one bar to the other and back again on a one way traffic principle so that the risks of collision were reduced to a minimum. These thoughtful precautions were much appreciated especially by the large number of seafaring gentlemen who attended the party, to many of whom the Borneo Company's Compound was as an uncharted water—although as a matter of sober fact water was scarcely the most conspicuous feather of the Borneo Company's com-pound that evening. Much speculation was aroused as the manner in which our hosts had managed to instal a long bar in the garden, and it was only when, with dawn fast approaching, the last of the guests took their leave and the entire structure collapsed that we tumbled to the simple secret of how it had been supported all night!
On the afternoon of New Year's Eve the annual football game between the Island Club and The Rest resulted in a win for the latter by 3 goals to l. The game was watched by a number of keenly interested spectators including His Excellency the Governor who had arrived 2 days before to do us the honour of seeing us safely into the New Year. The match was keenly contested but the Island Club's tactics were unfortunately based on the mis-taken assumption that the second half would only last 15 minutes whereas in fact it lasted 30. Even so no-one was carried off.
That evening a remarkable number of personalities converged on the Residency for dinner, dancing, and the libations and jollifications usually attendant upon a change of year. Space does not permit justice to be done to all but mention must be made of His Excellency. The Tweedle of Dum, and The Honourable Tweedldee, who apart from the neatness of their costumes displayed aristocracy in every line of their magnificent figures; of Miss Betty Pargeter who won the ladies prize in a costume made by Louise Pemberton as Aladdin; of the arrogant King Charles the Second who took the gentleman's prize and was the first to start cheering himself about it when the announcement was made and the last to leave off (although as we all knew he owed his success entirely to Nell Gwyn). The great event
6
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, JANUARY 30, 1953.
on New Year Day was the Archer Cup Bowls Com-petition from which Jerry Howard emerged a very popular winner. There were less competitions than usual this year, quite a number of potential contest-ants being on leave and most of the new arrivals being short of the qualifying number of averages. But the standard was high and the numerous spectators had plenty to interest them.
On the 2nd of January, His Excellency the Governor’s very welcome visit came to an end and he returned to Kuching on the "Mermaid" with, we hope, stimulating memories of Sibu's joie de vivre.
Space does not permit of a detailed account of other Sibu activities during the month some of which will have to stand over to the next letter but we would like to make mention of the great pleasure afforded us to receive visits, albeit very short ones, from Dr. W. Clyde. C.M.G., the Foreign Office Adviser on Food production, Mr. Elmer Newton, the Director of United States Information Services who was accompanied by Mr. Philip Jones, the Right Reverend The Bishop of Borneo and the Hon. Mr. Justice Rogers (the latter to lend timely aid to your grateful correspondent!).
J.R.B.
The potentialities of Sarawak's dry padi varieties.
by Mr. R. W. R. Muller, Director of Agriculture.
Part 1.
Many different opinions have been expressed as to the origin of the cultivated padi plant. The most likely theory seems to be that it was originally selected, somewhere in Eastern Asia, from wild plants growing on fertile alluvium. The site was probably subject to periodical inundation from neighbouring rivers although it could not be regarded as a permanent swamp; the climate was undoubtedly hot and humid and abundant water was certainly available to the plant during the growing period, but as the plant flowered and seeded the climate probably became drier and more sunny, with a marked reduction in the hours of daylight. Such conditions are of course found in many parts of the tropics at some distance from the equator, and even in parts of the sub-tropics; it is in fact in parts of the sub-tropics where the highest yields of padi per acre in the world are now obtained.
The cultivated padi plant is extremely sensitive to small changes in conditions (including minor periodical differences in the hours of daylight during its growing period). However, farmers throughout the ages have made countless selections of padi, many of the varieties being tolerant of conditions far less favourable than the original habitat; whilst such varieties may be tolerant of unfavourable conditions they usually are not potentially such high yielders as the varieties used under better conditions.
Thus Sarawak’s swamp varieties are generally tolerant of peaty conditions in the water of the permanent swamps in which they are planted and they will flower and seed without any marked
reduction in the hours of daylight (this of course being a necessary quality in any variety grown near the equator). Some of the swamp varieties will, in addition, tolerate occasional flooding with brackish water. Few of the equatorial swamp varieties of South East Asia appear to be very high yielders and the ceiling yields of the majority, when grown under swamp conditions, only seem to be of the order of 700 gantangs per acre (this may sound high for Sarawak but is actually only about half the average yields per acre normally obtain-able in the best padi areas of the sub-tropics). For some reason at present unknown these equatorial swamp vnrieties (when grown under swamp con-ditions at least) only seem to give small and unprofitable responses to fertilisers and any hope of major increases in yields of our swamp padis does not seem to lie in this direction.
On the other hand the so called "dry" padis whilst still requiring a heavy rainfall and a humid atmosphere are to some extent tolerant of short dry periods that would be fatal to swamp padis. The view has generally been held in the past that the dry padis are very low yielders and have few poten-tialities as far as agricultural development is concerned. Soon after he arrived in Sarawak in 1946 the writer found that this was not necessarily the case as far as Sarawak's dry padis are con-cerned; he was soon impressed with their hardiness, and with the good yields they could produce in a favourable season when grown on a well aerated water retaining sponge of soil mixed with half burnt and half decayed vegetable matter that was well supplied with available nutrients in the form of a plant ash. The high quality of the rice obtained from dry padis as compared with the poor quality often obtained from local swamp padi farms in Sarawak was also judged impressive. Even more important was the fact that as a result of small scale trials he found that some at least of the dry padis often gave very large responses to small applications of manures: the responses were not always obtained but have since been obtained with increasing certainty. As far as one can judge from available literature this ability to respond to ferti-lisers is a most unusual character in an equatorial padi and it does suggest that some at least of Sarawak’s dry padis may possess valuable qualities not previously suspected (incidentally FAO have recently started a scheme at Guttack in India with the object of producing equatorial wet padis that do respond to fertilisers by crossing equatorial wet padis with sub-tropical wet padis).
Small scale experiments with dry padis have been conducted by the Sarawak Department of Agricul-ture during the last six years. By using only small doses of fertilisers it does seem possible to grow quite good crops of dry padi in Sarawak on the same piece of land year after year provided the soil is of reasonable texture (this experimental system is in marked contrast to the usual system of hill padi farming in Sarawak where bush fallows of at least seven years and prefearbly twelve years should elapse between successive crops). Provided the land is not too steep no major difficulties have been encountered in performing the main cultivations with a medium four wheeled tractor. Various pests have at times been troublesome but there seems a reasonable chance of at least keeping on equal terms with them. Considerable damage from soil erosion does sometimes occur during heavy rainstorms but once the fibrous root system of the padi plant is well established erosion is less than one would
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, JANUARY 30, 1953.
7
expect. The main trouble so far has been to retain adequate moisture in the soil during the short dry spells to which Sarawak's climate is subject; whilst, as suggested earler, dry padis are to some extent tolerant of shortage of water in the soil, a check to growth is still inevitable during a dry period. A great advantage of the dry padis, which has been well impressed on observers of these experiments. is that the dry padis can be planted on land which is not subject to the occasional unexpected and dis-astrous floods which can do so much damage in Sarawak; this advantage does of course also to a considerable extent apply to pump irrigated wet padi as cultivated by the Department of Agricul-ture.
Experimental work on dry padi cultivation con-tinues and some promising results are being obtained. The work will be described in the second part of this article. On present indications Sarawak must continue to depend for its own regular supplies of rice on intensive wet padi cul-tivation (particularly when developed on the basis of well designed pump rrigated schemes); however, there is now a good chance, in view of the experi-mental results that are being obtained, that useful additional supplies of padi may be obtainable in good years from intensive dry padi farming (a con-siderable part of Sarawak's rice supplies are of course normally produced by intensive dry padi farming); it is also possible that intensive dry padi farming might eventually yield an exportable surplus. Pre-war it might have seemed ridiculous for Sarawak to ever consider exporting surplus padi or rice and competing in the world rice markets, but the position is very different now as pndi is rapidly becoming a valuable market garden crop and it seems very likely that padi prices will remain at a high level for years to come. Intensive methods of dry padi cultivation that would not have been economic pre-war can now be profitably used.
It is tempting to think of dry padi farming development in terms of large scale mechanical cultivation, mechanically operated seed drills, fertiliser distributers, combine harvesters and so on. Grandiose schemes on such lines at this stage could lead to only one result—dismal, expensive failures—in brief a "groundnut scheme". The correct and sound approach to the matter is to first further study the methods of the skilled Sarawak dry padi farmer and to learn the wisdom he has accumulated over generations and to continue the experimental work that has been started. Gradu-ally one can then hope to superimpose modern methods in a suitable from on Sarawak's existing systems of dry padi farming.
(To be concluded.)
Mr. Chips
BY
Brown Jack.
It is clear to the student of history that the records available to future generations are in one particular respect often inadequate and insufficient. Who to-day can tell us the colour of Bucephalus or the height of White Surrey; and how many, indeed, can answer any questions at all about such less famous but perhaps equally meritorious quadrupeds as Sleipnir, Copenhagen or Spumador. There
recently disappeared from the Sarawak scene a horse also not undeserving of honour—Mr. Chips who has been put down a year after his retirement from racing—a year which he spent in well deserved ease at Simanggang. It might be as well to record, before they are entirely forgotten, one or two facts about an animal which it would be no exaggeration to describe as the outstanding figure in Sarawak racing during the first post-war season in the autumn of 1949.
He arrived in this country in July of that year, already an elderly gentleman who had first raced in Malaya nearly seven years before and who had survived the Japanese occupation. His perform-ances immediately prior to his arrival in Kuching had been far from distinguished and his appearance on arrival was such as to stimulate an active corres-pondence in the Sarawak newspapers on the import of animals fit only for the knackers' yard. His unfortunate purchasers received on all sides the commiseration and sympathy of their friends; in spite of the fact that one of these purchasers, who was deputed to be not entirely ignorant in such matters, was heard in an unusually unguarded and expansive moment to state that he was not entirely dissatisfied with the animal, it was felt that his owners had made a most injudicious purchase.
He disappeared into a small, select, Across-River establishment devoted to the care of horses; and appeared again looking considerably fitter but still a gaunt and elderly figure, for the first Post-War Sarawak meeting. On the first day, owing to a slight misunderstanding between his rider and the starter, he took no part in his race; and his first active performance was in the Autumn Cup which he won wilh snrprising ease. This was the first of three consecutive races, all at distances of a mile or over, in which he carried increasing weights to victory; on his fourth outing he was splendidly defeated in one of the closest finishes ever seen on the Sarawak racecourse. This was his last really first-class performance, which was not, perhaps, surprising, in view of the fact that he had now attained the respectable age of eleven: but he did succeed, with lower weights and in a lower class, in winning three more races and being placed several times during his last year's racing.
The answer in his case to the eternally difficult question of why some horses run faster than others was not difficult to find. Very little is known about his maternal relations but research in the Australian Stud Book disclosed that on his sire's side he came of truly royal blood and was a grandson of the great Hurry On, winner of two classics in England thirty years ago, his sire being the result of a mating of Hurry On with a Stephan the Great mare. He was a big-boned chestnut with a white blaze and four white socks. He had a good shoulder and a classic head. When racing he showed the same headstrong hard-pulling characteristic as did his paternal grandsire; and he was almost certainly the most outstanding personality in Sarawak racing in the years 1949-50. R.I.P.
It might be appropriate to mention briefly another disappearance from the Sarawak Turf—the Yuntang stables which, I am informed, have now per-manently closed. They close at the end of a year in which they have almost entirely dominated horse-racing in Sarawak. With only four horses in training for most of the year 1952 (indeed only two after Mrs. Ellis' departure on leave in September),
8
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, JANUARY 30, 1953.
horses from this stable won, during the year, the Sarawak St. Leger, the Governor's Cup, the Autumn Cup and eleven other races with a total in prize money of nearly $17,000. These successes were not all achieved with English importations although Cherith and Hat Trick made their con-tribution to the total; more than half the races were won with $500 importations from Malaya. Those followers of racing who delight in the spect-acle of a fit horse will undoubtedly share my regret that we shall not again see Yuntang-trained horses in the paddock at Padungan; but no one would regard it as unnatural or inhuman if the stable’s less successful competitors heaved a faint sigh of relief.
The Dream Excise.
(All characters in this narrative, apart from supernatural ones, are entirely fictitious.)
Meeting my friend Chundi last week called to mind how strange are the vicissitudes which may overtake even the most harmless individual, if once he is caught up in the machine of government. For Chundi was an inoffensive man, who abode in God's peace and the Queen's Ulu Lungit, where he was possessed of a small rubber garden, sufficient to maintain him in modest circumstances together with his wife and two children. Yet he was made the sport of such hazards as rarely fall to the lot of any law-abiding citizen, and that through circumstances entirely beyond his control.
Chundi was exactly as other men are, save only that he nightly dreamed of the Devil and woke with a shout at two o'clock of the morning. This he had done as long as memory served, and had done it with such unfailing regularity that nightly at that hour the cocks crew, the dogs barked, the swine grunted, and all who dwelt in the long house turned over on their mats. This eccentricity was not, however, taken ill by the majority of his fellows, indeed they had become so habituated to it that at two o'clock they wakened and turned over even though he were not in the house at all. Some few only who suffered from insomnia held it against him, but of these more later.
The beginning of all Chnndi's misfortunes lay in a dispute with one Lim, a mercer in the neighbour-ing bazaar. It happened that on one occasion Chundi had gone to the shop of this Lim and had purchased therefrom a pair of blue drawers, which upon returning to his long house he discovered to lack buttons. As this deficiency considerably limited their utility, he returned them and demanded reim-bursement, but was so villanously used by Lim that he filed a suit against him in the district court. Here the dispute became involved, for the neigh-bours of Lim deposed that in fact the drawers had had buttons, but that these had been violently burst asunder by ill-usage. The neighbours of Chundi, on the other hand, steadfastly supported his con-tention that there never had been any buttons. As might have been expected in a case of such complexity, it was carried on appeal to the tribunal of the Divisional Resident.
Now it happened that the Divisional Resident at that time was a person of gracious presence but of infirm understanding, and through misapprehending the tenor of the case, comniitted both parties for
sedition, so that they were together clapped into the Bridewell, where they would have long remained but for a fortunate chance. For two days later there fell the birthday of the mother of one Tan Chang Tee, a timberer, who, as he was engaged in extensive illicit fellings, invited to the feast the Divisional Resident and diverse other functionaries. As a consequence of this lavish entertainment the Resident was surfeited, and that night dreamed of Hell and the Devil and much else besides, so that he awoke the following morning gravely disturbed at all that he had seen. When he had reached the office he summoned the chief clerk, who was a noted authority on the interpretation of dreams, and sought from him the meaning of this one. But though the clerk made diagrams and drawings and used instruments of the utmost exactitude, he was utterly unable to arrive at any interpretation, for which the Resident was much chagrined and ordered that his increment should be stopped. Then a young constabe named Unti, who had recently graduated from Kuching and had an eye to advancement, recalled that one had recently been committed who had a certain reputation in the matter of dreams.
Forthwith Chundi was brought before the Resident, and the circumstances being explained to him, readily interpreted the dream, which was that through the perdition of a certain person much good would shortly accrue. The Divisional Resi-dent was over-joyed at this intelligence, and hardly had he dismissed Chundi with gifts and high com-mendation, than word was brought that on the right of the feast there was deceased his aunt Dorothea, a devout woman widely known for her piety and good works, who had bequeathed to him in sole proprietary the best bawdy house in Caracas together with another of more slender repute in Porto Bello. These raised him to such affluence that he began to use a wide independence of judge-ment and so acquircd a reputation for eccentricity, for which he was shortly afterwards retired the service, and now lives in Boscastle in the County of Cornwall. A few days after these events the gaoler discover that the mercer Lim was yet con-fined, whilst the other party committed with him was gone. He therefore discharged Lim, who returned to his shop swearing that he would yet be revenged upon Chundi, and indeed the occasion for this arose sooner than he expected, for the Dream Excise was shortly after imposed.
For the benefit of those who live at some distance from the seat of Government a few words on the background of the Dream Excise will be season-able. It will be recalled that in the autumn of last year a great outcry was raised by the urban popu-lation that they were wrung by taxation beyond all endurance, indeed that the whole weight of the fisc fell upon them, whilst the inhabitants of the ulu areas escaped with a few trifling imposts. They therefore begged for a large remission of taxation. When this matter was debated in Council the inequity of the situation was readily admitted; it was agreed, however, that this would be more pro-fitably remedied by imposing a vigorous tax upon the ulu people rather than by remitting taxtaion on the urban dwellers, and some excise was sought which would by its nature bear on the former but byepass the latter. Those well read in history urged either a stamp duty or an excise on tea. But those of a better acquaintance with the country pointed out that, save for certificates of registration
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, JANUARY 30, 1953.
9
and de-regisration of schools, documents of any sort were wholly unknown in the ulu, whilst tea was not used except as a pulse for ailing swine, and now with the diminution of disease and the increased longevity of the animals, it was likely to fall into total desuetude. In neither case, it was argued, would the yield of the tax be commensurate with the cost of collection.
Mr. Beauchief now put forward his proposal for an excise on dreams, which was roundly applauded by the Senior Almoner, who said that an excise on dreams of a licentious character would much con-duce to the amendment of manners in the country. Mr. Beauchief explained, however, that his proposal was not for an excise on dreams of a licentious character, for such dreams were normally harboured in the bosom and not made public, so that the levy of an excise on them would present the greatest difficulty. His purpose was an excise on dreams of a strictly ominous character, for such dreams were invariably made public. In consequence of them a man divorces his wife, builds a house. or goes on a journey, and makes no secret of the fact that he does so because of an ominous dream. Such dreams were readily taxable and had the advantage of being peculiar to the ulu population, for the town dwellers in Sarawak were mostly an infidel crew, who recked not one jot of dreams and omens. The Dreams Excise would therefore redress the balance of tax-ation as between the two sections of the population. The wisdom and ingenuity of Mr. Beauchief were warmly applauded and his proposals shortly achieved the force of law.
No sooner was the excise imposed than the mercer Lim hastened to denounce Chundi to the District Officer as a person notoriously given to ominous dreaming and so heavily chargeable to the state. Now the District Officer being newly graduated from the London School of Economics was a young man widely read in curious authors, and his handling of the case showed much insight and acumen. Of the fact of Chundi’s dreams there was no dispute, the question turned on whether or not they were ominous. The District Officer ruled an ominous dream was one which purported to amend or modify the course which the dreamer would otherwise pursue. Hence as Chundi was of the Christian persuasion, to dream of the Devil presaged dam-nation and was a monition or omen to amendment of life. Therefore his dreams from birth upwards (for the excise was retrospective) were ominous and liable to excise at the rate of one dollar for every dream.
When it came to determining Chundi's age for the purpose of assessing the sum payable consider-able difficulty was experienced, for whilst his family swore that he was not above fifteen certain male-valent persons from his long house, who suffered from insomnia, as has been mentioned before, deposed that he was hard on ninety. The District Officer therefore settled the matter by throwing dice and ruled that for fiscal purposes Chundis age was forty, the sum due to the Public Chest being consequently $14,600.00. The case was appealed.
Although normally the appeal would have been dismissed, so masterful had been the handling of the case by the District Officer, nevertheless the administration conceived that in the public interest it should be heard afresh in Kuching, so that the greatest publicity might be given to the new excise and the stem resolution of Government in enforcing
it might be impressed upon the public. In this connection I was retained for the defence and so became conversant with the intricacies of the matter. In the new trial I bent my efforts to showing that Chundi's dreams were not of an ominous character, and I was able to call two wit-nesses of great weight in support of my contention.
The first was the Rev. Mr. MacNachtall, who deposed that Chundi's dreams of the Devil could not be ominous in the sense of tending to his amendment for he was already damned for certain, indeed he had been predestined to damnation from all eternity and nothing that he could do could aalter the fact. At this point Chundi's family, completely misunderstanding the tenor of the defence, fell a-wailing and were removed from the court. The Rev. Mr. MacNachtall went on to enlarge on the forthcoming dissolution of the universe, so that the atmosphere of the court became exceedingly sulphurous and all were much relieved when the presiding justice bade him stand down. Neverthe-less it was obvious that the case for the prosecution was badly shaken.
My second witness was the Rev. Ninnian Fitz-Gibbon, a Licenciate in Moral Philosophy and a man of high standing in the world of letters. He deposed that the tenets of the persuasion to which Chundi adhered were of do heretical and damnable a character that all who professed them were neces-sarily lost. Hence his dreams of the Devil were not ominous in the sense of being monitions to amendment, but were merely a foretaste of the wrath to come. Now it happened that the pro-cuting counsel was of the same persuasion as Chundi, and was much riled by this deposition, further he sought to retrieve his case before it were too late, and so fell upon the witness with great violence in cross-examination. But here he was signally routed, and the Rev. Ninnian FitzGibbon carried his advantage still further by openly con-victing him of the heresy of Pelagius. At this the presiding justice was so appalled that he adjourned the court.
It was evident that as far as argument went the prosecution's case was completely overthrown, and Mr. Tan Choon Chong, who keeps a gaming house opposite to the High Court, refused to accept any further bets on the verdict. But meanwhile the administration had debated with itself and had con-cluded that, whatever the abstract rights and wrongs of the case might be, a stern example must be made lest the whole excise fall to the ground. When therefore the court re-assembled the presiding justice gave judgement for the prosecution and sentenced Chundi to imprisonment for the term of his natural life, adding (for he was a pedantic man who set much by the letter of the law) "or until such time as he shall have paid into the Public Treasury the sum of $14,600.00.” It must be admitted, however, that he used much humanity in delivering this sentence, for he exhorted Chundi that, as he was now being put away from amongst his fellows, he should use the time remaining to him for meditation on his latter end, and so amend his life that these dreadful prognostications should be falsified, and that he should finally attain to a lasting bliss. All this Chundi took very ill and expressed himself so profanely that the justice was for giving him an additional term of imprisonment for contempt of court, but reflecting that such an incarceration must necessarily be posthumous, he forbore, and the proceedings were concluded.
10
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, JANUARY 30, 1953.
That same night the mercer Lim, who had come to Kuching for the case, spent fifty-four dollars on the purchase of fire crackers with which to celebrate the achievement of his purpose. As he was carrying these to his lodging they became ignited and exploded, whereby he was utterly consumed at the corner of Rock Road and the Main Bazaar, thus necessitating a diversion of traffic, a circumstance which many regarded as a just recompense for his malevolence.
Chundi was now lodged in the common gaol, where he continued to dream nightly of the Devil and to wake with a shout at two o'clock of the morning. In the beginning this roused no little animosity against him, but soon it became such a matter of habit that the entire gaol woke and turned over at that hour and even the prison time-piece was regulated by it. He proved the best of prisoners, both companionable to his fellows and helpful to the authorities so that befere long he was set apart to assist the Munciple, and in this capacity was accustomed to follow him to market each morning for the purchase of vegetables.
In the course of one of these expeditions he mentioned to the Manciple that his dream of the previous night had been more than ordinarily terrible, for he had beheld the Devil riding on a black horse which had a white face. Now the Manciple, though in other respects a man of upright life, was in secret given to the vice of gambling, in particular to the laying of wagers on horses. When Chundi mentioned to him a black horse with a white face, he recalled that such an one would run the following Saturday at Singapore. Very rashly therefore he laid one hundred dollars of his savings upon it, and the following Monday learned that not only had it won, but that his hundred dollars had become one thousand. From now onwards he assiduously cultivated Chundi and daily enquired as to his dreams. Yet a week later and the Devil again appeared riding upon a horse, this time a grey one with a black tail. Having discovered that such a horse was due to run at Penang, the Manciple greatly daring put five hundred dollars upon it, with the same result save that his money was even more extravagantly multiplied.
A short time later the Manciple appeared at the Seat of Justice and paying into the Public Treasury the sum of $14,600.00, procured the release of Chundi, with whom he had previously signed a contract that he would reveal to none other but himself the content of his dreams. He also retired the service and set up for a private gentleman of means, which caused no small stir about the town.
Now followed a season of prosperity for Chundi, for he was provided with a small cabin in the Manciple's garden where he lived with his wife and children, being found in food and clothing and allowed fifty cents per diem as pocket money. In addition to this the Manciple daily paid the one dollar excise which was due on his dream of the previous night. The Manciple also enjoyed a season of prosperity, though on a much more spacious scale, for he rapidly became one of the most affluent persons in the town and was shortly sworn of the Council.
How far he would have continued to prosper I cannot say, for so long as Chundi continued to dream and horses to run there seemed no limit which his affluence might not attain. He was, however, undone by his wife, for she. as is the
manner with wives, became much inflated with her husband's success, and seeing him saluted as "Honourable" in public places and much sought after by persons who desired his interest, she con-ceived that she must maintain an extravagant state. Whereas previously she had been content to pay two cents for a seat on a hackney wheelbarrow, now she must have the largest of American cars, and though before she had been glad to take in washing, now she must have more gowns than she could possibly wear.
This extravagance of the Manciple's wife coin-cided with a period of small returns from Chundi’s dreams, for throughout several months the horses that won were all favourites and the odds that they paid were exceedingly short. In some perplexity, therefore, he sought the advice of a necromancer whose name I must forbear to mention. This practitioner pointed out that now Chundi dreamed which horse would win, whereas it would be much more advantageous if the horse won which Chundi dreamed of. If this could be brought about it would be simple by means of photographs and other suggestive means to induce him to dream of horses with long odds and these must certainly win. The Manciple agreed that this would indeed be advan-tageous, but questioned how it could be brought about. The necromancer, however, assured him that he was in a position to effect it in return for the share of one fifth of the net gains, and this accordingly they compacted. The basis of the prescription was a certain fragrant herb which is found about the ninth mile on the Simanggang Road. If this were decocted and administered at a certain planetary conjunction the result would be that whatever horse Chundi could be induced to dream about would certainly win, howsoever long the odds.
In high expectation the Manciple prepared the draught and having administered it to Chundi gave him an enlarged photograph of a horse whose odds were exceedingly long, which he should steadfastly gaze upon until he fell asleep. At two o'clock of the morning Chundi's wife came running to the Manciple in great alarm and besought him to send for a physician, for her husband had failed to wake with a shout and must certainly be dead. Much agitated the Manciple sent him to the General Hospital, where he awoke at six o'clock and ate so hearty a breakfast that he was summarily ejected by the Matron. He professed upon returning to have had no dream whatsoever. The following night the Manciple sat by his bedside, and was appalled when he again failed to wake with a shout at two but slept soundly till six. On subsequent nights his behaviour was the same. Potions, decoctions, incantations, and injections were all tried without effect during the weeks that followed, but by no means could Chundi be induced to dream again. Finally the Manciple summoned preachers of diverse persuasions who enlarged to him on the horrid aspect of the Devil and the nightmare terrors of Hell Fire, but all to no purpose, for he slept as soundly as ever.
And that is the end. Of the Manciple I say no more, for he is a good man at bottom and I would be loath to embarrass him. Chundi and his family returned to the long house in the Ulu Lungit, where he resumed the tapping of his rubber and the cultivation of his farm. The night of his arrival he was awakened at two o'clock of the morning by the crowing of cocks, the barking of dogs, the
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, JANUARY 30, 1953.
11
grunting of swine, and the turning over on their mats of the inhabitants of the long house, but on subsequent nights he was undisturbed even by this, for he slept soundly in the sleep of the just and the Dream Excise passed him by.
H. Pomphret St. Auben.
1943-46, Fifth Division, Sarawak
by
Chong Ah Onn, b.e.m.
[Note. Mr. Chong Ah Onn is a member of the Junior Service working in the General Hospital, Kuching.— Ed.]
PART III.
The journey to the interior took place in the middle of May, 1945. After some hours on the way from Lawas I met the Native Officer and the Dresser-in-Charge, both from Lawas, in a Murut long-house. Then we continued the journey together. After two days on the tracks we came to Pa Brayong—the first S.R.D. permanent station. We met a few old friends who also came from the coast. This section was under the command of Sergeant Nibbs.
Next day, we continued our journey further up from Pa Brayong. We spent the first night at Pa Mararap and the second at Pa Lupeng before reaching Long Simado, the second commanding station of the S.R.D. where there were several allied Officers, commanded by Captain Eric Edmeades (later M.C.). On our arrival, the Penghulu of Long Simado introduced us to them. We greeted each other very sincerely and exchanged conversation, and they immediately offered us cigarettes and tobacco.
For nearly one and a half years, throughout the occupation, we had not known the taste and odour of cigarettes or tobacco, and this was the first of its kind. After a long period, which filled the air with sweetness, we thought a last we had come to the Garden of Eden! Anyway, we were out of misery.
Soon after our arrival, a message was dispatched to the Commanding Officer, Major Tom Harrisson, who was expecting us. Due to the soreness of my legs, the journey had been delayed by two days.
On the afternoon of the 24th May, 1945, we reached the place where the S.R.D. Headquarters was. I was immediately given the opportunity to take charge of all the Medical works here. The dispensary was situated on the opposite side close to the aerodrome about a quarter of a mile from the Commanding Officer's camp. It had a modern supply of medicine and equipment. I had a native assistant. Together with us in this camp was an American airman who had some time past met with a crash accident in Limbang district.
At length our journey came to an end. Soon after I stepped in to the dispensary, I went down with a temperature which kept gradually rising up towards the evening, followed by severe headache. Moreover, the condition of my legs were very tender with sores and I could hardly move even a few steps. I recovered from this unpleasantness next day and I began to enjoy the atmosphere of the interior.
Though comfort and pleasantness I enjoyed, yet I could not exist happily and peacefully—for I had a thousand and one kinds of trouble and sorrow in mind. Firstly I had my family in my mind—who were l eft to the care of those Sikh families at Kampong Lintang. Secondly, there was a foot-path in Lintang that could lead to Trusan from Limbang or elsewhere via Labuh. Thirdly, should the enemy retreat their forces from those places, they might advance to the interior and might make use of this foot-path to come through Lintang which was the only passage avail-able. In their retreating they might cause harm to the people. All these fears were in my mind. I could not give myself a moment of peace. Indeed, it actually happened that a party of about twenty Japs, ranking from private to officer, com-mitted themselves to retreating and came through this passage from Labuh, well equipped with fire-arms.
Ever since I was iu Central Borneo, I had neither heard nor received news of my family and my mind was somewhat disturbed by pain. After having speculated, I submitted a request to the Command-ing Officer for approval to give me permission to go and look up my family at Trusan and thus bring them with me to the interior. My request was approved but he suggested sending a number of guerrillas and luggage-bearers instead of me going personally—because of the pressure of work at hand for me to do.
About a month these guerrillas and luggage-bearers were away to the coast. One afternoon, as I wandered hither and thither, I caught sight of my family far off on one of those boundary-paths along the padi-fields, coming towards the hospital. On their way they had met with one or two incidents and had once made a good escape from the enemy while at Ruan Spakoi, a jungle spot. They had started from there at sunrise in order to hurry up along the whole length of the journey to an end. Soon they came to Tengoah river and found that it was flooded on both banks and there was no other passage available to go to the other side, except through the water. Later, with extreme difficulty they managed to cut down a big tree at one side of the bank and made a bridge out
of it.
As soon as they came to Long Lutok that same evening after crossing the Tenguah river, they were told by someone who had followed after them that between two to three hundred enemies* had come in sight of Ruan Spakoi. This occurred soon after my family and the party were taken off from there that very morning. My wife and the others were shocked on learning of this news. With speed they hurried on their journey from Long Lutok early next morning and reached Pa Brayong about evening on the same day. My wife had met an accident on the way to Pa Brayong after a tedious and frightful journey, by spraining one of her knees, which did uot recover even when she came to Central Borneo and for some time she still walked with a limp.
The rest of the journey of my family from Pa Brayong had little to be told, and my family was
*The Jap force probably numbered about 1,000 when it reached the Tengoah. Of these, postwar documents show that only 300 got through to their objective, Jap. G.H.Q. on the Sapong Estate in North Borneo. The rest were killed by guerrillas or died of starvation and sickness, denied all local food by the Muruts.
12
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, JANUARY 30, 1953.
accompanied by my previous assistant. Before those guerrillas made their trip to Trusan to fetch my family, I brought him to the knowledge of the Commanding Officer, requesting he, my former assistant, Mr. Jambol, should accompany my family to the interior and also give me a hand in the job. He was an experienced and capable man and had been with me in the job since early 1941.
After a time, my former assistant was with me once more and we worked together for some months. He was subsequently transfered to the Kelabit country to take charge of a small dispensary, giving aid to the people. On several visits I made to the Kelabit country I fouud that he was getting along well. But in the end, the poor fellow’s longing for his home on the coast—Limbang—to see his relations, was so strong that it grew almost to nausea. He was still there, in the Kelabit area, when we left the interior on transfer to Kuching. Since then, I have neither heard nor received any news of him t.
He was a quiet type of person, a hard worker and was a person worthy of praise for courage, person-ality and honesty.
It took my family about ten days to cover the whole length of the journey from Trusan, whereas, it took me about thirteen and half days to reach the same destination via Lawas. A few days after their arrival, my former assistant began to tell me about the enemy who had attempted to hunt me, successively on three accounts, and he said that I had just made good my escape from the coast. It meant my “number" was about up on three counts.
In the course of my sojourn in the interior after a month or so, one morning I was suddenly broken down by nervousness, and lost my sense. This continued for some days before I regained my sense again. While attending my patients, and without provocation whatever, I began to insult them unconsciously. This was later related to me by some one who personally witnessed the whole period of such behaviour.
This nervous break-down of mine was purely caused by constant mental torture and the shock derived from allied bombing attack. Fortunately, God had mercy on His sinful and sorrowful servants, of which I was one—for my condition began improving from day to day. (When I had fully recovered, then I prayed to God to help me, and never did I pray more heartily before.)
About two months afterwards, I established an inland hospital with the warm approval of the Commanding Officer, Major Tom Harrisson, con-sisting of two wards—a male and female—to cater for the sick and the wounded. We encountered no trouble whatever, during all its operation. The hospital had a staff of a dozen male and female native attendants. The average number of daily in-patients was between thirty to forty; and the number of out-patients ranged from one hundred to two hundred per day. With regard to the ration of the in-patients—arrangements were made thus; for every admission one should provide one’s own food, such as rice, vegetable, fruit or fowl. These supplies were purely for their own consumpt-ion. On weekends, they usually had a meal or two with chicken-soup. With the introduction of this system, the hospital carried on with great satisfaction.
Towards the end of 1945, another trouble broke out in the interior. The women and children were
compelled to evacuate from their homes for safety. The men were to defend and to resist the enemy, who consisted of nearly a thousand fully armed soldiers, retreating from the coast. They came via Ulu Limbang.*
On their way through the jungle, a great number of them died from starvation and disease; still they kept marching on to Ulu Trusan, in spite of con-stant warning in the form of pamphlets dropped to them by air to the effect that the war was over. They were unconcerned with the warning and kept marching forward, killing on the way and destroy-ing villages.
They finally came to Bah Klalan in the top of the Trusan which was encircled on all sides by allied guerrillas. At one position was our Com-manding Officer (Tom Harrisson) himself together with his forces and a Jap envoy from the coast. After days of fighting until late October contact was at last made. The Jap envoy then read out a proclamation to them commanding them to surrender. This instruction was in the end carried out under the direction of the Japanese Commander-in-Chief, who did not for a long time believe it, to the effect that the war was over:
When wild war's deadly blast was ended, And gentle peace returned, Many a sweet babe fatherless, Make countless millions mourned.
Never will pleasure return, Nor comfort but a heavy heart. A weeping country joins a widow's tear, The wail of the helpless poor mixes with the orphan’s cry!
When the Japanese force surrendered at Bah Kalalan at the end of October, the whole force was removed to Pa Bawan, a distance of one and a half hours walk from our place (Belawit). A number of Japanese soldiers and Javanese luggage-bearers were seriously affected by diseases caused by mal-nutrition and requestsed urgent attention. Those affected were about thirty persons including a dozen Javanese. The majority of the patients had to be carried on native shoulders to the hospital.
Out of the total number of cases treated, only one was later recorded as death, an advanced case. The rest recovered and returned to the coast after treatment. There was another group of Japs con-sisting of about ten persons who took shelter in a Kelabit house at Long Seridan, Ulu Tutoh. Among them there was a Taicho, an officer of rank. They eventually surrendered themselves to Sergeant Bolang and came over to our place. They also suffered from minor complaints and were admitted to the hospital for treatment. This Taicho self reduced his rank and took a common place among his soldiers, attending to odd jobs with no more respect from his subordinates.
Early in 1946, I had established another inland hospital at Bah Kalalan and transferred all the medical equipment over there from Dutch Borneo and coutinued the work with the same eagerness in Sarawak territory. After some time, a message unfortunately came from Kuching instructing me to return to Kuching to duty. We started the journey to the coast to Lawas in June, 1946, and
tMr. Jambol is still stationed in the Fifth Division, now on the coast. He has been promoted as befits a man of his quality and loyally.
*This was not the same force who previously went to Tengoah, but another from the oilfields. The remainder of this, 352, eventually surrendered on October 31st.
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, JANUARY 30, 1953.
13
a few Japs, who were with me in the interior, also came with us as far as Lawas. These Japs had been left in the interior to receive prolonged medical attention as their ailments were considered
serious.
We left Labuan by the "Matang” in the middle of July, 1946, and arrived Kuching one evening in the same month. On arrival, we spent some time transporting our luggage to our house where the whole family would once more settle together in a happy re-union after so many years of separation and ordeal. We had left in Kuching our three older children and we had neither heard nor learned of each other since we left. Throughout the occupation period, I reckoned, by the mercy of God the Father Almighty, that my life was saved which thereby enabled the whole family to reunite and live peacefully together! Otherwise we could not have such a reunion and happiness. I have two sons, six daughters and five grand-children, at the time of my writing this.
All these years of struggle and hard labour are like struggling life in a deep ocean. With careful frugality and management and with the generous assistance of Dr. Tan Sim Poh, we managed to obtain a small piece of land and a house of our own, but no one can foresee what fate has in store for the future. Everybody knows how far a wage-earner can reach in this world through hard saving and frugality to provide for the future with com-fort and useful work.
THE END.
Reports from the Lower Court.
Some interesting cases were heard in the Kuching Magistrate’s Court earlier this week. The first was brought against the Sarawak Company Inc. by the Kuching Municipal Council.
The case for the prosecution was presented by the Senior Inspector, who alleged that the defendant company had failed to provide a separate building for the soldering of leaky tins in contravention of By-law 31, Chapter 12 (Storage of Petroleum). He called on his four assistants to give evidence that no such building existed on the site under the con-trol of the defendants and was about to produce further witnesses when the defendant, in the person of John Jones, stood up and stated that he accepted the evidence and agreed that there was no separate building.
The worthy Magistrate looked somewhat put out at this frank admission and muttered something to the effect that if Mr. Jones agreed with the pro-secution why hadn't he pleaded guilty and thus saved much time.
However perceiving that the defendant remained standing he merely said "Do you wish to say any-thing?” "Thank you, your worship", said Jones "if the prosecution has finished."
Various nods being accepted as an affirmative answer, he continued. "I have a son," began Jones.
"So have I," said the Magistrate, "also four daughters but where's the connection with petro-leum?"
Swallowing, Jones continued, "And I am an indulgent father. There are many youths who like to travel the countryside in large cars or on fast motor cycles and there are those who fly aeroplanes; but, though my boy could have had his choice of any machine held in stock, and we are of course
sole Agents for Rolls-Royce, Bentley, Morris, Austin, etc., etc., he preferred, being of an engineer-ing turn of mind, to drive a steam roller, and at considerable expense and to the envy of the P.W.D. I imported one for his pleasure.
Now to return to petroleum. From time to time it must be admitted that tins of petroleum leak. It is the contention of the prosecution that I should provide a separate building for the soldering of such tins. BUT!” he paused, "my company has an interest in the Gunong Tin Manufacturing Coy. and it is our policy to use only perfect tins. That's where the steam roller comes in. My son enjoys himself flattening the defective tins and indeed has become so adept at this that he is able to make the most amusing shapes and with a little further practice I am quite sure that we shall be able to put on the market, at very low cost, weather vanes, toy swords and sundry other articles.
Hence, since I do no soldering, I need no build-ing, and I am sure that your worship will appreciate this point and dismiss the case."
The Magistrate, looked through his copy of the By-laws and then announced an adjournment. When he returned from the Municipal Office twenty minutes later he gave his decision.
"I find this defendant guilty", he announced. "The by-law is quite clear, at least it is to the Municipal, and quite plainly says that a separate building shall be provided. Obviously the case wouldn't have been brought if those who framed the by-law hadn't thought it had been contravened. I am sorry to deprive your son of his innocent amusement and in imposing a fine of $5, this being the first case under this particular section, would recommend that he try his skill on the road outside my house."
Notice of appeal was not given as Mr. Jones was not discharged from Hospital until long after the statutory period in which appeals may be lodged.
Josh.
The Palm Tree and an Old Woman
(A Bornean tale retold by W. G. Eber.)
In the long, long ago, in the Tampasuk district there once lived an old woman whose age nobody knew. When asked how old she might be she would point to any pinang or coconut tree and say "How old do you think that tree is? Well I was born at the same time as that tree". As that bordered on the ridicudous no one would approach her again on such a delicate question, as even in Borneo no woman in her right senses would tell her correct age.
However, be that as it may, this old woman was so lazy that she went by the name of Gabulan (lazy). She lived all alone in a dilapidated hut on the right bank of the Tampasuk river and never worried to cook for herself, but was all ears to the sound of gongs, as this ushered in a period of eating and drinking bahr (toddy) to one's content. Distance did not trouble this dear soul, and she would tramp uphill and down dale till she located the house. There she would feast and drink as long as the feast lasted, after which she would tramp home the best way she could, and sleep it off. She would only awake when the pangs of hunger were again gnawing in her stomach, and then would she think of gathering any wild berries, bananas and other fruits or vegetables which she would consume readily.
14
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, JANUARY 30, 1953.
Now as luck would have it, just opposite her hut there was a palm tree and it would appear that this sympathetic tree was witnessing daily the plight of this old woman till one day it could bear no longer and shouted to her to come over to the other bank. Thinking it was a human being inviting her to a feast, she readily awoke from her slumbers and looked far and wide, but seeing nohody she was again about to resume her sleep when the palm tree cried so persistently that she yelled in dismay "Where are you?" Then the palm tree answered "Well, why here just opposite your house". Now the old woman thought to her-self what could a palm tree do for her, and she was about to dismiss the whole matter, when the palm tree said "If you come over and do what I say, you will never go hungry again". Oh! she thought this was something new and worth giving a try. She waited till the tide subided a little and waded across to the other bank and stood at the foot of the tree. "Now that I am here what are you going to give me to eat, seeing that I am hungry and that you are only a palm tree?" said the old woman in anger. "Now don't be so angry, old girl", said the palm tree quietly. "I will drop some of my dahan, you take them and weave into a basket, and every tamu day the basket will bring you as much as would last you till the next tamu".
Upon this, she gathered what dahan fell off and returned to her hut and laboriously made a basket with same and waited for the next tamu. Now tamu in Borneo is market day, which occurs every ten days, though in some parts every Sunday, when a lot of people come from afar off with their wares which they spread out on the ground. These generally comprise betel nuts, betel leaves, gambier, kapor, dried fish, salt, nut-megs, baskets, fowls, bananas and such like.
She placed the basket at her door step, and off it shot as if there was a strong gale on to the tamu ground. Now it happened a good house-wife saw the basket, and seeing no one nearby, she took it and placed in it all her purchases. As she was about to proceed home she met a friend and, as it is usual with her sex, they had a lot to gossip about so, after a time, the good house wife placed the basket on the ground. Immediately the basket sailed merrily along to the hut of the old woman who was ever so pleased to see so many nice things in it, the more so without any effort on her part to obtain them. When the good house wife had finished talking, sbe looked round for the basket, but lo! it was no longer there. After many futile attempts to find it she returned home empty-handed. The same thing happened at subsequent tamus to different individuals, and as it is true "one can fool some of the people some of the time, but not all of the people all of the time", the talk of the mysterious disappearance of a certain basket became common property.
A few victims decided to get their own back at the next tamu. True enough the basket was seen lying at a corner as if someone had forgotten its existence. "Here is the tombieoh (devil),", they whispered among themselves, "let us put dung in it for a change and see what happens", and dung they put in it. Now this was too much even for a decent Borneo basket, and it eventually found its way to the old woman's hut crying and in a very angry mood.
The palm tree, looking on, said it would no more assist any human being seeing that this was what it received for its pains. The poor basket hence-
forth remained just like any ordinary basket seen at any tamu, and the palm tree still continued to wave in the cool Borneo breeze, but no words were heard by any human beings issuing therefrom, up to this day.
The Festive Season in a Sarawak Outstation.
As we sat round the Yuletide log quaffing hot punches, I felt impelled to reassure those in Britain that Christmas here is the same as there. The rhythm of the poem is rather an unusual one as it is much affected by Christmas spirit.
Christmastide is here again, Hot the winter solstice air is, Half- drawn the blinds to hide the glare, Sweet the perfume of gardenia. Cool beneath the whirring fan D.O. Jones awaits his guestses.
The jungle fruit is not yet over, The durians ripe strong are smelling. Mangosteens blue are on the dresser. Loud the dapor children are yelling.
What a joy ! The tomatoes are Ripening fast on the verandah (Seeds they were from far Australia). Do they herald an early transfer?
Ten is sounding from the kubu.
"Here come the staff in files of two, Wishing mcrry Christmas to you And to drink some of your home mixed brew. Oh ! A penghulu has turned up too."
Fast the words and sweat are flowing, Watch, their eyes and brows are glowing. The Court Peon calls for a song, The District Officer eggs him on. Gives Peon Mat Nor some ginger beer Increasing his feeling of good cheer. (Mat Nor though a good Mussulman lnsists on joining in the mirth And wisey remarks to the gang Jesus's was a great man's birth.) The L & S clerk now obliges, As he drains to the full his glass, With a seasonal rendering of "I'm dreaming of a white Christmas."
Homewards bound the clerks are reeling Down the canna-lined avenue.
Some on the hibiscus are leaning As the dresser does a dance or two.
The D.O. and I now go to the Club (The atmosphere yet's not that of a pub) For all the station's young children there are Having come to see from far The decorated casuarina.
The Postal Clerk as Father Christmas Through the doorway suddenly appears. The Forest Guard's four year old lass Bursts into loud, terror-struck tears. "Quick, a chocolate cake she must get And a glass of cherry ciderette. Who's that naughty little boy Hanging on the ping-pong net?"
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, JANUARY 30, 1953.
15
To-night the Padre and D.O.
To my house are gaily hying. Sweating hard (and slightly rolling?) Here they come through the portico.
Wassail we with whisky water Before I call "Makai, makai”, Then down we go to the dining quarter The D.O. goes out "to look at the sky".
Now I'm carving the 10 lb. turkey (By Chinese launch yesterday it came). "Boy! Serve the 'taties and the kangkong". Why the atmosphere is just like hame.
Oh! A falling chichak has plopped on To the table cloth of cotton.
For this high fall what is the reason?
Is it now his mate's in season?
Oh has it over the eight had one?
3 a.m. and my guests are going.
"Boy! Where's my alkaseltzer" What a head I shall have resounding. Christmas is but once a year.
Boxing Day and New Year's eve Celebrated are in a trop'cal way. Shall I get casual leave To recover from this season so gay?
At my house we're all awaiting The arrival of 1953.
Damn. My battery’s not working; When will we get our electricity?
"Hark! The kubu gong is sounding Striking out the year has been. (Strongly he that gong is pounding) Listen, he has struck thirteen! While we have this cheery feeling. While with figures heads are reeling, Let us do the Board of Survey One a.m. this New Year's day."
I.A.N.U.
Communique.
At a joint meeting of the Sarawak Government Senior Service and Junior Service Whitley Councils held on 16th January, 1953, the Government representatives announced that the scheme for the incorporation of a portion of the cost-of-living allow-ance in basic salaries, as recommended by the joint Whitley Councils and accepted by the Council Negri in December, 1952, had been approved without amendment.
The necessary steps are being taken to give effect to the scheme as quickly as possible.
At a meeting of the Sarawak Government Junior Service Whitley Council held on 16th January, 1953, it was announced that Government intended to introduce a Bill at the next session of the Council Negri to revive the option to become pensionable of those officers who were affected by paragraph 7 (ii) of Secretariat Circular No. 4/1950.
The Sarawak Club.
December Bowls Average.
Men.
159	J. M. Earley	180	5
159	M.	Steele	210	12
155	O.	F. Wright	208	11
151	G.	F. S. Wood	166	5
151	G.	T. Myles	206	8
140	F.	Clarke Hunt	174	5
133	G.	M. Cass	178	9
Ladies.
160	Mrs.	T.	Myles	223	8
127	Mrs.	F.	A Clarke	Hunt	151	5
119 Mrs. E. Steele	138	6
104	Mrs.	S.	Kitto	136	6
90	Mrs	N.	Marjoribanks	105	6
Highest No. of
Average. Names.	Score. Rolls.
Island Club, Sibu.
Bowling Averages for December, 1952.
A. Webb	7	186	- 9
D. Dickerson	13	183	- 4
D. M. Mansfield	17	167	+19
D. Niblett	15	165	+22
G. H. Rackham	6	165	+ 22
D. F. Henderson	4	162	+27
W. H. Dickie	19	161	+28
A. L. Proctor	15	159	+31
J. J. Howard	6	157	+34
T. Rozalla	6	155	+37
D. C. White	10	149	+46
N. W. Smyth	6	149	+46
H. Whiteside	4	144	+54
L. R. Poole	6	141	+58
Mrs. Niblett	22	140	+ 60
H. F. Rafter	4	132	+72
Mrs. Rozalla	7	127	+79
Mrs. Dickie	5	126	+81
Miss li. A. Pargeter	13	125	+82
Monthly Bowling Competition for December, 1952.
Rolled on Wednesday 7.1.53.
The Cup was won by D. F. Henderson. Esq.
Handi-
Name.	Score. cap. Total.
Mr. D. F. Henderson 353+	27	380
Mr. A. Webb	388-	9	379
Miss B. A. Pargeter	287+	82	369
Mr. D. Dickerson	330 -	4	326
Mr. W. H. Dickie	296+	16	312
No. of Aver-	Handi-
Name.	Rolls.	age. cap.
Archer Cup Bowling Competition January 1ST, 1953.
WINNER J. J. HOWARD, ESQ.,
Mr. J.	J. Howard	447
Mr. G.	H. Rackham	406
Mr. D.	Dickerson	412
Mr. J.	G. C. Kirby-Turner	367
Mr. E.	P. Spencer	349
Mr. A. Webb	317
iii
ADVERTISEMENTS.
[January 30, 1953.]
Results of the Sibu Benevolent Sweep No: 8.
Drawn Publicly on Sunday, 25th January, 1953, at Chung Hua School, Sibu.
Total pool ...	... $28,592.00
Less : 30% for Charity Fund and
promotion Expenses $ 8,577.00 $20,015.00
1st Prize	...	$10,007.00
2nd Prize	...	5,003.00
3rd Prize	...	2,501.00
Ten Consolation prizes each of $250 ... 2,500.00
Fraction ... 4.00	$20,015.00
1st Prize Ticket No: 23581
2nd ,, ,, 49917
3rd ,, ,, 24018
Consolation Prize Ticket No :
32130	39594	32020	32128	11720
53767	34524	38823	58527	42572
Scrutineers.
Signed. D. C. White J. J. Howard Chew Geok Lin Datu Abang Yan Ting Lik Hung.
