 Vol. LXXIX
No. 1148
PRICE
KUCHING, Saturday, October 31st, 1953
50 CENTS
Contents
Page
Saying for the Month	...	...	... 179
Information ...	...	...	... 179
Notes and Comments	... ...	... 180
Comings and Goings ... ... ... 181
Visit of His Excellency the Governor to Marudi and
the Tinjar River	...	...	... 181
United Nations Day, 1953	... ...	... 184
Problems of Multi-Racial Societies ...	... 185
The Good Old Days	... ...	... 186
Correspondence	...	...	... 186
Hard Cases	...	...	...	... 186
Indonesian Goodwill Mission	...	... 187
Council Negri—September, 1953	...	... 191
Visit of a North Borneo Delegation to Limbang	... 192
Charita Sarang Burong Dalam Gua Niah	... 193
Erratum	...	...	...	... 194
Sibu Letter	...	...	...	... 194
Government Scholarships ...	...	... 194
Sarawak Club—Bowling Averages and Bowling Com-
petition, September, 1953	... ...	... 195
Sarawak Club—Golf—October Tombstone Competition,
11th October, 1953	... ...	... 196
Turtle Trust Fund—Income and Expenditure Account as at 31.12.1952	... ...	... 197
Kuching Market Price List ...	...	... 198
The Sarawak Gazette
SATURDAY, OCTOBER 31st, 1953
Saying for the Month
“Physicians, like beer, are best when they are old and stale, and lawyers, like bread, when they are young and new"
William Noy, Attorney-General, 1631—34
Information
Samuel Johnson once defined knowledge as of two kinds: we know a subject ourselves or we know where we can find information upon it.
The seeking and finding of information upon a sub-ject we do not know is, no less than the strivings of the earnest seeker after truth, as inherent a part of human living as breathing; and in a state where de-mocratic rule is the order of the day and the seeking and imparting of information regarding the Adminis-
tration is encouraged rather than frowned upon, the knowledge of where such information may be sought has come to be acknowledged as of special significance.
The manner of seeking information varies with divergent social groups and on different occasions. A native living close to nature and trained to follow the superior judgment of his elders will trudge through miles of jungle to discover the truth of a report or to ascertain the cause of illness of his child from the Tuai Rumah or his tribal medicine man. The modern sophist, priding himself on his individuality, his edu-cation and his outlook, may emulate John Brown and regard satiric comments as the most salutary way of shocking and galvanizing into action a lethargic government—
Truth's sacred Fort th’ exploded laugh shall win; And coxcombs vanquish Berkeley by a grin.
Indeed, whatever the method adopted, be it the sim-ple, primitive hankering after information that is easy of satisfaction, or the pedantic, verbose exposition of the master craftsman toiling at great pains to avoid farce, the result is the same fulfilment of that inward craving to drink at the fount of knowledge and be satisfied.
The dissemination of coherent information by the governing authority to the people, on all matters affecting their interests and welfare, is likewise looked upon as of foremost importance, equalled only by the concomitant necessity to obtain full knowledge of the feelings, thoughts and aspirations of the people governed. This realization has given rise to the need in Sarawak, as in other countries, for an information service through which all forms of information may be channelled and collated.
The recent spate of correspondence in the local press voicing public opinion on a number of govern-mental projects is in itself a welcome improvement, for contructive criticism is the basis of good government; but intelligent criticism is easily stifled and clear judgment warped by a lack of knowledge. Therefore we urge most strongly that no efforts be spared to provide early and full information on all subjects of public concern, and to keep it (if not already being done) abreast of the progress of all important govern-mental measures.
In this the information service exists to help, and has helped, though the extent to which this service has put its shoulder to the wheel is not generally known and is perhaps a moot point. After all, an information service is by its nature to be shot at; we all have ideas about what should be done and what should not. Lest we be misunderstood in what follows we wish to assert here that the Gazette does not take upon itself to defend any particular branch of the public service, nor does it commit itself to a policy of giving publi-
180
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, OCTOBER 31, 1953
city to any department of Government. But we do feel that some light shed on the facts which are blazon-ed daily would save a good deal of unnecessary con-troversy and recrimination against a service that is a temptation to facility of public opinion because it is financed by public funds, and disabuse the critics of the current clich that the Department of Information merely provides free film shows and distributes propa-ganda leaflets.
The Information Department does provide free film shows but they are an essential and much-welcomed service in a country with a scattered population whose only source of entertainment, as well as information of how people live in other lands, is often derived from these film shows. And the Information Department does not distribute propaganda leaflets in the generally accepted sense of the unpleasant term, except for per-haps a number of publications and periodicals from the USIS and the United Kingdom Central Office of Infor-mation which have always proved popular and in great demand, especially those in the vernacular languages.
Other than these two aspects of its activities the Information Department undertakes the publication of two monthly papers each with a circulation of more than six thousand copies; and it has undertaken the task of producing, in two locally spoken languages, a sub-stantial portion of the Annual Report on Sarawak for 1952—a task which may be unique amongst overseas territories within the Commonwealth; it provides fea-ture articles, notices and advertisements for use of the local press; it gives out information on most of the major subjects of controversy recently—museum ex-tension, water-supply, hospital, etc., with translations in-to Chinese and Malay done in the Department; it con-ducts a tourist bureau service, its officers accompanying the constant stream of visitors to Sarawak on journeys and supplying them with topical information; it regu-larly sends abroad material about Sarawak for publica-tion in overseas newspapers, including those of the United Kingdom and the United States; it takes its own photographs and sends them out almost daily for publi-cation; it provides reading rooms (with literature in all languages) for use of the public, and its office is open to all: visitors are welcome and the daily flow of en-quiries are answered either verbally or dealt with by letter. Perhaps its most enterprising if equally pro-mising project is the construction of a broadcasting service whose programmes will one day serve all parts of the Colony.
Admittedly the information service has ample scope for improvement and expansion. The ability to ob-tain truthful information from the people, for example, is essential not only to a successful information service but also to a progressive government, for such infor-mation is the yardstick of public interest, feelings, re-actions and censures even of the policies, projects and reforms that Government may introduce from time to time. The education of the people to a realization of their civic responsibilities and also their privileges is undoubtedly an important forward step which takes time and patience to accomplish. Meanwhile ignor-ance, age-old prejudice and the habit of acquiescence in the face of authority will continue to be a hindrance rather than a help to the procuring of useful and re-liable information. There are encouraging signs, how-ever, that the wall of prejudice is crumbling, if slowly, and that acquiescence has transformed itself into con-fident action along constructive lines. Such results as are achieved already are due in large measure to the enlightened efforts at local self-government, the increas-ing co-operation from the people and the vision and leadership of officers whose personal knowledge of the country and the sympathetic understanding of local
problems make progress possible. And in all this right information has paved the way.
That is why we look forward eagerly to the future of that service whose influence we trust will one day reach out to embrace the remote villages as it does the towns and bring within its sphere the ignorant as well as the learned. We visualize the day when, with a larger and better network that the broadcasting sys-tem will surely provide, the voice of truth will ring out clearly in every part of Sarawak, and when the best in the way of information will be exchanged and reciprocated in a spirit of genuine friendship.
Until that day dawns we must strive to play our part as citizens by respecting and believing the truth and by assisting others to do the same; and if we find cause to criticize or to condemn let us do so intelligently and constructively, making certain of the facts and the information. Let us, above all endeavour, like John-son, to clear our minds of cheap cant and meaning-less clich s which have no place in an atmosphere of spontaneous goodwill so long characteristic of the relations between Government and people in this country that both profess to love and pledge to serve.
J.M.C.
Notes and Comments
Of late Sarawak has had her lion’s share of visiting missions and distinguished visitors. It began with the Japanese Parliamentary Mission, under the leadership of Mr. Ichiro Honda, which called here on a short visit of observation on the 19th of September, and ended with the Indonesian Goodwill Mission, headed by Bambang Soeparto, Resident Co-ordinator for West Borneo (Kalimantan Barat) which arrived here on the 16th of this month and departed on the 19th. A full account of the Mission’s visit will be published in the November issue of the Gazette and we publish some pictures this month. In between these unofficial visits there was also the arrival here on 2nd October of members of the Burmese Trade Mission headed by U Aye Choe and the official visit last month of the Representative of the Government of India in Malaya, Mr. M. Gopala Menon, accompanied by Mrs. Menon and the Private Secretary, Mr. Sundram.
The Consul-General in Singapore for the Federal Republic of Western Germany, Dr. Hans Granow, paid his first official visit to Sarawak on October 12th. Dr. Granow was accompanied by Frau Granow, their daughter, Fra lein Kate Granow, and his Com-mercial Counsellor, Herr Mock. The Consular party left Pending in M.L. Mermaid on the evening of October 14th, accompanied by the Deputy Chief Secretary, Mr. J. H. Ellis. We understand that their itinerary was to include Sibu, Miri, and Brunei.
The preservation of books is a matter of concern to many. For 35 cents book-lovers and picture-lovers can now obtain a wealth of information on the pre-servation of books and prints and pictures in the tropics from the Federation of Malaya’s National Museum, Kuala Lumpur. This small work, published in the Museum Department's Popular Pamphlet Series, was one of the last to come from the pen of the late Major P. D. W. Williams-Hunt, Acting Director of Museums in the Federation. Pamphlets already published include Collecting Butterflies in Malaya and How to Run a Simple Aquarium. Others are in preparation on Malay coins, the Malay Kris and other Malay weapons, and signs and marks on Chinese porcelain.
“Your Sarawak stamps are sensational," an old friend wrote to us recently from Taos, New Mexico: “please send us all you can spare." We sent her a mint set. A few days later on a Saturday afternoon,
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, OCTOBER 31, 1953
181
while we were despatching telegrams in Kuching Post Office, a smiling and very young Aircraftman of the R.A.F. put his head through the window. "Please, could you tell me what time the post office opens to-morrow?" he asked. To-morrow, we told him, would be Sunday, and no opening. His face fell: “I’m flying back to Singapore at 10 o'clock in the morning, and I did so want a set of Sarawak stamps." If he could trust us, we said, we would send him a set on Monday. He gave us the money without a thought and a very long address, beginning with '4115403', of which we made three copies and put in different places to ensure against loss and a betrayal of his trust.
The present set of stamps is certainly one of which the country may be proud, and an excellent model for several of our neighbours. We are confident that the new stamps for the new reign, of which we hope for news soon, will maintain Sarawak’s reputation.
Those who have read James A. Michener's recent book Voices of Asia may have done so with mixed feelings. As one Indonesian remarked. "What does Mr. Michener know about Indonesia anyway? He was there only for a short time.” Time, the necessary quality of getting acquainted with people and con-ditions and thus of forming true conclusions on the basis of personal knowledge of intimate facts, is indeed lacking in the case of the globe-trotting journalist, as Michener was; but to do him justice his world-wide contacts have given him ample background and the essential sense of perspective for this type of reporting. And experience has led him, unlike many a political reporter, to the discovery and appreciation of the opinion of the little people who form the backbone of any country. His technique of establishing rapport in an interview is refreshingly original. If it did not give him the correct information which he had set out to get (and this is a controversial point) it had at least enabled him to get down to the level of his informants and to view facts and events through their eyes as well as his own. He found, as some have done on occasions, that profound truth may be concealed beneath a cup of mid-morning tea in a coffee shop and that the genuine views and aspirations of a people are more readily told over a rijsttafel at a wayside restaurant. To quote him, “In Asia I talked with as many people as I possibly could. Since both Life and Herald Tribune have very able political correspondents I was not interested in meeting big shots. Nor did I attempt to do financial, parlia-mentary or economic reporting. Instead I went into a nation, sat quiet, listened, and in time found that all sorts of people wanted to talk to me."
Comings and Goings
The period covered by "Comings and Goings" in this issue is the last five days of September and the first twenty-three days of October. During that period there was only one “going” but seven "comings”.
After just over seven years with the Sarawak Government and after an association with the country extending over some sixteen or seventeen years, Mr. D. F. Matheson has left the country on retirement consequent upon the abolition of the post of Shipping Master. Their many friends will, we are sure, miss "Mathy” and Mary and wish them well in the future.
Amongst the "comings", four individuals returned from furlough: Mr. E. Bomphrey, accompanied by his family, returned early in October and resumes duty as Mechanical Engineer in the Public Works Department. The District Officer, Baram, Mr. F. B. K. Drake, went direct from Singapore to Miri and has now once again taken over the Baram district. Mr. J. H. Nelson-Smith, accompanied by Mrs. Nelson-Smith and their
children, returned in the middle of the month, and is going to Sibu to take charge of Forest affairs there. Towards the end of the period under review the Deve-lopment Secretary, Mr. B. A. St. J. Hepburn, together with his family returned and is now at work again in the Secretariat.
There were, in addition, three new arrivals though the first of these is only a new arrival in respect of Government Service. This is Mr. “Mo” Steele who has returned, together with Mrs. Steele, to become an Assistant Controller of Posts and Telegraphs. Our readers will remember Mr. Steele as a member of the staff of International Aeradio Ltd. for some years, and Mrs. Steele who as Miss McLeod was employed in the Secretariat for some time.
Two really new arrivals were Mr. G. A. G. Sap-stead and Miss H. M. Wallis who have come to Sara-wak for the first time. Mr. Sapstead, accompanied by his wife, takes up an appointment as Assistant Exe-cutive Engineer in the Public Works Department, and Miss Wallis takes the place of Mrs. Bomphrey as Lady Education Officer in the Education Department.
To these newcomers we offer a warm welcome to Sarawak and hope they will be very happy here.
Visit of His Excellency the Governor to Marudi and the Tinjar River
On the 1st October at 9.30 a.m. Lorna Doone and Mermaid left Kuala Baram with His Excellency the Governor, the Resident Fourth Division (Mr. A. F. R. Griffin), Mr. Loke Wan Tho and the Private Secretary on board. At 5.40 p.m. we arrived at Ma-rudi at the tail end of a rainstorm and were met by the District Officer, Baram (Mr. A. R. G. Morrison), his wife, local notabilities and a Guard of Honour standing in a sea of mud. After His Excellency had inspected the Guard and met the notabilities, he toured the now nearly completed fine new bazaar, which already has improved the general aspect of Marudi, even though the central space has still to be laid out properly and was a muddy waste when we saw it. His Excellency then adjourned to the District Officer’s bungalow, where three Iban and one Kenyah Penghu-lus called on him. We then all went to the Foochow Association room, where the Chinese Chamber of Commerce had arranged a drinks party, after which we embarked on Leonora to go to the Kampong. Both banks of the river looked entrancing on this pitch black night as all the Malay houses on each side of the river and the front of the kubu and certain roads and buildings had all been lit up with fairy Hari-Raya-like lights. At the Malay school we were treated to a most excellent curry, and after the meal His Excel-lency looked round the school and congratulated the Malays of Marudi on their enterprise in raising up their old school on to high stilts and thus getting in-creased and better accommodation.
Next morning the sun was shining as His Excellency made his way to the kubu, where he inspected a smart Guard of Honour, and then went into the kubu to present Long Service Medals to N.O. Wan Mahadzar bin Datu Tungku Mohammad, Mr. Joseph Yong of the Medical Department who is now helping the WHO team in the Baram, and to Mr. Lim Chui Kang a retired headman. His Excellency then heard requests and went upstairs to meet the office staff, after which he went to the Chinese school where he was offered refreshments. He then passed the proposed site of the new airstrip, and visited the Roman Catholic Mission, where he was entertained by Fathers Van de Laar and
182
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, OCTOBER 31, 1953
Michielsen. His Excellency, the Resident, Mr. and Mrs. Morrison, Mr. Loke Wan Tho, Native Officers Wan Hashim and Tinggang Malang and Penghulu Gau then embarked in the Mermaid and went upriver a short distance to Datu Zen Galau’s house where we found the aged Datu and his wives had come to the river bank to meet His Excellency. Brunei cannons were let off without harm to anyone and we were then invited into the Datu's house where His Excellency presented him with the Badge and Certificate of Ho-nour. We were all glad to note that the Datu appeared remarkably active and alert for his age. After refresh-ments and after the Datu had invited His Excellency to attend the 1954 Baram Regatta, we re-embarked in Mermaid and carried on upriver.
At the mouth of the Tinjar we changed to Lorna Doone and reached Long Teru close on dusk. We were taken to the Local Authority School building where Penghulu Enteri and his Iban girls in traditional dress greeted us with much tuak and a party spirit; speeches of goodwill were made and His Excellency was presented with a Kenyalang. We were next led to the Chinese bazaar and treated to beer and then pro-ceded across river to Penghulu Lawai's house, inhabited by Berawans. Guns were let off and we were all liter-ally swept off our feet by the great welcome. We were escorted into the house, and while some of the gentle sex plied us with borak others brought on dinner and before we knew what had happened a sumptuous meal was laid out on the floor before us. After dinner we had a short respite while the Berawans watched a cine-ma show, and then the party started spontaneously again with Mrs Lawai (Kasi) acting as hostess. The fair sex became less gentle and more boisterous and there was no doubt that they were all thoroughly enjoy-ing the party, with its singing and dancing. One by one we guests excused ourselves in the early hours of the morning, murmuring that we had had a long day and were tired and we retired to bed, but our hostesses refused to be baulked of their determination to enjoy themselves and so would come and haul the slumbering guest out of his mosquito net to carry on with the fun and games. For myself I know that at 3 a.m. I was at last allowed an uneasy sleep to the sound of merry-making on the verandah which lasted until daylight, when I shakily stepped out of my room to find a lady waiting with a morning pick-me-up of rather dirty and vinegary looking borak for me. As His Excellency and party were carrying on their ablutions at the water's edge we were all rather alarmed to find the indefatigable Kasi and a bunch of Amazons coming towards us with their hands covered with mud and pot black, smearing menfolk and their hair and clothes with this mixture and pushing others into the river. Various native officers were vanquished by these ladies while members of the crew of Lorna Doone fled before them. The District Officer was caught unawares by them and overcome and the Resident too had to pretend he enjoyed the hearty party spirit of being dirtied just after he had washed himself. There was no doubt that these people were out to enjoy them-selves in the traditional manner on this, the first visit of the Head of the State to the Tinjar for a very long time indeed.
After this most of His Excellency’s party accom-panied him to Bunut Lake, leaving at 7.30 a.m. while the remainder of the party arranged the switchover from Lorna Doone to three large outboards. Al-together there were 17 outboard engines taken upriver, this large number being necessary to allow for boats of different sizes in all depths of water and for re-placements in case of break-downs. About 11 a.m. the whole party carried on up the Tinjar. We called
on the Penans under Tama Sedut, who entertained us traditionally, and then we had a cold lunch on the grass of the river bank near an empty hut and reached Long Jegan, Tama Arek Subai's Berawan house, at about 5.30 p.m. Our hospitable hosts provided a fish and chicken dinner for us. After the cinema show, the party began in the same mood as that of the previous night, but these Berawans were slightly more restrained and the dancing was more beautiful. Even so the maidens did not wish to appear to be lacking in hos-pitality and plied us with borak with a verve and hied one or two of us out of our beds after we were slum-bering happily, and forced us to rejoin the party. Native Officer Wan Hashim was especially to be con-gratulated and commiserated with in this matter as he had worked hard all day and yet allowed himself to show no signs of fatigue at night despite the fact that he was hauled out of bed 2 or 3 times a night and could get little sleep before 5 a.m. Penghulu Gau too was a tower of strength at party times, but then he is experienced in these matters and took care to sleep as much as he could during the day or during cinema shows.
On the 4th October we were away by 8.30 a.m. and called at the Sebop houses of Aban Matu at Long Sungai and Tama Itang Bit at Long Simiton (where we were given some well-hung pork cooked in bamboo) and reached the Sebop house of Wakil Penghulu Balan Lijau at Long Tejoi at about 5 p.m. U.R.A. Bela-lang (Tama Abit) was also there. After a bathe and dinner we witnessed a drill display by the school children of nearby Leppu Leju and some excellent dancing by both sexes. The party went with a swing and ended with guests and hosts doing a Conga in the early hours of the morning.
We changed into eight perahus on 5th October and first of all visited Leppu Leju Bazaar, where the Chinese entertained His Excellency hospitably, and then went to the kubu which is now the Local Autho-rity school. His Excellency looked round the school and had tea with the headmaster. We carried on up-river visiting Usat Lian's Sebop house at Long Aton, had lunch and a pleasant bathe at a 'kerangan' in the river, which was now beginning to get clear and at 5 p.m. reached the Lirong house of Tama Itang Liah just up the Dapoi River, which is where the Tinjar begins. The Lirongs gave us a very good party. By this stage some of us were beginning to get the knack of how to take a sip and refuse the rest of the drinks offered by muscular, buoyant maidens and also of how to persuade them to accept one’s drink without having borak spilled down one’s own shirt front. The main thing, I found, is not to bend one’s arm at the elbow.
On 6th October the water was up quite a lot, and we had a speedy but exciting journey up the Dapoi to the Sebop house of Tinggang Keling at Long Buroi, arriving there in time for lunch. That afternoon His Excellency went a short way upriver and caught his first fresh water fish in Sarawak waters, an Ikan Semah of 2 katis, which made an excellent supper for us all. That night the party was slow to begin, but worked up to the usual peak, slackening off soon after daybreak. There was no doubt that in this area each house had long looked forward to His Excellency's visit and was determined to make it an unforgettable occasion, regardless of the strain on the guests, who were beginning to droop somewhat at this treatment every night and often by day as well.
Next day was to be a restful holiday at Long Buroi. It started off however with three pigs being ceremoni-ously killed on the verandah, after which His Excel-lency, accompanied by the Resident, Private Secretary
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, OCTOBER 31, 1953
183
and Penghulu Gau went on upriver for a couple of hours till we eventually reached a very lovely small gorge with a deep pool and some rocks in it. Before lunch the Honourable the Resident had distinguished himself by catching his first fresh water fish ever, a fighting Ikan Adong weighing almost one tahil. This was later divided up amongst ten of us for lunch. That evening a rather more distinguished event occurred, for at the top of a rapid he caught a whop-per of a fish and the boat, with 10 excited people in it all shouting instructions to which no one listened, and the rod and line and the fish careered down the short rapid. The fish reached the bottom first and wound itself in and out amongst some sunken tree trunks in a pool and there stuck fast. People dived in after it and eventually one Lirong caught it in his jersey. Thus did the Resident land his second fish, a three kati Ikan Semah, in rather an irregular and un-orthodox manner, but one suitable to the difficult circumstances in which he found himself. This fish was much appreciated for dinner that night, though we found when we got back that the Sebops had laid out a veritable banquet at which there must have been 200 persons present seated on the floor. The three pigs formed a large part of the food provided. Any hope some of us had that last night’s party would suffice and we could get some sleep was soon dashed, as an-other party developed. Though most of us got to bed by 1 a.m. we were awakened at 2 a.m. by the usual complement of competent maidens. So far as I was concerned they first of all tickled my feet through the mosquito net. When I ignored that they lifted up the net and let in the mosquitoes. I pretended this had no effect and I ignored their repeated calls to come out and 'main-main,' yet I could not go to sleep as I heard them nearby whispering a plan of campaign amongst themselves. Next I found the mosquito net was let down around my feet and I felt despair well-ing up within me. Then they let the net down over my face and smothered me. So fully awakened I went out and joined the Conga up and down the house until 3 a.m. when I sneaked off unperceived. My experience was much the same as that of other members of the party, although some of them were got out of bed as much as three times in one night. Lest I have given the impression that these ladies of the Tinjar are harridans, I hasten to state here, that normally they really are most charming, and feminine and carry themselves well and with great dignity, but there is no getting away from the fact that they are very hearty about a party.
Rather jadedly His Excellency's party rose in time to be off by 7 a.m. Only one of the more active maidens of the previous night had succumbed and failed to make an appearance on the verandah to see us off. When the majority of us were in our boats ready to set off we noted with some concern the Hon-ourable the Resident, his face and clothes streaked with black finger-like marks, approaching rapidly along batangs and tanggas and followed more rapidly, like a battleship surrounded by destroyers, by the ladies of the house. Three maidens leaped into His Excellency's boat uninvited and showed their goodwill and knowledge of the right way to send off a treasured guest by splashing water at us all regardless of our cameras and binoculars. Such is the strength of these 'ulu' maidens that they successfully resisted being thrown out of the boat. Gently splashing us at inter-vals and gaily laughing the maidens accompanied us across the Dapoi River and a hundred yards up the Buroi River, when with one accord they leaped out of the boat into shallow water and gurgling with mer-riment really got down to soaking us. The District
Officer, Resident and Penghulu Gau leaped out and held them at bay while the rest of us made a hurried and ignominous getaway. The last I saw of Penghulu Gau for some time was the three members of the fair sex sitting on him in about three feet of water. Such is the traditional 'adat' of these people. An overnight stay in their houses and a farewell next morning is certainly a memorable one, and serves its purpose of ensuring one doesn't forget one's hosts.
Wet and bedraggled we got out of our boats and walked for nearly 5 hours before we reached the next house. First we walked for 3 hours up the Buroi River then over a small watershed and walked down the Belepau River to its junction with the Pakulon River. We arrived in time for lunch at a house now inhabited by settled Penans under Basing Kedaman, though a generation or so ago they were nomadic. The luggage went ahead early while His Excellency and some of us followed later in perahus and were thus caught in drenching rain and were thoroughly wet and cold, but revivified with dry towels and hot tea on arrival at the Penan house of Tama Lorai Nagan at Long Tah in the Nibong River. These people mercifully do not have quite the same vigorous tradi-tion of parlies, and we had a pleasant time with just enough dancing to watch and borak to drink to make us enjoy it, and we were actually allowed to go to bed at 11.30 p.m. and thereafter were not disturbed by anything more than the usual noises that accom-pany longhouse life.
Next morning, the 9th October, we were up at day-break as we had a long journey to do and would have to go hell-for-leather to reach our destination. We were disheartened to find that our breakfast had been eaten during the night by dogs. I had always heard Penans were fond of their animals. The dogs had not taken the coffee, however, nor a tin of dry biscuits. We left at 7 a.m. and stopped at Long Nibong to visit Utong Jangan with his partly Penan and partly Sebob longhouse, and then were soon back in the Tinjar, which to our surprise was in a high flood. Longhouses and Leppu Leju Bazaar were standing in water and huge trees were sweeping downstream. We dropped the U.R.A. and Wakil Penghulu Balan Lijau at Long Tejoi after a small party there and with the help of the favourable water all reached Long Teru at 7 p.m. which was very good going, as we had started in a multitude of small boats, had a party or two on the way and switched into three big boats. It says a lot for the District Officer’s organisation and luck that through the trip we kept up to schedule and out of all the outboards in use we broke only one pin. At Long Teru we found Lorna Doone waiting for us. After a wash and brush-up we adventured into the longhouse and found the familiar face of Kasi (Mrs. Penghulu Lawai) waiting to do us the honours of the evening. However with the experience of our trip be-hind us we managed to make the party here pleasant though fast and furious and all retired satisfied by about 11 p.m.
On a cold misty double-tenth we left Long Teru at 6 a.m., reaching Marudi about 10 a.m. His Excel-lency met Dr., Mrs. and Miss de Zulueta, photographs of the expedition were taken. His Excellency con-gratulated the outboard drivers on their magnificent performance and we transferred to Mermaid leav-ing Mr. and Mrs. Morrison and the Native Officers behind. Early that evening we reached Kuala Baram, where His Excellency and Mr. Wan Tho went bird watching, and later Mr. Wan Tho and the Resident climbed the Baram lighthouse. Next morning we dis-embarked and were driven to the Residency at Miri. That evening His Excellency and the remainder of his
184
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, OCTOBER 31, 1953
party were entertained at a very successful drinks party given by the Chinese Chamber of Commerce in their spacious new building.
On the 12th October His Excellency left in Mermaid for Kuching arriving there after dark next day. Much lack of sleep was made up on this part of the journey which was unevenful apart from the unexpected arrival of a lesser blue-winged pitta or some such bird which knocked itself out on Mermaid some 20 miles off Kuala Igan in the darkness.
To end up with I might mention once again how very much appreciated is the Information Office film unit on these ulu trips, if only because during the performance some of us can get an hour or two’s sleep and so help to prepare ourselves for the pleasures to come.
(Contributed.)
United Nations Day, 1953
[Note:—United Nations Week was celebrated in Kuching from October 17th to 24th, 1953. At a dinner held by the Kuching Rotary Club on October 21st, the President of the Club, Mr. G. T. Bates, gave an address which we regard as so important that, with Mr. Bates's permission, we print below the test in full.]
October the twenty-fourth is the birthday of the United Nations, but there is something appropriate in our holding our celebration to-day. October the twenty-first is perhaps the most famous anniversary in British history. To-day is the 148th anniversary of the Battle of Trafalgar. France, Britain's enemy in that fight and that war, has become one of her closest friends and allies. This shows what is possible between nations.
This is only the eighth birthday of the United Na-tions. They have been eight stormy years. Although all that we hoped for has not been achieved the United Nations has had a stabilising influence and much has been achieved in alleviating the distress and hardships caused by six years of war.
The father of the United Nations was Franklin Delano Roosevelt, President of the United States of America. It was his conception, and his dying dream. There is among his papers a single sheet on which, at the Teheran Conference table in November, 1943, he sketched out, in pencilled circles and little scribbled notes, his idea—which was not far from the final form—of what the organization should be; and when he died on April 12, 1945, he was at work on the speech he was to have made a fortnight later at the opening of the San Francisco Conference at which the Charter of the United Nations was hammered out and accepted and signed by the representatives of sixty nations.
The Organization came formally into being on October 24th, 1945, and it was decided that the permanent headquarters should be in the United States. Here is the Preamble to the Charter:
WE THE PEOPLES OF THE UNITED NATIONS DETERMINE
to save succeeding generations from the scourge of war, which twice in our life time has brought untold sorrow to mankind, and
to reaffirm faith in fundamental rights, in the dignity and worth of the human person, in the equal rights of men and women and of nations large and small, and
to establish conditions under which justice and respect for the obligations arising from treaties and other sources of international law can be maintained, and
to promote social progress and better standards of life in larger freedom.
AND FOR THESE ENDS
to practise tolerance and live together in peace with one another as good neighbours, and
to unite our strength to maintain international peace and security, and
to ensure, by the acceptance of the principles and the institution of methods, that armed force shall not be used, save in the common interest, and
to employ international machinery for the pro-motion of the economic and social advancement of all peoples.
HAVE RESOLVED TO COMBINE OUR EFFORTS TO ACCOMPLISH THESE AIMS
Accordingly, our respective Governments, through representatives assembled in the City of San Fran-cisco who have exhibited their full powers found to be in good and due form, have agreed to the present Charter of the United Nations and do hereby establish an international organization to be known as the United Nations
The basis of the whole conception was that the United Nations should be both united and universal. We can see only too clearly that neither of these ideals has yet been achieved. Here in Eastern Asia we have seen it with especial vividness, with the Chinese revolution and the Korean war very near us. But the organization is still in being, and in the year since we last met here for this celebration the most dramatic and hopeful event in the history of the United Nations has happened. I refer, of course, to the signing of the armistice in Korea.
I spoke of the Korean war. That is really not the right term to use. When the aggression began in June, 1950, and was at once opposed, the words "police action" were used, and those are the words we should keep in mind. When the armistice was signed, The New Yorker, one of the wisest and most civilized papers in the world, said this:
“The Korean action was, it seems to us, a germinal police action, and the young men who gave their blood to it supplied a new bright face to freedom’s old, staunch frame........The resistance
in Korea not only halted an aggressor in the middle of his mischief, it helped tear down the popular and devastating fallacy that each nation is a world unto itself.”
But resistance to aggression, though it is the most pregnant for good or evil, is very far from the only achievement of the United Nations, as we in Sarawak have good reason to know. The United Nations has many agencies, known by confusing assemblages of initials and served with single-minded devotion by their staff—UNESCO, ILO, FAO, UNICEF, WHO, and others. It is to the last two we have especial cause to be grateful, and I feel justified in taking a few minutes to summarise what they have done for us.
UNICEF—the United Nations International Child-ren's Emergency Fund—has lent to Sarawak for a term a midwife teacher and a children’s sister, and has given ward equipment; a skim-milk and fish-oil capsules feeding scheme; a lecture room and equip-ment; two jeeps; and has lent a B.C.G. team. For next year, now awaiting final approval, there is a further milk powder feeding scheme for two years at 40,000 lbs. a year, maternity and child health equip-ment for five centres, and further teaching equipment.
The other agency that has helped us is WHO—the World Health Organization, and this is a very im-pressive story. We all know of the splendid and tireless work now being done by Dr. Zulueta, assisted by Dr. Sambasiram, in the anti-malaria pilot project, which is to last for two years in all and may do incul-culable benefit to the health of the people; and it would be difficult to forget the visit of the WHO ophthalmologist last December who—to quote the report of the Director of Medical Services—in a space
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, OCTOBER 31, 1953
185
of three weeks "restored sight by surgery to thirty-nine blind persons and left a valuable legacy of example and instruction to the medical staff.” WHO has also given a scholarship for a course next year in the United Kingdom in ophthalmology, and in the past year two scholarships were given, to a senior health inspector and the chief laboratory technician. A WHO adviser is here now to advise on water supplies and a hospital architect has made visits and drawn plans. And UNESCO has given a scholarship for a dental nurse in New Zealand.
All this brings the United Nations home to us and is very good cause for making this evening an occasion of thanksgiving, and I would urge you with all my power to show your thanks, each one of you, by keep-ing the ideal for which the United Nations still stands, and must always stand if it is to live—by keeping this, the united and universal ideal, always in your hearts and minds. It should not be difficult, for it is the same basic ideal as that of Rotary International.
I have been talking, perhaps too much, about organizations, but in speaking of this subject it is difficult not to, for organization is the rock on which the whole structure is built and without which it falls in ruins to the ground—organization infused with unselfishness. But, welcomed in human terms, we can bring the idea closer to our hearts, as in Rotary we strive to do. This should not be difficult in this country, where men and women of diverse races live and work in harmony.
I ask you again to ponder over these things, and not this evening and this week only, but throughout this United Nations year that begins on October the twenty-fourth, and throughout your lives. I ask you to pray that God's blessing may rest upon the United Nations and upon all who serve them, searching your hearts and placing yourselves, by your striving, among those who serve.
Problems of Multi-Racial Societies
The difficulty of promoting constitutional advance on the road to self-government in any multi-racial colony in the face of the competing nationalisms of the various races concerned is obvious. In Malaya, for example, self-government cannot be achieved, although it is equally the political objective of Malays, Chinese, Indians and British, until those four communities, all living side by side, have sunk their differences and joined together in a genuine, shared determination to forge a united Malayan nation, founded not on race but on a common interest in the welfare and the future of the land in which they live.
Similarly self-government can only be achieved in such multi-racial societies in East Africa as those of Kenya and Tanganyika, when Africans, Indians, Pakis-tanis, Europeans and Arabs have learned to subordi-nate their sectional interests and to co-operate on a basis of inter-racial partnership. The necessity for this, on grounds of both practical expediency and moral principle, has been fully recognised not only by Britain's Colonial Office but by all the responsible leaders of opinion in all communities in East Africa. Considerable progress, indeed, in influencing public opinion and in practical measures designed to promote “partnership” has been made since World War II.
In Kenya such steps as the founding, by local leaders of all races, of the Kenya Citizens' Union, and the successful establishment of an inter-racial social club were promising evidence of the trend of public opinion. The present Mau Mau outbreak among the Kikuyu tribe (to which it is at present restricted) is an explo-itation of the ancient tribal traditions of witchcraft and the secret society, it is not only anti-European, it is
also anti-Christian, anti-Indian. anti-Pakistani and anti-government. It preaches the doctrine of zealotry, that if every alien influence, if every aspect of Western civilization is driven from the country, the ancient “golden-age” of Africa will return—that age which, in fact, was soaked with the blood of tribal warfare and ravaged by the slave-trade, that age from which the Europeans, whatever else they may have done, liber-ated all the peoples of East and Central Africa.
The chief danger of Mau Mau may well be that its extremism may breed extremism on the other side and so set back the movement for inter-racial co-opera-tion just when it is getting into its stride. It is at least a comfort to know that, so far, the British and Asian communities have behaved, in the face of mur-derous provocation, with great restraint, and there is even evidence that the leaders of the United Kingdom settlers are more than ever convinced that the future of Kenya depends on their ability to win the trust and friendship even of the Kikuyu. Whatever happens such partnership remains and must remain the goal.
In Tanganyika progress towards this goal has been faster and quite harmonious. There, in 1951 a com-mittee of local political leaders of all races met and unanimously recommended that the whole system of local government in the country should be remodelled in order to enable British, Asians and Africans to work together in public affairs. More important still, they recommended that in a newly constituted Legislative Council there should be seven United Kingdom, seven Asian, and seven African representatives on the "un-official" side. These recommendations have been accepted by the United Kingdom Government and will be carried out over the next few years. The principle of inter-racial co-operation has thus been fully and definitely proclaimed by the people of Tan-ganyika and a splendid example set for other multi-racial societies. In Tanganyika, if anywhere, it looks as though the miracle of partnership may be achieved.
Central Africa, too, is multi-racial, though the Asian community is relatively small, but there the political situation is somewhat different. The pros and cons of the great project for the Federation of the two Rho-desias and Nyasaland are too complicated for discus-sion here, but two points are particularly relevant to the question of inter-racial partnership; first, all three states have explicitly rejected the South African phi-losophy of apartheid and have made political and economic partnership between Europeans and Africans the foundation stone of future development; and. second, what is proposed is only a limited form of political federation which would leave Northern Rho-desia and Nyasaland, in so far as African affairs are concerned, under the protection of Britain’s Colonial Office—and most rigid constitutional safeguards are proposed to ensure that the rights and the future of the Africans are protected. Here, too, inter-racial partnership is made the keystone of United Kingdom policy.
Even such a short and necessarily superficial survey as this is, perhaps, enough to show that the problems of East and Central Africa are generically different from those of West Africa, and that in all multi-racial societies, where there are competing nationalisms, the only possible basis for shared prosperity, happiness, and political freedom, is co-operation. Domination by any one community can have no future, not even for those who dominate.
Whether this solution can ever be achieved will de-pend mainly on circumstances and the development of public opinion in the territories concerned, but those of us who believe that it must and will be achieved
186
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, OCTOBER 31, 1953
are not discouraged. In Africa Tanganyika is showing the way; in Malaya the inter-communal movements are gaining strength; in Trinidad, Jamaica and British Guiana race has ceased to be the political criterion. One day, we hope, the colour of a person’s skin will cease to matter anywhere, and on this ideal Britain has based her policy.
Kenneth Bradley
The Good Old Days
(Extracts from Sarawak Gazette)
September 1, 1887.
The new printing press which recently arrived from England has been used for the first time in the publi-cation of this number of the Sarawak Gazette. It is of the make known as “Harrild’s Bremner” and is a most complete and handsome piece of machinery. It has appliances capable of producing all kinds of printer's work.
Being considerably larger than that previous(ly) in use, two houses have been taken in the bazaar and thrown into one which forms a commodious printing office and godown, much more convenient than the old one in the Court House which was rather limited as regards elbow room. Another advantage is that the new office being in the bazaar the other Government offices will be spared the noise which used to reach them from it when the machinery was at work.
(We are informed on good authority that the two shophouses referred to stood on the present site of Nos. 20 & 21, Court House Road, at the function of India Street and Court House Road—Editor)
March 1, 1888
The Illustrated London News of the 31st December last devotes a column to the criticism of a number of the Sarawak Gazette under the heading of "A Tropical Curiosity." The article is written in a pleasant man-ner and is most flattering to our little paper.
May 1, 1888
The question of forming a Cricket Club in Kuching has of late been frequently discussed and on the 24th ultimo, a meeting was held for this purpose. Some twenty names had been previously obtained, of gentle-men willing to join and subcribe towards its mainten-ance. Nothing, I believe, was definitely settled at the meeting except that Major Day should be empowered to forthwith collect six months' subcriptions in advance, to meet the charges of sending to England for the necessary outfit.
September 1, 1891
On the 4th (of August) the Honourable C.A. Bam-fylde invited some twenty guests to dance in the Court House, among whom were the exceptionally large muster of over forty Europeans. The building was tastefully decorated with flags, palms, fem &c: and the verandahs hung with many coloured lights. Dan-cing which was energetically kept up until after 2 a.m. went on in the body of the Court, the dais was taste-fully arranged as a drawing room, and supper, supplied by Messrs. Chong Kim Eng, was served in the Resident's Office. Treasury was for the time being converted into a card room and the Land Office was occupied as bar and refreshment room. The Court floor seemed to be in capital order for dancing having been well waxed, and the evening passed most suc-cessfully.
CORRESPONDENCE
c/o Bank of New Zealand, Queen Victoria Street, London, E.C. 4.,
22nd September, 1953
The Editor,
Sarawak Gazette,
Kuching.
Dear Sir,
It may interest any of your readers who contemplate travel in Italy to know that the large Italian Tourist Agencies charge a fee of twenty per cent on the cost of rail tickets, bus tickets and hotel accommodation when such services are booked and paid for through the agency. This surcharge is also applied to incidental expenses incurred by the agency such as telephone calls, taxis and other transport etc. This all makes the cost of such travel unnecessarily expensive.
Yours faithfully.
D. L. LEACH.
Hard Cases
(1) What is a Durian?
This is the first of a series of "Hard Cases" collected by Mr. Lionel Reynolds, a hard-boiled egg of 67 years' residence in Malaya (off and on). The author wishes it to be understood that this case did not happen in Malaya and that the characters referred to here-under do not, cannot and are not intended to refer to any person living or dead since 1819.
The Plaintiff and the Defendant are members of the Kuala Karang Sanitary Board, which meets at Kuala Karang once a week to discuss the Municipal affairs of that town.
The matters complained of by the Plaintiff against the Defendant occurred during four meetings of the Board in the month of July, 1938. Before attending these meetings the Defendant consumed several durians, with the result that the stench which ac-companied the Defendant's breathing caused serious discomfort to the Plaintiff, and ultimately brought about a serious nervous break-down of his health. The Plaintiff claimed an injunction and damages.
In his defence the Defendant pleaded that legally he was perfectly entitled to eat what he pleased; and he also relied on the Colony Charter of 1858.
The Plaintiff relied on the well-known case of Rylands v. Fletcher.
Mr. F. G. V. Cole-Tarr appeared for the Plaintiff.
Mr. S. D. Jones-Plum appeared for the Defendant.
The judgment of the Court was delivered by the Honourable Mr. Justice Cobwebb and reads as follows:—
"The Plaintiff and the Defendant are hard-working members of a public-spirited body of unpaid officials known as the Kuala Karang Sanitary Board. This Board meets every Saturday at the Town Hall of Kuala Karang to discuss the Municipal affairs of the Town.
It appears that for some years past the Plaintiff and the Defendant were not on friendly terms. The bad feeling between them is alleged to have arisen during a discussion at one of the meetings of the Board, to decide whether or not a clock should be erected in the centre of the Markel Square in the Town. How-ever, the cause of the friction is immaterial, but from the evidence I am satisfied that the parties definitely entertained spiteful and unfriendly feelings towards one another, Mr. Baba Pitchay, another member of the
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, OCTOBER 31, 1953
187
VISIT OF THE GOODWILL MISSION FROM WEST BORNEO (KALIMANTAN BARAT) TO SARAWAK, OCTOBER 1953
GSIS
The arrival of the visitors, led by Bambang Soeparto, Resident Co-ordinator, Kalimantan Barat, (seen standing between the Resident, First Division, Mr, L. K. Morse, and the Commissioner, Sarawak Constabulary, Mr. G. E. Wilson), at Pontoon Wharf. Kuching, on Friday, 16th October, 1953
GSIS
Members of the Mission watching a demonstration of musketry training at the Police Training School, Kuching, on Saturday, 17th October, 1953
188
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, OCTOBER 31, 1953
GSIS
Cadets of fourteen different races at the Police Training School, Kuching, being inspected by members of the Mission, Saturday, 17th October. 1953
GSIS
Members of the Mission with men of the Field Force, Bukit Seol, after the staging of a demonstration ambush attack on an armed lorry, Saturday, 17th October, 1953
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, OCTOBER 31, 1953
189
Sarawak Press
Bambang Soeparto speaking at the Civic Luncheon given in honour of the Mission by Kuching Municipal Council at Jubilee Hall on Sunday, 18th October, 1953. On the Resident Co-ordinator's right is His Excellency the Governor of Sarawak, and on Bambang Soeparto's left the Chairman of the Council, Mr. W. S. B. Buck, who presided.
GSIS
His Excellency the Governor bidding farewell to the members of the Mission at Pontoon Wharf, Kuching, Monday, 19th October, 1953
190
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, OCTOBER 31, 1953
Niah Caves
GSIS
An illustration to the article on page 193 showing Iban men climbing the bamboo poles in Niah Caves in quest of edible birds’ nest.
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, OCTOBER 31, 1953
191
Board, gave evidence that the Plaintiff has been known to faint at the mere sight of a durian. This state-ment at first seemed to me almost incredible. But I have had the advantage of hearing the evidence of Professor Lallang (the eminent Malayan Botanist), as to what a durian really is.
The Professor says that the word "durian" is derived from the Malay word “duri" which means a thorn. The durian is the first of the Durio Zibethi-nus, and is spherical or oblong in shape. It varies in size from 5 to 9 inches in diameter and has a hard shell, which is completely covered with strong spines or spikes meeting at the base and terminating in sharp thorny points. When the fruit is opened at the joins of the carpels, it is found to contain a number of arched chambers in which repose 4 to 6 seeds covered with a cream-coloured glutinous custard. The first is much relished by natives and tigers, but to Europ-eans its taste and smell arc offensively overpowering. According to Professor Lallang this unique firuit is the curse of European existence in Malaya. He says its smell may be compared to that emanating from rotten onions and putrid animal matter. I accept the opinion of Professor Lallang, without hesitation.
I now revert to the evidence of Baba Pichay. He says that two hours before each meeting of the Board, throughout the whole of July, 1938, the Defendant used to consume 6 to 7 large-sized durians with the avowed intention of causing the Plaintiff physical and nauseating discomfort. I was somewhat perplexed as to how the consumption of 6 to 7 durians by one person could cause discomfort to another. I should have thought that the consumer would be the person to suffer the discomfort. But here again Professor Lallang has come to my assistance. The learned Professor says that the stench emanating from the breath of a durian-eater is most obnoxious and over-powering, and what is worse, he has satisfied me that when once a durian has been consumed, its odour comes out in strong whiffs at each exhalation, with the regularity of a recurring decimal. In fact, the Professor has proved his contention, because he con-firmed my suspicions when I taxed him with having consumed this disgusting fruit, before coming to Court.
My sympathies are entirely with the Plaintiff, especially as Mr. Baba Pitchay has deposed to the fact that, at each meeting, the Defendant would not take his seat until the Plaintiff had sat himself down. The Defendant would then choose a chair immediately opposite the Plaintiff For these facts I find that the Defendant's consumption of the durians was an act of deliberate and malicious intent, done and performed solely with the idea of causing physical discomfort and injury to the Plaintiff.
The question the Court is called upon to decide is whether the Plaintiff is legally entitled to the in-junction which he claims. Plaintiff’s Counsel relied on the well-known case of Rylands v. Fletcher, a case that was decided by the House of the Lords 90 years ago, and has been accepted ever since as good law. In Rylands v. Fletcher it was laid down that "the rule of law is that the person, who for his own purposes brings on his lands and collects and keeps there anything likely to do mischief if it escapes, must keep it in at his peril, and if he does not do so, is prima facie answerable for all the damage which is the natural consequence of the escape. He can excuse himself by showing that the escape was owing to the Plaintiff’s default, or, perhaps that the escape was the consequence of vis major or the Act of God. This is the law whether the things so brought be beasts, or water, or filth, or stenches.” In my view this authority could be applied to durian con-sumers. If a person will introduce durians into his system he must keep in the aftermath of gaseous stenches, (generally accompanied by concomitant regur-gitations), and not let them escape so as to annoy or damage other persons. If he does not do so, he is liable for all the consequences.
Counsel for the Defendant attempted to suggest that the process of breathing was an Act of God, and would therefore excuse the Defendant, but I do not accept his contention. He also relied on the S.S. Charter, where it is laid down that, wherever possible, effect must be given to the customs and habits of the various inhabitants of this Colony. But as the Plain-tiff and the Defendant are Europeans, I fail to see what the Charter has to do with the question before me. I find that the Plaintiff has established his claim to an injunction. There will be an injunction restraining the Defendant from consuming durians for at least 7 days before each meeting of the Kuala Karang Sanitary Board. I realise that this means that the Defendant will be prohibited from consuming durians so long as he remains a member of that Board, but he must make his choice; either he must forgo durians or his seal on the Board.
As to the question of damages, Dr. Pill-Roller has testified that the Plaintiff is now a nervous wreck and is unable to attend to his business with his former zest and success. The Plaintiff’s wife says that her husband now suffers from acute insomnia and often dreams and shouts out in his sleep, the words "Damn that durian” whether that fruit is in season or not.
For the injury to his health and business. I award the Plaintiff $50,000. The Plaintiff will also have his costs."
(Extract from August, 1953, issue of MALAYA by kind permission of the publishers.)
Council Negri, September, 1953
Kuching Automatic Telephone Exchange
The Sarawak Development Plan (1951-1957) con-tains provision for the replacement of the existing telephone exchange in Kuching by an automatic exchange.
Proposals were submitted by the Postmaster-General for an exchange of 800 lines, which could subsequently, if necessary, be extended to 2,000 lines, and approval was given by Government in September, 1952, to the purchase of the necessary equipment and laying of underground cables, at a cost of $1,072,479. The Postmaster-General was at the time on leave in Eng-land, and he immediately made contact with the Crown Agents and arranged for the necesary lenders to be called for with the minimum delay.
The first consignment of 19 drums (9,700 yards) of 100 pair underground cable arrived in Kuching in July of this year, and it is expected to complete laying of the cables and jointing in twelve months.
The exchange itself is scheduled for delivery in England in June, 1954, and the building which will house it will, it is hoped, be completed by that time. Government has already made available a sum of $80,000 for the building.
Recruitment in Sarawak of suitable staff for the operation of the exchange is proving difficult. It will therefore be necessary for a certain amount of the recruitment to be done outside Sarawak, and this can be done only when quarters are available. Building of quarters is now in progress and it is hoped that they will be considerably advanced within the next few months.
Every effort will be made to expedite the change-over from the present exchange to the automatic exchange.
Honourable Members may also be interested to know what progress has been made in our plans for new telephone exchanges in Sibu and Miri.
A sum of $280,000 has been provided in the Development Plan for the purchase of a new exchange and cables for Sibu. The exchange will be of the ordinary C.B. type and not automatic. It will be an exchange of 300 lines, capable of extension up to 500.
192
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, OCTOBER 31, 1953
An indent was sent to London in June, 1953, specify-ing the same type of equipment as had by then been decided upon for Kuching, but no information has yet been received as to the delivery date. It was at first intended to use overhead cables, but, as a result of the recommendations of an expert who visited the Colony early this year, it was decided that underground cables were preferable. They were ordered in April, and delivery in the United Kingdom is expected at the end of September.
Provision of $249,500 has been made in the Development Plan for the purchase of a 100-line C.B. exchange for Miri. This was ordered early in 1952 and has been delivered. It cannot be installed until the cables have been laid. The ordering of these was left till the visit of the expert referred to above, and, as in the case of Sibu, underground cables will be laid. They were ordered al the same time as those for Sibu, and will be delivered in the United Kingdom at the end of September.
Kuching Waterworks
Two measures are being taken to increase the flow of water from Matang.
The existing 3 miles of 9" pipe which connect Sungei China and Sungei Bawang with the main pipe-line are being replaced with a new 12" pipe. This alteration will only increase the supply during the wetter months of the year when there is adequate water at the Sungei China Dam. The necessary materials for this work were ordered some sixteen months ago. The pipes arrived recently but the valves, bends and tees are not yet all to hand.
To increase the supply from Matang during the drier months of the year is more difficult. In order that the water will flow to Kuching by gravity it has to be collected at about the 400 foot contour and all the water which it is practicable to collect at this level during dry spells is already being collected into the system.
Although, during dry spells, all the water in the streams at the 400 foot level is diverted into the pipe-lines, the flow in the streams does gradually build up again lower down the valleys, and in the case of the Sungei China this flow is worth taking into considera-tion. It is proposed, therefore, to erect a temporary plant to collect and pump this water into the pipeline.
People who do not know the terrain at Matang no doubt think that additional storage reservoirs should be constructed there, but investigations going back many years have failed to find a suitable site at the required elevation. Dams could, of course, be con-structed but owing to the steepness of the valleys the small amount of water impounded would be out of all proportion to the cost of the dams.
The distribution system in Kuching is overloaded under the present conditions of intermittent supply, but will be reasonably satisfactory in most areas when a twenty-four hour supply is again available.
Certain pipes are known to be too small. Materials for replacing some of these pipes have been on order for many months, and provision for the replacement of others has been entered in the 1954 Draft Estimates.
Batu Kitang Water-Supply Scheme
Preliminary investigations for the Batu Kitang Water-Supply Scheme were carried out by the Public Works Department staff, but as the Department was so short of staff at the time it was decided in January, 1952, to recruit an engineer on contract especially to design and carry out this work. Efforts were made to obtain the services of a suitably qualified waterworks engineer from Malaya, Australia and Great Britain without success, and it was only towards the latter part of August that a fully qualified waterworks engineer arrived in Sarawak. After a brief period of work on the Batu Kitang Scheme he is proceeding to Sarikei where his arrival has been eagerly awaited for many years.
It was, therefore, decided that the Public Works Department should carry out the general design and order the necessary materials for the pipeline, and that a firm of Filter Plant Manufacturers should be asked to do the detail design of the treatment plant and pumping installation.
The design of the treatment plant and pumping installation was nearing completion in January, 1953, when exceptionally heavy floods occurred in the upper reaches of the Sarawak River. The flood level at Batu Kitang was three feet higher than the highest previously known flood. The bed of the river near the proposed intake just below Batu Kitang Bazaar was scoured out to a depth of over ten feet below its previous level, and several heavy landslides took place near the pro-posed site of the treatment plant. It was, therefore, considered prudent to carry out further investigations and to re-design and re-site parts of the works. It is extremely difficult to find suitable sites at the required levels in the Batu Kitang area. The terrain consists mostly of low ground liable to flooding, or steep-sided hills which are too high for our purpose. Also most of the ground is of unsuitable type. The re-designed scheme is now nearing completion and trial pits and bore holes which it is hoped will finally decide the best site for the treatment plant are almost completed.
The pumps cannot be definitely ordered until the site and elevation at the treatment plant has been fixed, and the time of delivery may be as much as eighteen months.
All pipes and fittings for the new pipeline have been ordered. The asbestos cement pipes are already arriv-ing but we have no definite delivery time for the cast iron valves, bends and tees.
The road from the 7th Mile, Rock Road to Batu Kitang is being reconstructed with an eight-foot verge on one side in which the new pipe will be laid.
Negotiations are in hand with the Sarawak Electricity Supply Company concerning the supply of electric current and the erection of a transmission line to Batu Kitang.
Subject to the limitations of staff and plant at the disposal of the Public Works Department, everything possible will be done to push forward the completion of this scheme as rapidly as is possible.
Visit of a North Borneo Delegation to Limbang
A delegation from North Borneo paid a visit to Limbang on 10th August and stayed here for two days as guests of the District Officer, Abang Haji Abdul-rahim. The delegation was headed by O.K.K. Has-bullah and comprised three other members who were O.T. Taka, O.T. Binawas and Mohd Said. During their stay in Limbang arrangements were made for them to visit government offices, schools and bazaar, and in particular to observe the work of the Limbang District Council.
Soon after the party arrived at noon of the 10th they called on the Resident to pay their respects where-upon a programme of visits was drawn up for them. They were invited to be present at the opening session of the Limbang District Council on the following day.
Heavy rain in the afternoon prevented the party from embarking on a sight-seeing tour of the town and the surrounding kampongs. They were instead shewn round the offices and explained, among other things, the intricacies of the “tin system” of enumerating po-pulation, at present in use in different Divisions.
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, OCTOBER 31, 1953
193
The following morning turned out chilly. One member of the party humorously remarked that the temperature on that day was similar to that found at a certain elevation of Mount Kinabalu. In spite of the weather, however, the party were in high spirits and were in due course led by the Resident from the main office building to the Council Chambers where they were formally introduced to the Councillors.
The Council then opened its session and the Presi-dent welcomed the visitors. On behalf of the delega-tion O.K.K. Hasbullah spoke, offering his best wishes to the Council and expressing his appreciation of the hospitality shewn to his party.
After the meeting the party repaired to the bungalow of the District Officer for curry tiffin at which the Pre-sident and the Vice President of the Council were also present.
At 2 p.m. the party under the able direction of the President of the Council and driven by the non-pro-fessional District Officer in a Land Rover toured the new bazaar site, the kampongs, the Malay and Chinese schools, the sawmill, the padi mill and the agricultural station at Penapak, on the first milestone of the Lim-bang-Pandaruan Road, Thereafter the tempo of en-tertainment grew fast and furious. At 4.00 p.m. the party were entertained at the Limbang Recreation Club at which the Resident and Mrs. Fisher were also pre-sent. At 6.15 p.m. the party and members of the Council were treated to drinks at the Residency.
The following morning, August 12th, saw the visitors going off to the ulu with the President of the Council in the M/L Aline. The party called at the following Council schools on the way—
1.	Pendam
2.	Merasam
3.	Bumbun
4.	Bambangan
5.	Batu Danau
6.	Ukong
Before returning to Limbang the party called on Mr. Lim Cheng Kok of Ukong, a Councillor, and had drinks in his shop. A member of the delegation also spent $130 on some rare old silver. They finally reached Limbang after sunset.
Alas, time was running out and regrettably our visitors soon made ready for departure. Early next morning they sailed away carrying, we hope, happy memories of their visit. When the writer went down to bid them farewell he found the Resident already on board before the others.
Abang Haji Abdulrahim
Cherita Sarang Burong Dalam Gua Niah
Menurut cherita yang di-beri oleh sa-orang yang tidak tahu akan rumah surat, ia-itu, buta huruf, dan menurut ingatan-nya maka ada-lah sarang burong di-dalam gua Niah itu pada mula-nya di-jumpai oleh orang pada zaman perentahan Sultan Brunei dahulu.
Sarang itu di-dapati di-dalam gua itu dari bawah hingga ka-tingkap batu yang di-atas, dan pada masa itu ia di-kenalkan oleh orang2 sebagai kulat (sarang burong). Mereka ambilkan sarang itu di-sabelah bawah hingga mana yang dapat di-jangkau dengan tangan dan sarang2 yang ada di-sabelah atas itu semua-nya tertinggal sahaja.
Dari dua hingga tiga tahun kemudian itu, sa-orang telah dapat fikiran membuat penjulok buloh atau kayu, panjang-nya lebeh kurang 10 depa dan pada hujong penjulok itu di-ikatkan sa-puntong besi, dan dengan penjulok ini-lah mereka julokkan sarang itu dari atas dan beransor2 kabawah. Penjulok itu sentiasa-lah di-kerat hingga tinggal panjang 1 depa dan yang demikian maka bekas keratan buloh dan kayu pen-julok itu ada di-dapati di-dalam gua tersebut.
Lebeh kurang pada masa itu juga ada sa-orang yang lain pula telah dapat fikiran membuat tiang buloh panjang-nya dari 7 hingga 8 depa. Di-hujong tiang itu di-buatkan-nya kayu palang untok tempat dudok kutika menjulok sarang dan di-pasang juga temberang rotan di-empat penjuru. Kemudian itu di-dirikan dengan temberang rotan yang di-ikat pada lubang batu atau di-buat akan-nya pantak kayu. Tiang tersebut ada-lah di-namakan tiang kaleh2 kerana ia dapat di-alehkan ka-lain2 tempat. Penjulok buloh pun juga di-ubah dan di-buat bersambong2 dari satu hingga lapan sambong, ia-itu, lapan depa, dan jika menguna-kan penjulok itu pada tempat yang rendah maka sambong-nya di-buka menurut kemahuan kita dan sunggoh pun bagitu chara-nya maka maseh juga ada ketinggalan sarang2 itu pada tingkap atas.
Dari 6 hingga 7 tahun mereka telah pandai pula membuat tiang buloh dan tiang kayu hingga dapat menchapai tingkap atas. Tiang itu di-sambong dan pada satu2 sambong-nya di-ikat dengan rotan serta di-pasangkan temberang. Pekerja’an ini di-jalan pada tiap2 tahun untok mengambil segala ikatan atau tem-berang yang lama dan ini mengunakan banyak rotan yang di-katakan hampir habis di-dapati dari hutan berdekatan dengan gua itu dan yang demikian mereka terpaksa mengambil rotan di-lain2 tempat. Kema-langan pun juga biasa berlaku di-dalam gua itu dan dalam 2 atau 3 tahun maka ada sahaja orang di-jumpai jatoh hingga mati.
Dalam masa perentahan Raja Sarawak, Niah telah di-lawati oleh banyak orang yang datang dari lain2 negeri terutama-nya Brunei dan dari Kuching. Me-nurut cherita-nya maka Ibrahim dan Japar, ia-itu, peranakan Brunei telah membuat perkakas tiang yang di-dapati dalam gua itu sekarang ini.
Chara membuat tiang belian untok mengambil sarang burong dalam gua itu ada-lah separti berikut:—
Mula2-nya tiang buloh di-dirikan di-atas tanah dan di-sambong hingga ia dapat menchapai tingkap batu yang di-atas. Di-sekililing tiang buloh itu di-pasangkan tali2 temberang rotan dan di-ikat dengan kuat-nya supaya tiang itu tidak akan rebah. Kemudian di-adakan pula tiang2 belian besar-nya kira2 3 inchi dan panjang-nya 24 kaki. Juga di-adakan 2 kalang belian kira2 3" x 5". Lubang cherbot serta penganching pun juga di-kehendaki, dan satelah siap semua-nya perkakas ini maka 2 orang menaiki tiang buloh dengan mem-bawa takal dan tali yang panjang. Sampai-nya mereka pada tingkap batu. mereka chari akan tempat2 yang baik untok mendudok 2 kalang belian. Satelah itu tali takal di-pasang pada tempat yang kuat dan tali itu di-turun ka-bawah di-mana tiga orang ada sedia menunggu untok menghantarkan 2 kalang belian itu. Sesudah-nya siap pekerja’an ini maka tiang belian pun di-naikkan dan di-pasangkan belian dan di-paku dengan cherbot belian. Pada tiap2 hujong tiang belian itu di-buat satu kayu lintang panjang-nya kira2 2 kaki. Guna-nya ia-lah untok tempat sa-orang dudok menunggu tiang sambong dari bawah. Sa-orang dari atas turun di-tiang ini menunggukan kedatangan tiang belian yang kedua dan di-sambongkan-nya hingga pekerja’an sambong menyambong itu di-jalan dengan sempurna-nya. Tinggi-nya tiang di-dalam gua itu ia-lah 20 depa.
Abang Zainnorin
194
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, OCTOBER 31, 1953
Erratum
In our issue of August 31st 1953, on page 157 at the foot of the left-hand column, the quantity of padi estimated to have been sold by Dayaks in the Kanowit District is given as 50,000 pikuls. It should be 5,000 pikuls. We are indebted to the District Officer, Kanowit, for drawing attention to this error, and express our regret.
Sibu Letter.
A great calm descended on Sibu on September 2nd. This was not, as those who know Sibu might imagine, owing to the departure of one of our more exuberant Residents, but because on that date the Sibu Airfield was closed for repairs and up to the time of writing weather and circumstances have foiled the best efforts of the P.W.D. staff to complete the job.
And so the constant comings and goings have been halted except for the weekly passenger complement of the good ship Meluan, a few hardy travellers on the less “luxurious" Chin Teck Lee and the occasional Favoured One who can command his own transport from Kuching.
It is with due diffidence and appropriate blushes that I record that there are among us uncharitable persons who have been heard to mutter that this partial severing of our communications with the Capital is a Good Thing and that there has been no appreciable slowing of the machinery of Industry, Commerce and Government for want of the attentions of the Great World Outside. However, the rumour that the moon-light picnic organised by the Divisional Medical Officer was merely a cloak for a sabotage operation may be definitely discounted.
Lack of transport, of course, also affects those who wish to get out. Ian and Louise Pemberton just managed to get away, but were, alas, foiled in the very hour of escape, and will, so I understand, have to wait a little longer for their well-earned leave. Sibu will miss them, as the large crowd that gathered to see them off bears witness. It is to be hoped that a copy of Ian's film of the Sibu Coronation Celebrations, which was so popular with Sibu audiences, will be obtained by the Information Department and preserved in the archives of Sarawak, wherein it deserves a place. This is perhaps the appropriate place to accord a welcome to their successors in Bank House, Mr. and Mrs. Gay.
A notable social gathering was the recent cocktail party given by one of Sibu's oldest Chinese residents, Mr. Tan Tiong Chi, in honour of his son's wedding. It is pleasing to note that Mr. Tan was following the new custom of giving less lavish entertainment on celebratory occasoins and giving a sum equivalent to the saving in cost to some deserving cause. Mr. Tan gave a handsome subscription to the Chung Hua School Building Fund and also a donation to the funds of the Teo Chew Association. This function was also noteworthy in that the guests were entertained with music played on traditional Chinese instruments.
Sibu shows signs of development on all sides. The modern piledriving equipment which was recently brought in has been a source of great entertainment to members of the public with an idle hour to spare. One weekend the bus proprietors even rap a service to the new flats in Race Course Road to convey spectators to this phenomenon. The unfortunate Government Officer whose bungalow adjoins the site failed, however, to find anything entertaining in the performance. The piledriver was perhaps even more successful when it began on the site near the launch wharf. It had no sooner started operations than the Borneo Company’s premises commenced to disinte-
grate. Fortunately, or unfortunately, according to one's view of that old-established commercial enter-prise, the damage was noticed in time to prevent the outer wall from falling down and revealing to a horrified public gaze the machiavellian operations that go on within.
Road-making progresses apace. Additions to our equipment and staff have helped to make this possible, but as ever the weather always has the last word. Precise assessments of achievements during the "dry" season just ended belong to official reports, but the ordinary citizen can see striking differences enough to enable him to picture the broad highway to Sungei Merah and the Airfield, paved with Sibu's own hard-won stone. (Your Correspondent's optimism, not the Divisional Engineer's).
We have had a short spell of high water owing to the combination of high tides and rain up-country and considerable stretches of road were temporarily under water. Some unscrupulous revellers were able to use this opportune excuse for returning home late to the bosom of their families. The Old-Timers were busy bringing out their favourite flood stories. Verily in the past Sibu has been the Venice of the East if they are to be believed. The Police Intelligence Service obviously has no eyes and ears for the weather. The day before the highest flood a body of stalwarts solemnly marked out a beautiful set of white lines on the padang in readiness for the police sports on the morrow. It shows a lamentable lack of initiative on the part of the Constabulary that they abandoned their programme without any attempt to utilise the perfect conditions to decide their swimming championships.
The Sibu Rural District Council showed no such weak concession to the adverse conditions. It met more or less surrounded by water—water which con-tained more than its normal proportion of the local frog population! When the first speaker attempted to sway the gathering he could not be heard even by those sitting next to him owing to competition from the frogs outside, no doubt expressing their joy at this unwonted extension of their territory—to the very doorstep of the District Council.
This batrachian insolence, however, could by no means be tolerated by the Chairman of that August Body, who sent out a menial with orders to silence them. This he did, to the astonishment of your correspondent who regrettably allowed his attention to wander from the Estimates, by rushing higher and thither in the water wherever the sound seemed loudest, whereat the frogs, in order not to betray their position to the enemy, prudently lapsed into silence.
There is no truth in the allegation that provision is being made in the Sibu R.D.C. Estimates under the special heading "Temporary Non-Pensionable Frog-Silencing Allowance, Personal to Holder.”
G.H.R.
Government Scholarships
In November, 1952, in accordance with the Govern-ment Scholarship Scheme, an announcement was made by the Government regarding certain scholarships which would be available during 1953 and specifying the terms and conditions under which those scholar-ships might be awarded. In this further announce-ment it is emphasised that the purposes of the Scholar-ship Scheme is to afford assistance to those students who would otherwise be financially unable to undertake courses of higher education.
2. Subject to the conditions hereunder a further limited number of scholarships may be awarded during 1954, 1955, 1956 and 1957 for the following courses of training, priority being given to those types marked THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, OCTOBER 31, 1953
195
A POST-GRADUATE COURSES
Education
Diploma of Education
B DEGREE COURSES
Administration
University Degree Courses Agriculture
Agricultural Science Engineering
Veterinary
Education
Arts Science Mathematics Engineering
Civil
Electrical and Telecommunications Mechanical Municipal
Forestry
Forestry Science
Geology Language
Chinese Language and Literature Medical
Medicine
Dentistry
Note
In addition, consideration will be given to applications from students with exceptional and out-standing qualifications who wish to undertake courses of training other than those specified above.
C DIPLOMA AND OTHER SIMILAR COURSES
Education
Commercial Industries
Domestic Science
Teacher Training
Trade and Technical Instruction
Engineering
Civil
Geology
Land and Survey Medical
Nursing
Dental Nursing Optical Training Pharmacy
RSL (Hygiene and Sanitation)
X-Ray Technique
Social Welfare
CONDITIONS
(a) The above-mentioned scholarships may be granted to any suitable candidates, who should normally be persons born or educated in Sarawak, whether or not they are in Government employ. In some cases the successful applicants may be required to serve a probationary and "non-establishment" period in a Government Department before proceeding on the course of training. All awards will be subject to the candidates being accepted by the Universities or other training institutions which Government considers they should enter.
(b) A scholarship holder will be granted financial terms:—
(i) He will receive a stipend and other allowances for incidental expenses similar to those normally paid to other scholarship students in the University or institution.
(ii) If he is an “Establishment" Government employee. Government will, during his absence, be responsible for his contributions to the Provident Fund or Widows' and Orphans' Pensions Fund, as the case may be.
(iii) If he is a Government employee and has dependants (wife and children) to support, the dependants will be paid an allowance at the following rates:—
First dependant ...	50% of his total emoluments.
Each subsequent 10% of his total emoluments. dependant up to a maximum number of 3 ...
If he is not a Government employee, the above allowance will also be payable but it will be based on the approximate total emoluments which he would receive were he a Government employee.
(iv) In special circumstances and on satisfactory proof being produced, a scholarship holder may be granted an allowance in respect of a person or persons partially dependant on him for a living. Each case will be considered on its merits and an allowance fixed accordingly.
In no case will the allowance be in excess of the rate approved for first dependant as in (iii) above.
(c) It is the policy of Government to award scholar-ships only to suitable candidates whose higher education is genuinely handicapped by financial cir-cumstances, and where reasonable to require the the parents or guardians of successful applicants to contribute towards the cost of the scholarship. It will be appreciated that such contributions will enable the limited funds available to be utilised for a greater number of scholarships. Each applicant should there-fore state in his application what, if any, contribution his parent or guardian will be prepared to make.
(d) It is usual for successful applicants to enter into an agreement which, amongst other things, will stipu-late that they will on completion of their training return to Sarawak to join the Government Service if required, or enter other employment in Sarawak approved by Government, for a specific minimum number of years.
(e) It should be clearly understood that the holding of a Pass Degree would not be an assured qualific-ation for a Senior Service Post in the Government Service. In most cases an Honours Degree, and in some cases additional professional qualifications, is essential.
(f) Application form are obtainable from the Chair-man of the Scholarship Committee, c/o the Secretariat, Kuching, and also from the Resident of each Division and they must be correctly completed and returned to the Chairman not later that the 15th December, 1953. Applicants who are in Government employ must submit their applications through their Residents or Heads of Departments.
Sarawak Club.
Bowling Averages for September, 1953
No. of Rolls
Highest Roll
Average
Ladies
Mrs. Clarke-Hunt	17	160	134
Mrs. J. Greene	19	148	125
Mrs. S. Kitto	6	142	111
Mrs. P. Courtney	14	163	108
Mrs, H. Wynne	8	118	105
Miss J. Daly	13	139	104
Mrs. N. Marjoribanks	9	147	90
Mrs. J. Ogden	6	102	86
196
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, OCTOBER 31, 1953
Gentlemen
Mr. T. Courtney	15	213	171
Mr. H. Polman	21	211	167
Mr. M. Klooster	19	183	151
Mr. O. F. Wright	18	210	145
Mr. F. Clarke-Hunt	18	174	138
Mr. C. Baker	11	177	135
Mr. L. Holliday	6	145	135
Mr. G. D. Becket	9	150	132
Mr. S. Larkin	19	152	129
Mr. R. Greene	23	179	129
Mr. F. Ogden	5	146	128
Mr. D. St. J. Forrer	5	167	127
Mr. W. F. Wynne	11	138	111
OWEN F. WRIGHT
for Convenor
Ladies' Competition
Mrs. S. Kitto	202
Mrs. H. Wynne	180
Mrs. F. A. Clarke-Hunt	160
Mrs. P. Courtney	157
Mrs. N. Marjoribanks	144
Mrs. J. Greene	140
Miss J. Daly	140
Mrs. J. Ogden	126
Gentlemen's Competition
Mr. G. D. Becket	363
Mr. R. Klooster	361
Mr. L. Larkin	360
Mr. H. Polman	356
D. Forrer	352
Mr. L. Holliday	343
Mr. O. F. Wright	341
Mr. F. Ogden	334
Mr. R. Greene	326
Mr. F. Clarke-Hunt	325
Mr. T. V. Courtney	292
OWEN F. WRIGHT
for Convenor
Golf October Tombstone Competition, 11th October, 1953
1.	I. Gordon (20)	9" from 20th hole
2.	G. E. Strickland (14) 20 yds. from 19th hole
3.	W. L. Whyte (6)	9" from 17th hole
4.	B. T.	Joyce (20)	3' from 16th hole
5.	N. Thomas (16)	5' from 16th hole
6.	C. O. Adams (1)	In 15th	hole
7.	J. R. Outram (8)	8'	from 15th hole
8.	R. E. Chater (24)	202 yds. from 15th hole
9.	H. Henniker Heaton (14) 5th? 12th?
Conditions: Ideal
(Still searching for Henniker Heaton's tomb)
COURSE RECORD
The course record of 59 (par 61) was broken by Adams on 13th September with a 58. This record will be of short duration, however, as the course will soon undergo a little face-lifting with the introduction of two new holes which will enable the 9th Green to be where the 7th is now, and the 18th to be where the 17th is now.
13th October, 1953
C. O. ADAMS
Convenor,
Golf Sub-Committee
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, OCTOBER 31, 1953
197
Turtle Trust Fund
Income & Expenditure Account as at 31st December, 1953
EXPENDITURE
To payment of Charity ...	... ... $ 1,381.65
Excess of Income over Expenditure for the year .	20,568.94
$21,950.59
INCOME
By Balance of Turtle Trust Suspense amount transferred
as at 31.12.52	...	...	...	$21,948.09
Amount credited direct per T/R 1191 of 17.9.52 ...	2.50
$21,950.59
Balance Sheet as at 31st December, 1952
LIABILITIES
Fund in Trust:—
Balance as at 1.1.52	...	$16,801.76
ADD
Excess of Income over Expenditure for the year ...	20,568.94
$37,370.70
ASSETS
Cash in hand of Accountant-General ...	... $37,370.70
$37,370.70
Examined
ARTHUR G. TAYLOR,
Principal Auditor
22nd September, 1953
Kuching, 24th August, 1953
ABANG HAJI MUSTAPHA,
Chairman,
Turtle Trust Fund
198
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, OCTOBER 31, 1953
Kuching Market Price List
20th September to 20th October, 1953.
RICE—(per gantang)
Local, White milling ...	...	...	$2.70
Govt, Siam	...	... ... 2.52
Rangoon	...	...	...	2.40
Broken	...	...	...	2.04
SUGAR—(per kati)
Java, White (Govt) Refined ...	...	.34
Brown	...	...	...	Nil
Nipah Sugar	...	...	...	.30
SALT—(per kati)
Coarse ... ... ... ... .10
Fine	... ... ... ... .15
FLOUR AND BREAD—
Wheat Flour, per kati	...	...	.35
Bread per loaf ...	...	... .10
MILK—(per tin)
Milkmaid	... ... ... .70
Golden Wheel ...	...	...	.65
EGGS—(each)
Duck, fresh	...	...	...	.20
salted	...	...	...	.17
Fowl	... ... ...	.22
EDIBLE FATS—(per kati)
Coconut Oil	... ... ... .80
Pork Fat No. 1	... ... ... 1.97
2	...	... ...	1.57
PORK—(per kati)
Lean	No. 1 ...	...	...	3.40
Lean with fat 2 ...	...	...	1.91
BEEF AND OTHER MEATS—(per kati)
Mutton (Australian)	...	...	...	2.80
Beef, steak	... ... ... 3.00
Beef, curry meat	...	...	...	1.60
Buffalo No. 1	... ... ... 3.00
curry meat	...	...	...	1.60
Kambing (daging)	...	...	...	3.00
POULTRY—(per kati)
Capons	...	...	...	$ 2.80
Duck	... ... ...	2.00
Fowl, Chinese breed	...	...	...	2.70
Fowl, Dayak breed	...	...	...	2.20
FISH—(per kati)
Fresh fish No. 1	...	... ... 1.84
2	...	...	...	.80
3	...	...	...	.40
Prawns	1	...	...	...	1.60
2 ... ... ...	.84
Crab	No.	1 ... ... ...	1.20
2	...	...	...	.80
Salted	fish	1 ... ... ... 2.40
2 ... ... ...	1.00
3	...	...	...	.60
roe ...	...	...	2.20
VEGETABLES—(per kati)
Bangkuang (Yam beans) ...	...	.20
Bayam	...	...	...	.30
Bean Sprouts	...	...	...	$ .30
Cabbage Imported	...	...	...	.80
Changkok Manis	...	...	...	.30
Daun Bawang	...	...	...	1.20
Ensahi Puteh	...	...	...	.55
Bunga ... ... ...	.45
French beans	...	...	...	.70
Garlic, fresh	...	...	...	.60
Kachang panjang	...	...	...	.29
Kangkong	...	...	...	.40
Keladi (China)	...	...	...	.40
Ketola	... ... ... .40
Kribang	...	...	...	.16
Kundor	...	...	...	.20
Labu	... ... ... .15
Ladies Fingers	...	...	...	.60
Lettuce (per tie)	...	...	.10
Lobak (Chinese radish)	...	...	.30
Lobak, salted, imported	...	...	.70
Onions, Bombay	...	...	...	.35
Onions, small	...	...	...	.70
Potatoes, Bengal	...	...	...	.40
Pria (Bitter Gourd) ... ... ... .60
Bamboo shoots, salted	...	...	.40
Trong (Brinjals)	...	...	...	.33
Yams	... ... ... .20
Cucumber (timun)	...	...	...	.30
Ginger	...	...	...	.80
Chillies (red)	...	...	...	1.25
(green)	...	...	...	.67
Sauerkraut, imported	...	...	.80
local ... ... ... .60
Tamarind	...	...	...	.40
Tomatoes, fresh	...	...	...	1.03
TEA—
Tea, Lipton per lb.	...	...	3.70
Chinese per packet	...	...	.80
COFFEE—(per kati)
Raw, Java No. 1	... ... ... 2.60
Java No. 2	... ... ...	2.20
FRUIT—
Pisang Umbun	...	per kati	...	.15
Pisang Tandok	...	each	...	.10 to.20
Pineapples	...	per	kati	...	.18
Papayas	... ... .20
SUNDRIES—
Bean Curd	...	per 6 square piece	.10
Cake (white)	...	per piece	...	.15
(yellow)	...	...	.25
Kerosene Oil	...	per tin	...	5.90
...	per bottle	...	.30
Charcoal	...	per pkl.	...	9.00
semi-converted	... ...	5.00
Sauce (kitchup)	...	bot. (1)$1.00, (2) .70,(3).50
Blachan	...	per kati ...	,70
Dried prawn	... 2.80
Coconut, fresh	...	each ...	.20
Bako Wood	...	per panchang ...	28.00
Cigarettes:
Players ...	... 3 sticks for ...	.12
Craven "A"	...	3	...	.12
Capstan ...	...	3	...	.11
Rough Rider	...	3	...	.10
State Express	... 1 stick for	...	.05