 Vol. LXXIX.
No. 1143.
PRICE
KUCHING, Saturday, May, 30th 1953.
50 CENTS
Contents.
Page.
The Coronation ...	...	... ...	81
His Excellency the Governor's Addre$s to Council
Negri	...	81
Comings and Goings	... ... ...	86
Farewell	...	86
Sibu Letter ...	... ... ...	87
Award of (he George Medal to Menggong anak
Panggit	... ...	88
New Bintulu Malay School ... ...	88
Correspondence	...	...	... ...	89
On Museums ...	89
This Sarawak	...	...	...	91
Second Division Atmosphere ...	91
Excerpts from Reports of Administrative Officers ... 94 Kuching Market Price List ...	...	99
The Sarawak Gazette.
SATURDAY, MAY 30th, 1953.
The Coronation.
A special illustrated edition of the Sarawak Gazette will be issued as soon as possible after Coronation Week.
His Excellency's Address to Council Negri—5.5.53.
Mr. President and Members of Council Negri:
When last I had the honour of addressing Council in December of last year, a state of emergency still existed in the First Division, but shortly afterwards, on the 16th of January, I felt that it was possible to revoke the order since there had been no recurrence of trouble and quite a number of disaffected persons who had shown no liking for our liberal way of life had elected to go elsewhere to seek their earthly paradise. Since that incident in August, 1952, we in Sarawak have not suffered any outward aggression at the hands of the Communists but that is not to say that the Government or the people of this country can afford for one moment to relax their vigilance or lower their defences. You will note on your Order Paper that Government still considers it necessary to retain powers allowing for the detention of persons in certain circumstances and with the necessary safeguards, and
you will be asked to approve these powers for a further period. Furthermore, although the people of this country have not during the last few months been the victims of violence or disruption of their daily lives indeed, there have been some encouraging and com-forting signs of improvement in public morale and determination—yet the picture in Asia as a whole does not, I am afraid, lead me to any feelings of very great confidence.
In Malaya there has been a steady improvement of the situation in the fighting against the bandits. The success of the security forces is now clearly no tem-porary phase. The bandits have lost the initiative in the field and are being hard pressed, and they know it as the increasingly frequent surrenders prove. We rejoice in this success and are proud that Sarawak citizens have contributed in some measure to this heal-thier state of affairs. But let us not delude ourselves into thinking that a victory won in Malaya necessarily lessens the danger in Sarawak.
The Communists in Korea show no desire whatso-ever to bring about an honourable and reasonable armistice. They show only a determination to con-tinue their aggressive policy of domination in Asia. Any country which desires to maintain its own way of life, to develop its resources and to progress along the road of prosperity and happiness, must be suffi-ciently strong to deter the aggressor.
At your last meeting you voted large sums of money for the purpose of improving the efficiency of the Constabulary. It is essential to continue this process; even though our revenues may suffer a decline, and our enemies remain quiescent or are fully engaged elsewhere. Let us ensure that what is happening at this moment to the little kingdom of Laos, a country of hard-working, God-fearing peasant fanners, wanting only to live in peace and work out their own salvation, does not happen in Sarawak. In Laos we see where inadequate defence and preparation and divided loyal-ties may lead—a fair and prosperous land laid waste by foreign invasion and the horrors of war.
Now let us consider what progress we in Sarawak have made during the last six months.
You will have heard that a meeting was held in Kuching on the 23rd of April last under the chair-manship of His Excellency the Commissioner-General, the Right Honourable Mr. Malcolm MacDonald, at which His Excellency the Governor of North Borneo, His Highness the Sultan of Brunei and myself were present with our respective advisers. As I consider this meeting and what arose therefrom to be of con-siderable importance, I will give you some explanation of its background and purpose. Since the middle of 1950 a Joint Defence Committee for the Borneo Terri-tories has been in existence. This Committee has met twice a year to consider all aspects of the defence of the
82
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, MAY 30, 1953.
three territories in order to make sure that our indivi-dual plans are known to each other, that co-ordination is complete, that communications are adequate and that the mobilization of our joint resources can be achieved as efficiently and speedily as possible—in short, to ensure that we can assist each other effectively and rapidly in any emergency. You have witnessed for yourselves that these discussions have proved fruitful. We received very prompt and efficient aid from the North Borneo police last August, as did Brunei in March of this year. The Brunei operation was a triumph of organization. Within six hours of the receipt of our call for assistance to the Governor of North Borneo, sixty police had arrived by air in the oilfields area and had been issued with weapons and rations and were at their posts as a fully effective force.
It was clear that in matters other than defence a closer co-ordination of policy, a pooling of technical resources, the exchange of ideas and experience and the unification of laws and regulations would bring benefit io all three territories. It was therefore agreed at this conference that at intervals of six months similar conferences would be held under the chairman-ship of the Commissioner-General. The permanent members of the Sarawak-North Borneo-Brunei Con-ference are the Governors of Sarawak and North Borneo, and the Sultan of Brunei, all of whom will of course be supported by both official and unofficial advisers. It was also agreed to establish a system of periodic joint meetings between the Heads of Depart-ments of the three territories for the discussion of prob-lems of mutual and general interest, and to promote as far as possible co-ordination of policy and adminis-tration.
Nothing but good can come of a strengthening of the ties between these three territories in the Island of Borneo. By sharing the burden of our problems and difficulties and declaring our unity of purpose whilst each keeps his own individuality, customs and traditions, we will gain in stature and in the influence for good we can exert in this part of the world.
I am sure that I am expressing the sentiments of your-self Mr. President and the members of your Council when I say how pleased we are to welcome here this morning the Maharaja Laila and the Orang Kaya Di Gadong of Brunei. These two distinguished mem-bers of His Highness's State Council have made the journey here in order to observe the proceedings of this Council and I hope they will find the experience useful and instructive and that they will enjoy this short say in our capital city.
In the development of local Government a further step forward was made. On the 1st of January, 1953, the Kuching Municipal Ordinance was brought into force and on the same day the inaugural meeting of the Kuching Municipal Council was held. This was the outcome of several years of planning and the change-over from the status of Government department to that of an autonomous municipality was effected according to plan with the minimum of dislocation. The volume of business passing through the Muni-cipality has continued to show a steady increase which has been apparent from 1950 onwards. The Council has made an encouraging start and is facing its diffi-culties, among which the matter of public road tran-sport is perhaps the most pressing, with courage and patience. In January, at the invitation of the Govern-ment, Mr. A. A. Forward, Commissioner for Road Transport in the Federation of Malaya, paid a visit to advise upon this problem in Kuching. His report has now been received and confirms what has previously been apparent—that there are far too many public
passenger vehicles on the roads and that the service extended to the public is by no means all that it should be. The report is being studied at the present time by the Municipal Council.
I shall now deal with some points of interest in the work of the Departments of Government. Firstly, Agriculture. The prospects for the 1952/3 paddy crop are good. The total acreage of this year's crop has been far higher than for the 1951/2 crop and, pro-vided yield expectations are realised. Sarawak has. temporarily at any rate, overcome the most serious situation it has had to face with regard to rice imports for many years. Providence may not always be so kind in future and it is hoped that our farmers will profit from this experience and not be so keen in future to neglect essential paddy production for temporarily profitable cash crops. It should not be forgotten that last year, in 1952, we had to import no less than 28,000 tons of rice at a great cost to the consumer; and the price continues to rise. Most of this rice came from Siam towards whose frontiers the menace of Commu-nism marches.
Pepper diseases are causing increasing anxiety and, whilst there is no cause for alarm and despondency as yet, one cannot help remembering the havoc that disease at times wrought in our pepper gardens before the war. The department is tackling the problem energetically and outside expert advice is being obtain-ed, and the Secretary of State is trying to recruit a plant pathologist for us. Whilst there seems little hope of effecting a cure of badly diseased vines, it does seem that the prospects of preventing the spread of even the worst diseases are good, provided all gardeners will conscientiously take the proper precautions. Sara-wak's pepper industry is now extremely prosperous and it would be a disaster of the first magnitude if disease extinguished the industry. It is hoped therefore that all gardeners will accept the advice of the Department of Agriculture in this matter and co-operate fully with them.
Due to the fall in prices, the rush to plant up new rubber has abated somewhat; there is still however a healthy tendency to plant up new areas of high yielding material when the material can be obtained. It is perhaps of interest to record that in 1952 the total value of rubber exported from the Third Division was almost equalled by the value of pepper, timber and sago, thus indicating a more balanced economy and not the complete dependence on rubber which has caused so much anxiety in the past.
The Forest Department is making steady progress in its main tasks of formation and protection of permanent forests, inventories of the Colony's forest resources and the planning of the systematic working of timber in accordance with the principle of sustained yield. By the end of 1952, the area of permanent forests in the Colony totalled 7,506 square miles, and a further 2,400 square miles are now in process of constitution. At the end of 1951, only 2 square miles of forest were being developed under working plans. During the past year this figure has been increased to 84 square miles, and plans for further very large areas are almost complete. Work on forest inventories is proceeding steadily, and special attention is being given to an assessment of the Colony's resources; this project, however, owing to the very uneven distribution of the species, presents peculiar difficulties and will take some years to complete. Until it is completed, future policy with reference to belian timber must remain undecided, but in the meantime every care must be taken to ensure that it is used with the utmost economy.
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, MAY 30, 1953.
83
As foretold in December, the timber industry has continued steadily to expand. The total production of timber increased from approximately 110,000 tons in 1951 to 202,000 tons in 1952, but of recent months there has been a decline in local demand. The quantity of timber exported, in terms of round timber, increased from 69,500 tons in 1951 to 128,000 tons in 1952. There is no sign of a decline in this trade, and exports during the first two months of the present year totalled approximately one-fourth of the total exports for 1952. Of recent months there has been some revival in the trade with Australia, which had previously fallen to a low level. The United Kingdom and Hong Kong remain the principal importers. It is pleasing to note that there is a general, though fluctuating, tendency for the number of export limbers to increase, and 25 kinds of timber were exported under their own names in 1952, the highest number so far recorded.
The decision of the Government to allow the Colonial Timber Company to take over Government land at Rejang for a new mill has been well received in the village where full employment will once again be available after many years of depression.
The Director of Lands and Surveys reports that a scheme to settle Chinese on land suitable for rubber, coconut and padi on the coastal lands between Oya and Mukah has been completed and the land will be made available during the next few months.
The mapping facilities of the Land and Survey Department have been improved by the acquisition of a modern machine used for compilation of maps from air photographs. The Department is now able to pro-duce sketch maps for special purposes such as agri-cultural and forestry projects and development schemes generally.
The meteorological staff in Kuching has now moved to the Kuching Airfield, where the installation of staff quarters and up-to-date equipment and offices has been completed. Meteorological offices and quarters have also been completed at Miri and Bintulu.
The Department of Trade and Customs reports that the year 1952 closed with the aggregate value of the Colony's external trade being $821,509,270, $70,585,623 down on the previous year, with an apparent favourable trade balance of $55,617,364. The large decrease in the trade balance, $79,986,615, as compared with 1951, was due to the decline in both the volume and value of rubber exported. It would have been reasonable to have expected this decline to to have had a greater adverse effect on the general prosperity of the Colony than it did, but, while rubber is still the Colony's main export, the secondary indus-tries, sago, pepper and timber, contributed greatly to maintaining a moderately high level of prosperity and resulted in a satisfactory trading year. The factors most responsible for this continued prosperity were pepper and timber. The rapid recovery of the pepper industry since the war has been remarkable and exports for the year, approximately 4,000 tons, were only a little short of the peak year 1934. Timber is rapidly becoming an important item in the Colony's economy with exports for the year being 80% over those of 1951. The Government's policy of encouraging in-terest in industries other than rubber has amply justified itself, and the results from the pepper and timber industries over the past year have saved the Colony from what might well have been a slump. If, however, the Colony is to depend less on rubber, a still further expansion of the Colony's secondary indus-tries will be necessary.
The Public Works Departments constructional activities, as might be expected, have been hampered
in the last few months by the exceptional weather con-ditions and progress in building works has been mainly confined to completion of last year's schedule and preliminaries for the programme this year. Included in the latter is a considerable expansion of Police train-ing facilities and accommodation throughout the Colony. Work has started on the erection of new Government offices in Kuching and the establishments required for the Broadcasting Scheme.
Progress on re-surfacing of the Kuching-Serian Road has been disappointing and the work is not expected to be completed before June. The Bau Road recon-struction also has not gone ahead so well as had been hoped and it may not be finished until the middle of 1954. Survey of the Serian-Simanggang road trace has been completed and the calling of tenders is in hand. At Sibu, recourse has been made to the import of stone from Hong Kong to enable bazaar road reconstruction to proceed.
Arrangements for the establishment of a major quarry at Sebuyau have gone forward and it is anticipated that delivery of stone will commence during the second half of the year.
The department is still hampered in its work by the shortage of staff.
The Medical Department has made a promising start in the scheme for the training of midwives; three fully trained women are now engaged in Sibu, Simang-gang and Kuching on this programme.
A Superintendent has recently arrived to take charge of our Leper Settlement. He has worked for many years for the British Empire Leprosy Relief Association before coming to Sarawak to assist us in this vital work.
The ATAS Clinic was opened in March, an excel-lent example of what can be achieved by the general public in co-operation with Government. The first B.C.G. vaccination programme for the control of tuber-culosis is nearing completion. Five local teams have now been trained to continue the work after the departure of the World Health Organisation team.
Mr. P. J. Shannon has retired from the post of Commissioner, Sarawak Constabulary, and Mr. G. S. Wilson arrived from Hong Kong in March and assumed command of the Police Force.
The Constabulary (Special Allowances) Regulations, 1952, came into effect on the 1st January, 1953. Members of the rank and file who qualify under the various headings, Education, Languages, and Specialists, will materially benefit. Payment of these allowances should encourage members of the rank and file to make every effort to improve their professional know-ledge and will, it is hoped, react favourably on the morale and efficiency of the Constabulary.
By the courtesy of the Commissioners of Police, Federation of Malaya and Singapore, Gazetted Officers,. Inspectors and N.C.O's of this Force are attending courses both in the Federation and Singapore on General Police Duties, Special Branch work, driving and simple mechanics.
The esablishment of the Inspectorate has been in-creased by 12. An intensive recruiting drive is under way to fill vacancies in the Inspectorate. The Com-missioner of Police of the Federation of Malaya has undertaken to recruit and train a number of Inspectors recruited by him for the Sarawak Constabulary together with those selected from Sarawak. Preliminary reports indicate that the officers recruited in Sarawak are doing extremely well and creating a favourable impression. There are still some 240 vacancies in the rank and file of the regular police.
84
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, MAY 30, 1953.
The first platoon of the Field Force has already been recruited from the Second Division and is now under-going training. On the completion of its initial train-ing at the Police Training School it will be transferred to the Jungle Training School at Bukit Siol for advanced training. The second platoon has been formed and is now under training at the Police Training School. The object of the Field Force is to provide Government with a mobile striking force which can be called out at short notice to deal with emergencies. Further recruiting in the force will be undertaken in the Third, Fourth and Fifth Divisions.
New barrack blocks have been completed at the Police Training School providing a welcome addition to the available accommodation, and a new canteen and mess room have also been completed.
In December last I stressed particularly the need for greater vigilance and a higher sense of responsibility on the part of managers, teachers and parents in Chinese school and I am therefore very glad to report that the tone and discipline at a number of our schools, where previously the situation was far from satis-factory, have shown a marked improvement during the past few months. An improvement in the supervising staff situation of the Education Department is at last enabling more attention and help to be given to schools. The appointment of a well qualified Educa-tion Officer, on secondment from Hong Kong, is a welcome addition to the staff. The growing co-operation of members of boards of management is an encouraging sign and will result in continued improve-ment; especially if this is supported by an increasing number of parents beginning to take a more genuine interest in the welfare of their children. This improve-ment reflects great credit on the Director and his staff as well as on the managers of the schools.
The expansion of primary and secondary education continues to be encouraging. In the Cambridge Junior Certificate Examination held in 1952, 110 pupils quali-fied for certificates as against 76 successful candidates in 1951.
A successful Refresher Course for teachers in the Batang Lupar District was organised by the District Group Supervisor last December. A Conference of all Group Supervisors held at the Training Centre early this year provided a valuable opportunity for the exchange of information and ideas.
During the past few months a further thirteen students have been awarded Scholarships for higher education overseas, but some of these are awaiting admission to various institutions. This higher stage of our educational programme is progressing most satisfactorily. In addition to the recent awards just mentioned, since liberation more than seventy students have been sent overseas, under various scholarship schemes, on courses of higher training covering thirty different subjects. It is very pleasing that our first Sarawak students have obtained degrees at the new University of Malaya: two in Medicine and two in Arts.
The Batu Lintang Training Centre suffered a sad loss by the resignation of Mr. J. K. Wilson at the end of last year. A new Principal, a well qualified and experienced officer, has been appointed and should be arriving in June. It is pleasing to be able to report that, as a result of the efforts of those people respon-sible for recruitment, a larger group of young men and women has entered the centre this year to take the Grade IIA Course. It is significant that these student-teachers have been drawn from Chinese Middle schools in Kuching and Sibu, as well as from Govern-
ment and Mission schools. Furthermore, this new group is now representative of Malays, Dayaks and Chinese. The standard of entry into the Post-Primary Classes has also improved considerably over the last few years which indicates that trained teachers, in spite of their many difficulties, have helped greatly to improve the quality of some of our local schools. In 1949 not one pupil from Dayak rural schools was found suitable academically for entry into Batu Lintang. For the new admissions this year there were over a hundred applications from the rural primary schools, and a class of thirty promising pupils of correct age has been recruited.
The Immigration Department has been strengthened by the appointment of an additional Passport Examina-tion Officer in Kuching; there are now Passport Examination Officers stationed at Miri, Sibu, Sarikei and Kuching. This has materially increased the efficiency of immigration work and tended to centralise control.
The work of the Labour Department has increased considerably owing to the extended P.W.D. road con-tracts. A considerable number of wage disputes, brought to official notice, were due to the malpractice of employing sub-contractors and sub-sub-contractors; this has now been taken up and conditions of employ-ment have lately improved.
A Prisoners Aid Society has been formed to take over the work formerly done voluntarily by certain Rotarians in alleviating distress among the families of prisoners.
The Co-operative Development Department has been fully occupied since the beginning of the year in carrying out the Annual Audit of 109 registered Co-operatives. A few new groups are being prepared for registration, but this will take place only when all audits have been completed. It is not yet possible to supply statistics of 1952 Development, but the increase in assets is expected to be very considerable.
An interesting project has been started at Kampongs Muara Tuang and Bundong in the Samarahan, to which several departments are giving their combined efforts and advice. It is a community development scheme amongst the Malays: an attempt to improve every aspect of their social and economic conditions, in which adult education, more advanced agricultural techniques, co-operative methods and improved hygiene are all playing their part. The success of this pilot scheme must, however, ultimately depend upon the Malays themselves and their keenness to improve their living standards. I am glad to say that the initial enthusiasm is encouraging.
The Museum has continued to analyse the results of the excavations at Santubong which have attracted widespread attention and interest outside the Colony. Many of the fragments of broken pieces have been fitted together with meticulous care and there are now about 30 complete pieces which give a clear idea of the type of ceramics traded between the Sarawak River Delta and the mainland of Asia eight to ten centuries ago.
A Museum expedition left for the Kelabit country in the headwaters of the Baram on December 2nd, 1952. The programme of collecting and research in that area has now been completed. The expedition took up tea and hemp plants to Bario, which is probably the highest permanent by inhabitated place in Borneo, at an elevation of 3,500 feet. These plants were doing very well when last seen in March.
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, MAY 30, 1953.
85
The turtles have done well and a nett profit of $28,000 was handed over to the Turtle Trust for religious and charitable purposes.
While the Postmaster-General was on leave in the United Kingdom, he visited the leading Telecommu-nication Equipment Manufacturers. In collaboration with Messrs. Preece Cardew and Rider, Consulting Engineers to the Crown Agents, he was able to con-sider Sarawak requirements for material and equip-ment having regard to price and quality.
Underground cables for Kuching to the value of $500,000 have been ordered and delivery in the United Kingdom is expected not later than June.
A detailed specification for the Kuching Automatic Exchange has been drawn up and tenders called for. The outcome is not yet known but delivery in the United Kingdom should be about January, 1954.
A decision has been made on the contractor to supply and instal the equipment for the V.H.F. Radio Tele-phone Scheme. The order is about to be placed and delivery in the United Kingdom is expected to com-mence in September, 1953. The contractor will send installing engineers to Sarawak a few months in advance of arrival of equipment to prepare staff and conduct radio surveys so as to be ready to commence installation work without delay.
The appointment of a new Chief Justice, Mr. E. H Williams, Senior Puisne Judge, Hong Kpg, has been approved by Her Majesty the Queen and he is expected to arrive in Sarawak later this month.
The work of the Judicial Department has gone on unobtrusively and no special comment seems called for. The Courts have been called upon to deal with little serious crime. Most of the work has been on the end side. The records of the cases tried by the lower courts show that magistrates have on the whole done their work conscientiously and to the best of their ability. One of the Judges has given a course of lectures on Law to the prospective Sarawak Adminis-trative Officers who will thus acquire in advance some familiarity with their Judicial duties.
The Government Information Service continues to expand its activities and there have been two note-worthy developments.
By the generosity of the Director of the Malayan Film Unit, a member of the Information stuff has been well trained in the use of both still and moving picture cameras. The Information Office is now making its own photographs for distribution both within Sarawak and abroad, and several promising films of life in Sarawak have already been made and shown.
The appointment at the beginning of the year of an experienced Chinese writer has made possible the pro-duction of original pamphlets in Chinese about Sara-wak—an important enterprise which will grow in volume. Greatly increased help to other Departments of Government in translation to and from English and Chinese has also been made possible by this appoint-ment. This service, working in co-operation with the Secretariat for Chinese Affairs, is much in demand.
Both these development help one of the main pur-poses of the Information Service, which is to provide for the people of Sarawak fuller opportunities to learn what their fellow citizens think and do.
To this same end, more reading rooms outside Kuching have been opened and equipped. Commu-nity wireless listening sets have been bought and are installed in the reading rooms as these are opened, and in other approved centres in the smaller outstations.
Mobile cinema units based on Sibu and Miri are
now established and working in the Third and Fourth Divisions. The Third Division units has its own out-board motor sampan and the Fourth Division uses the Public Address motor van stationed at Miri.
Turning to the Sarawak Broadcasting Service, I am glad to say that good progress has been made. The Chief Engineer arrived in Kuching in January, and the Programme Organiser early in March, and both officers have been hard at work since their arrival. The Springfield site for the headquarters of the Service, in Rock Road, Kuching, has been cleared and levelled and tenders for the construction of the main building have been received. A temporary building on the same site for housing the pilot broadcasting service has been erected, and, subject to a major difficulty to which I will refer in a moment, this service should be in operation in June or July.
The major difficulty is the problem of finding the experienced technical staff essential for the very com-plex and skilled task of installing and working both the pilot and the main transmitters and their ancillary equipment. It has been our firm purpose from the beginning to engage, and to continue to employ, Sarawak men and women in the service: but for the senior technical posts it has not been possible to do so. This is unfortunate, but understandable. Broadcasting engineering is a new science which, by the devotion and skill of its adherents and the intensive demands made on them, has been brought in a few years to a very advanced scientific level; and it is natural that in a country where hitherto there hus been no broadcast-ing, there are no experienced men. Since last year, intensive negotiation, personal enquiry, and advertise-ment have been carried on, both locally and in Singa-pore, Malaya and Hong Kong, to find and engage the men we need. So far, because the terms we are able to offer consonant which the terms of service in other and comparable branches of Government service are not attractive enough, we have not been able to engage any of the men we need, and the Chief Engineer is still working single-handed and at great pressure. Because of these staff difficulties, it is doubtful whether the main service—and I feel bound to give you this warning—can be in operation by the end of this year, as we had hoped. But I am sure that every possible effort will be made by those concerned to achieve this.
Now may I issue a word of caution on the subject of Finance? Although we are not so dependent as formerly on rubber for our revenue, it is still our main industry and we cannot expect a return to the boom prices of 1951 or anything near them We must also expect in the future to see a reduction in the price that our pepper will fetch.
Our customs and excise revenue for 1952 was $12 million less than in 1951, and the tonnage of rubber exported has fallen by 20%. We cannot afford, there-fore, any great expansion of Government services at the present time. In fact, I consider that we may well be faced with the necessity to practise considerable economies in the near future. Our finances are in a healthy state and the country has shown itself econo-mically far more resilient than was expected. How-ever, some of us may still be thinking in terms of boom prices and years of exceptional revenue and I think we should realise that those days over and we must adjust our plans to our present means.
I have no special comment to make on the order of business for this Session or on the bills which are to be put before you. But I would like to draw your attention to an omission.
86
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, MAY 30, 1953.
When you last met I mentioned that some of our Iban trackers in Malaya were being used experiment-ally in combat duties. That experiment proved a success and the Federation Government with the con-sent and co-operalion of this Government has since been recruiting Dayaks for combat duties in Malaya. This force now bears the honoured title and wears the badges of the Sarawak Rangers.
It was clearly desirable that the force so raised should have military status and that provision should be made for this both under the law applicable in the Federation and by the law of this country.
I am happy to say that the immediate step of giving military status to this force while in Malaya has been provided for by Emergency Regulations enacted in the Federation. A Bill has also been prepared here to regularize with retrospective effect the arrangements made and to incorporate the force raised in the Sara-wak Volunteer Force. It will I am sure be readily understood that legislation of this character requires careful consideration and it was thought desirable to obtain the comments both of the Federation Govern-ment and the Secretary of State. The latter's com-ments have only just reached me and in the circum-stances for this Session.
In a few weeks' time we and countless others through-out the Commonwealth, and indeed throughout a great part of the World, will be engaged in celebrating the Coronation of Her Majesty Queen Elizabeth the Second.
I believe the plans for Coronation Week are near-ing completion and I hope they will meet with general approval. We want everyone to enjoy himself and we want all to be able to take a part in this great family gathering. Sarawak has quite a reputation for its hospitality and for its capacity for enjoyment and I have no doubt at all that we will make the very best of an occasion which provides us with so excellent an excuse for celebration and merriment. For never has a Queen more beloved or more beautiful ridden forth to her coronation. Beneath the gaiety and charm of youth shines forth for all who wish to see that deep sense of devotion to duty and consecration to the service of her people which is such a moving inspiration to her loyal subjects.
I want all of you here to-day, the representatives of your people, to make it your special responsibility to ensure that the plans you have made emphasise that our celebrations in Coronation Week are principally for the benefit and enjoyment of the young: let us make of this Week a great festival of youth, at whose head' rides our young and gracious Queen. We want every boy and girl throughout the whole of our rejoicing country to carry, through the rough and tumble of the years to come, a bright and happy and indelible picture of these great days of 1953.
You Mr. President, supported by members of this Council, will be our witnesses to the act of crowning and dedication in Westminster Abbey on the 2nd June and you will carry with you our loyal greetings to Her Majesty and our fervent prayers for a long and glorious reign.
Mr. President and members of Council Negri, I thank you for your attention. May God guide and prosper your deliberations.
Comings and Goings.
Among the Government Officers who left on furlough during May was Mr. D. C. White, Resident Third Division, and Mr. G. T. Myles, State Engineer
Brunei, who was accompanied by Mrs. Myles and their children. Mr. M. M. McSporran, Administra-tive Officer Brunei, left by air on the 15th and Mr. A. O. Stickings, State Surveyor Brunei, also departed by air on the 21st. Mr. A. Morgan, Temporary Education Officer, accompanied by his wife and child, left early in the month by the Rajah Brooke. We understand the Morgans will not be returning to Sarawak.
Mrs R. J. Henniker-Heaton, who is preceding her husband on leave, left during the middle of the month.
Those who returned from leave included Mr. and Mrs. C. R. Murray, who will be stationed at Kuching, where Mr. Murray will take over the position of Superintendent Headquarters, Land and Survey Depart-ment; Mr. R. N. Baron, who will be State Surveyor Brunei Mrs. Baron and children arc coming later; Mr. and Mrs. R. E. Chater, who will be stationed in Kuching, where Mr. Chater will be Superintendent of Trade and Customs; Dr. P. P. Gopalla Pillai, Medical Officer, who will be in charge of the ATAS Clinic; Mr M. B. McCabe of the Public Works Department, accompanied by his wife and children; the Shipping Master, Mr. D. F. Matheson, and Mrs. Matheson; and Mrs. J. R. Outram who has joined her husband, the Secretary for Chinese Affairs, in Kuching.
Another arrival was Mrs. K. F. Michniewicz and child who have come from Australia to join Mr. Michniewicz in Miri.
New arrivals were the Honourable Mr. Justice E. H. Williams (accompanied by Mrs. Williams), who has been appointed Chief Justice of Sarawak, North Borneo and Brunei; Mr. W. L. Morrison (accompanied by Mrs. Morrison) who assumes a newly created post, Director of Marine; Mr J. G. R. Austine (accom-panied by his family), a Quantity Surveyor for the Public Works Department; Dr. and Mrs. J. C. Graham Stewart for Sibu, where Dr. Graham will be Medical Officer; Mr. R. H. Allen to be Assistant Controller of Posts and Telegraphs, Kuching; Mrs. F. M. Gray, who goes to Brunei Hospital as Matron; and Miss E. M. Smith, Nursing Sister.
Farewell.
Leaving Sarawak on leave prior to retirement by the Angby on 6th June will be Mr. and Mrs. D. L. Leach. David Leach first came to Sarawak in 1930 and shortly afterwards was busily engaged on the work which will remain a permanent monument to his industry and organising powers: the primary triangu-lation survey of Sarawak. This work compares more than favourably with similar work in other parts of the Commonwealth and was largely based on his study of the Survey of India.
At the outbreak of the war he volunteered for active service and. as an officer of the Royal Engineers, took a leading part in the organising and training which brought about a hitherto undreamt of expansion of the survey service of the British Army.
During the war he served in Africa and several European theatres and gave substantial help to the British Borneo Planning Unit in England. In 1945, in command of the Civil Affairs Unit, he was present at the initial landing on Labuan; and afterwards (with the curious designation of Lt. Colonel, Staff Officer I Agriculture, Forestry, Lands and Surveys and Fisher-ies) took a leading part in the restoration of civil administration in North Borneo, Brunei and Sarawak.
In 1946 he was appointed Director of Lands and Surveys, Sarawak. He was made Commandant, Special Constabulary, in 1951 and Deputy Commandant Auxiliary Constabulary, in 1952 and did sterling service during the 1952 emergency. Besides various other official duties, such as Custodian of Enemy Property, he also took a leading part in the life of the community and did a lot of work for the Sarawak Club, the Sarawak Turf Club, the Sarawak Association and Lodge Sarawak.
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, MAY 30, 1953.
87
Although Ella Leach came to us only in 1951 she leaves behind a host of friends. Like her husband she also look a leading part in the life of the community working hard for the Red Cross and as assistant-secretary of the Sarawak Club. She was Acting Colony Commissioner Girl Guides while Mrs. Matheson was on leave. At a farewell dinner given by the members of the Land and Survey Department she made a typical reply after a Malay member of the staff had wished her and her husband long life and children. "Well, thank you very, very much but I am afraid we cannot make any rash promises about having children. You see we already have four, my husband two and I two also, and that is enough for any self-respecting couple these days."
After a solid two months of farewell dinners and parties all over Sarawak (including a particularly en-joyable dinner at the Astana, when many humourous “off-the-record" speeches were made) D. L. Leach seemed to be bearing up very well and looked as though he had just had a holiday on the Riviera. One can now understand why it is a New Zealander who is the one and only European to have ever succeeded in climbing Mt. Everest—although his diet might vary very slightly from that of D. L. Leach
On behalf of the "Sarawak Gazette" we wish you, David and Ella, all the best in the future and we can assure you your names will long be remembered in Sarawak.
Sibu Letter.
When we referred last week with pride to the pioneer activities in Sibu of "our Mr. Dickie" in endeavouring to open up water-ways communication with his office we had no idea that a fair rival was contemplating entering the same field. This month we are able in report a most spirited contribution to this praiseworthy activity. No less a personality than Elaine Rafter has assayed a waterborne journey from somewhere about the Rest House to (presumably) the Bazaar. Profiting by the experience of “Dicey”, who found that his bicycle simply would not float, Elaine attempted an under-water journey. Alas for the plans of mice, men, and Elaine! Her saddle and handlebars only permitted of 6 inches adjustment whereas it turned out that some-thing more like 6 feet was required in practice. Even worse, she had forgotten her "Snorkel" apparatus and a most desperate situation might have resulted but for the timely arrival of the Borneo Company's elephant de-ditching apparatus. With the aid of this ingenious equipment the gallant lady was withdrawn from her predicament like a cork from a bottle with only the loss of her shoes. Jolly good show, Company!
We promised last month that we would say a few words about our new arrivals. Well, starting with easily the most important let us be metaphorically upstanding and drink a toast of welcome to Jill Rackham. Jill was born at 3.30 p.m. on the 18th of April. She scaled 7 lbs. has brunette hair, and a pair of very bewitching eyes. Congratulations Geoffrey and Joan, and best of luck, to you Jill! You should be certain of getting a good education!
The Hon. the Acting Resident, Mr. A. R. Snelus, and his family have now been with us so long that it seems superfluous to welcome them. At this time of writing your columnist is only just surfacing after a typical "Bob's" birthday party (of which more anon) and there has been much enjoyable "Margot" hos-pitality at the Residency. Mark and Sally Jane are in splendid heart and obviously enjoying our bracing Sibu air.
The Steamship Bungalow is now occupied by Lionel-larger, and so far steadier on his bicycle than the departed "Dicey"—and Thelma Storrs. This makes 2 Thelmas in Sibu an—all time high. Ken and Trudy Cleary—not forgetting Scrap—have taken over the Bettisonographicalogical Department with praiseworthy equanimity The medicos have increased their establish-ment by the addition of John and Annette Grahem Stewart. John is a great fisherman with advanced ideas. Eyebrows were raised the other day when he propped up a whopping great butterfly net against the operating table. But Joan has an answer for every-thing: "Semper paralus" he explained "they told me about flying fish in Eastern waters and I understand they take to the air sometimes—which is may be why they are called flying fish—and a pretty good fool I should look if one were to pop in here and I had to play it on the wing with rod and line in the middle of an appendectomy!" Now this seems to us a most interesting line of thought which ought to be brought to the notice of the Royal College of Surgeons (Very Far Eastern Section) without delay!
Dick and Pat Sherlock are two of our newest arrivals —to help out in the vast building and construction projects which are giving Sibu a good dose of pile-drivers' shudders these days. They must be particularly welcome to Jerry Howard who has borne the heat and burden of the day alone for a long time.
The attack on the Pelagus Rapids, which was started just before the landas, has now been resumed in force. Lt. Col. Obbard and Major Ratcliffe visited Sibu on 31st March to discuss plans; the advance party arrived on 20th April; and now the full contingent is up on the job.
The Commissioner-General arrived in Sibu on the 16th of April and left for the Balleh with the Resident in the "Marina". He spent one night in Penghulu Juga's house in the Merirai and two nights with Temonggong Koh. He was accorded his Customary Warm Welcome and participated in innumerable Iban ceremonies with his usual incomparable Stamina. He left again for Kuching on the 21st.
Denis White left us on the 27th. A large concourse saw him off to the accompaniment of a cacophony of crackers and the good wishes of all the Sibu Com-munity. To enable him to embark on the "Chusan" before she left Singapore—always a sensible objective if one wishes to travel on board—and at the same time leave Sibu at an hour expeditious to all interested parties. "Shipping" had worked out a nice space-time problem whereby Denis embarked on the "Marina", transferred some distance down stream on to the “Alice Lorraine", and then transferred again some further distance down stream on to the "Bruas”.
Bishop Ward of the Methodist Mission was a very welcome visitor to Sibu early in May. He was able to see the magnificent new School building off Tele-phone Road in its completed condition and on the 2nd of May the School staged a big concert. Joanna Blagden who attended in her own right and as representative of the "Sibu Letter" reported on it as "Super—Wizard"—an expression which we suspect she has acquired from her elder lister in darkest England. We understand it represents the highest school girl award which can be conferred upon any performance: all of which goes to show it was a most successful concert which everyone thoroughly enjoyed.
On the 24th of April the D.M.H.S., Dr. Glyn Evans, arrived in Sibu to welcome Dr. Wilson Rae one of the Medical Advisers to the Secretary of State for the
88
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, MAY 30, 1953.
Colonies who flew in the next day. They spent three pretty energetic days in the Division before leaving for the Batang Lupar.
We were pleased to have the Hon. The Attorney-General and Mrs. Strickland with us from the 16th to the 19th of May. It was not a long stay but it is doubtful if the Sibu standard of auction bridge will ever be the same again—which, we think everyone will agree, is probably a Good Thing!
On the 18th of May the Acting Chief Justice, the Hon. Mr. Justice Smith, flew in from Jesselton and on the following Monday morning opened the Court of Appeal Sessions and inspected a very smart guard of honour mounted outside the Council Chamber. That notorious old Sibuphile, the Hon. Mr. Justice Lascelles, arrived just before mid-day and the two Judges then proceeded to dispose of the whole list in rather less than a day and a half.
Other recent visitors to Sibu have included Mr. Towers, the Senior Auditor; Mr. Daly, the Programme Organiser of our embryo Sarawak Broadcasting Cor-poration; and Mr. Edmeades of the Police. Mr. Ed-meades was O.S.S. Sibu some years ago and his re-appearance on a recruiting drive for the regular Constabulary was most popular.
Last, but scarcely least, let us pay tribute to the endurance, stamina, and staying powers of David (alias “Les") and Ella Leach. These two well known and mercurial personalities visited Sibu in the course of the extensive farewell tour they have been making of the Colony and for 6 days or so maintained a pace which was decidedly brisk even judged by Sibu standards with-out apparently turning a hair. All the very best of luck to you both—and may health, wealth, happiness and long life follow you wherever you may go.
Residents they say are born and not made and on the evening of the 21st of May a distinguished party celebrated the birthday of Bob Snelus at the Residency. Dramatic talent was at a premium after supper when the assembled company were forcibly divided in twain and invited to perform the modernised version of "Dumb Crambo”. Time and space do not permit of a detailed description of the many excellent achieve-ments but pride of place must surely be given to Tim Dix's colourful rendering of "A Streetcar named Desire". A dozen times or more that desperate little tram travelled on hands and knees up and down the Residency floor with one finger painfully reaching for imaginary sparks off an imaginary overhead cable before its frenzied anxiety to establish its identity was assuaged. Then with damaged trousering and worn knees it turned its attention to the rendering of “Desire”—and how the Residency furniture suffered under that rendering! Oh Tim! What a great big caveman of a tramcar you are!
J.R.B.
The award of the George Medal to Menggong anak Panggit.
The official citation reads as follows:—
Labis Area of Segamat, Johore, Malaya.
13th November, 1952.
Acting Second in Command of an Iban Platoon.
On the morning of 13th November, 1952. Acting L/Cpl. Menggong anak Panggit was acting as second in command of an Iban platoon under command of
Lieutenant R. R. G. Bald of the 1st Battalion the Cameronians (Scottish Rifles) carrying out patrol duties in the Labis area of Segamat, Johore, when the leading scout sighted an occupied bandit camp. An attack on the camp was promptly planned and put into execution. Lieutenant Bald was killed instantly in the first burst of fire. From the accurate and sustained light automatic and rifle fire which was immediately directed at the platoon it was obvious that the enemy had been forewarned of the attack and were disposed in great strength and depth. Despite the hail of bullets Menggong without a moment's hesitation assumed command of the platoon and ordered his men to charge. Realising that the frontal attack was making slow progress he, with great initiative, led his reserve section to a flank and with-out regard for his own personal safety launched a succession of short charges against the enemy. Out-numbered by more than two to one, under his con-tinuous encouragement and determined leadership his men fought their way forward step by step slowly driv-ing the enemy from one position to another until finally defeated and demoralised they were forced to with-draw, leaving the Ibans in sole possession of their camp and in command of the battlefield. Determined to come to grips with the enemy again as soon as possible he organised a thorough search of the area and only when this proved fruitless did he order the withdrawal of his platoon and the evacuation of his late Com-mander's body. Appreciating that the knowledge of the presence of so large a number of terrorists in the area would be of paramount importance to his Com-pany Commander he detached himself from his platoon and walked alone, without a compass, 4,000 yards through enemy infested jungle to his company base where he rendered a most lucid and valuable report which enabled his Company Commander to initiate further offensive action without delay. Al-though only an Acting Lance Corporal with less than four months training as a soldier the calm cool-headed conduct, personal courage, determination, leadership and devotion to duty displayed by this N.C.O. were far above the average for his rank and service and worthy of the highest praise and recogni-tion.
New Bintulu Malay School Built by Local Effort.
The Education Department's policy of encouraging the people to accept more responsibility for the educa-tion of their children is producing good results in many districts. A stricking example is to be seen in Bintulu where a fine Malay school building is being erected by the local people.
In 1948 the District Officer, Mr. H. P. K. Jacks, began, and later officers continued, to encourage the populous Malay kampongs to do something about replacing the old temporary building. They did nothing.
In 1951 Abang Zainuddin, popularly known as "Abang J”, was posted to Bintulu as Senior Native Officer and later given the task of attempting to organise the new school project. A committee was formed but took no action. It was replaced by a number of separate committees in the several kam-pongs. Still little was achieved. Abang J thereupon, in July, 1952, set to work himself, following the me-thods he had employed with success for other public causes elsewhere.
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, MAY 30, 1953.
89
Going from house to house and shop to shop, donations of cash and materials were promised and gvien; here $3 or 100 attaps, there belian posts, else-where planks, and so on. In this way, by February, timbers and belian attaps sufficient for the building had been received plus $4,300 in cash. The whole com-munity had contributed, including Chinese and other non-Malays: sawmillers, shopkeepers, Government staff and others.
It was decided that the school could be built only if done by voluntary labour. Funds could pay only for cement (at cost price from a local merchant) and hardware and token wages to a skilled carpenter and cement worker.
So on February 15th this year the old school was enthusiastically demolished by a working-bee, usable timbers being set aside for use in the new building.
Now began the work of rebuilding. With enthusiasn at first volunteers came forward, but as novelty waned it became again necessary for Abang J and his few staunch helpers to take the lead. Seeing them carrying sand and timber, others would join in. The older school boys themselves and their Batu Lintang-trained teachers were always willing workers outside school hours, and it is an inspiration to see twenty boys tran-sporting cement by boat to the job where another young gang, well organised by the tradesmen, is mixing, pour-ing and tamping the concrete floor over many, many tons of compacted sand fetched from the beach. If these boys can carry this spirit into their future adult lives the Bintulu Malays have a great future, much in contrast with their past lethargy.
The building, to be finished by the end of April and opened with ceremony after Hari Raya, has nearly 4,000 square feet of floor space shaped in a shallow U and will accommodate over 200 pupils in four or five classes plus a staff room. Movable partitions will leave the space readily adaptable to other com-munity uses. It is being substantially and well made of durable materials and will be a lasting and valuable memorial to the leading and organizing ability of Abang Zainuddin and the public-spirited co-operation of the people of Bintulu, among the most active of whom may be mentioned Mohd. Hashim, chairman of the School Committee, Inche Mahmud and Awang Karim (tradesmen), the last two of whom have worked full time on token pay at considerable sacrifice.
Meanwhile classes are conducted in two kampong bouses and the old Court House.
An interesting feature of Bintulu education is the provision of informal extra-curricular classes run out-side school hours and open to all. These take the form of talks and discussion conducted by members of various Government Departments every Wednesday afternoon, and carpentry classes every Friday after-noon.
A. R. Bewsher.
CORRESPONDENCE.
District Office, Lawas.
27th April, 1953.
The Editor, Sarawak Gazette.
Kuching.
Sir.
I read with interest Mr. W. F. Roe's "Notes on Bin-tulu Valley and the Tubau Belaga Route to the Upper
Rejang Valley" of 27th, Feb, 1953 of the "Sarawak Gazette". I have timed myself while accompanying Dr. E. R. Leach of the Anthropological Research on a similar journey in 1947 from Belaga Tubau. The Route as extracted from my diary may be of interest to Mr. Roe and other readers.
(a) Belaga Fort—Aloh River 8.30 a.m. to 3 p.m.
Aloh River—Sungai Lanyau
3.10 p.m. to 5 p.m. Outboard, paddling and over-land mounting Bukit Jayong.
(b) Sungai Lanyau—Rumah Tamang Ubong 7.30 a.m. to 12.30 p.m. Paddling and poling
(c) Rumah Tamang Ubong—Muara Langunan 7. a.m. to 12 noon. Stopped here to await sam-pan. Overland.
Muara Langunan—Rumah Juman 3.30 p.m. to 7.30 p.m. Paddling.
(d) Rumah Juman—Kubu Tubau 7.30 a.m. to 10.30 a.m. Paddling.
Kubu Tubau—Bintulu
11 a.m. to 6.15 p.m. by M.V. Adeh
I agree with Mr. H. P. Buxton, the route is picture-sque and interesting. Among the things that I am never likely to forget are firstly leeches and secondly crocodiles.
Leeches. I was first warned by local inhabitants they were bad, and they advised me to rub my legs with kerosene or tobacco juice. I did not do so, not wishing to catch fire in the first place, and detesting the smell of tobacco in the second: I cannot therefore say how effective either of these remedies are but lee-ches were terrible.
Crocodiles. Of these I had not been warned, when my "Sampan" capsized at a small rapid in the Tubau River and I noticed my two Kayan companions jump quickly ashore, leaving me struggling to right the boat in mid-stream. Later, at Rumah Juman. I was told that crocodiles were abundant in that part of the river, hence the quick disappearance of the Kayans. I think it was just as well I did not know of the presence of crocodiles, or I should no doubt have abandoned the boat and ,"barang" to its fate.
Yours Sincerely,
Fauzi.
On Museums
In the General Hospital in Kuching there hangs a poster urging people to have their teeth examined at least twice a year.
This is excellent advice and it should not be limited to teeth. There are many things it is well for us to look at frequently and carefully: our manners, our temper, our political opinions—and our cliches. It is so easy to use tired and fancy phrases. We are saved a world of trouble. We will suffer a sea change, bow to the irony of fate, and sleep the sleep of the just, till words are perverted and meaningless, and our power of discrimination gone.
Among the phrases we so abuse is a “museum specimen." Occassionally we may use the words to describe a thing of rarity and beauty we hold should be preserved in a public place to give pleasure to those who will trouble to look and read, but far more often we intend by the phrase to consign an object to lumber, dust and oblivion, or a fellow creature to contempt.
90
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, MAY 30, 1953.
This is wrong. The Greek word from which our word museum comes means the Seat of the Muses, the nine daughters of the gods who were the guard-ians of the arts. These arts, the "liberal" arts, history, poetry, music and dancing among them, are the blood of the human spirit all over the world. We remember from the long past our kings and great men and their deeds, but only because of the artists who in picture, song and writing have so vividly preserved their names and deeds that we cannot escape the example and excitement of their records.
In some measure we can preserve and use these records privately in our homes, but this is a limited and selfish satisfaction. We have not means or space to keep for ourselves more than a minute fragment of our vast heritage. We have neither time nor (perhaps) knowledge to learn in seclusion the whole of what that heritage even in one small country may signify, and even if we had we could never taste the full savour of it alone and unshared.
This is where museums and museum specimens come to help us, and, what is more important, to nurture the life of the spirit of man from generation to generation, from century to century. Call them museums or libraries, or art galleries: they inter-mingle, and serve the same high purpose.
The great prototype of them all was the Library of Alexandria, said to have held 700,000 manuscripts, The destruction of the Library by fire in 640 A.D., so complete that even the site of it is not known, has ever since been looked upon as one of the greatest disasters that have befallen mankind. But the human spirit that made that first great library has never failed. It is a twofold spirit: it combines the devotion of those who give their skill, their means and their labour to the assembling and care of the collections, and the enthusiasm and desire of those who see and criticise and find inspiration in them.
They take many forms, these congregations of the works of men. In the British Museum Library in London there is a copy of every book ever printed in England. In the Castle Museum in York there is a perfect reconstruction of whole streets and shops and houses of an earlier day, and assembled in them all the things people used in their daily lives, so that you walk through a single door into the outward life of two hundred years ago; and in York also there is a large museum containing nothing but railway engines. At Williamsburg in Virginia a whole town-churches houses, shops, streets, gardens and public buildings, has been rebuilt with absolute fidelity to the form— and the beauty—of the eighteenth century. It is lived in by and serves all the purposes of the citizens of today—yet it is a museum in the true sense of the word.
In earlier times, these museums were built and their collections made and cared for by individual men— men having the time, the knowledge, the good taste and the means to devote to them. Those days are gone. Economic conditions have so changed that such men no longer exist, and it has become the duty, as fortunately it is the desire, of communities to share, as one of the most fruitful enterprises of their cor-porate life, in maintaining and embellishing these living sanctuaries of their history and achievement.
We in Sarawak are in this regard especially fortunate. We have in Kuching a museum and a collection of historic and artistic value unrivalled in all South East Asia, and it is good news indeed to know that the new building for which money was voted by Council Negri in December, 1952, is now being planned and will be erected where it will not spoil the beauty of the Museum gardens.
This new building must greatly benefit both those who have charge of the Museum and the people of Sarawak who enjoy it. The Kuching Museum established in 1886, through the vision and affection for his country of the second Rajah, Sir Charles Brooke. The collections have grown steadily both in quantity
and quality, until today you will hear from far beyond Sarawak's borders "When you are in Kuching, what-ever you do, don't miss the Museum."
No new building has been done for 25 years, and a large and extremely interesting and valuable part of the collection cannot for lack of space be seen by the people to whom it belongs. The Curator and his staff are submerged beneath a mountain of treasure of which they have seen far too much in too small a space, and they must sometimes find their work almost beyond their power. The reference library, unique in the world for its collection of books on Borneo, and inestimable in value, has long burst from its shelves and cannot be properly housed or used. Many volumes, indeed, are stranded in the Curator's house for lack of space in the library. Valuable natural history specimens collected on arduous journeys throughout the country lie shut in boxes deteriorating because there is nowhere to treat them and no hope of showing them until the new building is done. And now to all these needs is added the most imperative of all: space to examine, collate, and exhibit the Chinese ceramics and the other treasure unearthed in the excavations at Santubong. No one can yet foretell the limit of what this enterprise will produce, or its effect on our whole conception of the history of Borneo; but no one's imagination can be unaffected by the excitement of the discoveries already made and the vision of their significance.
And wherein lies the importance of all this en-deavour, and the succour the new building will bring?
First, in education We must all. even we who were educated in less enlightened days, be able to recall the sudden beam of light that fell upon our books, our memorisings and our practisings, when suddenly we found ourselves face to face with real things. A concert transfigured the dreariness of our piano exercises; the working models at a science museum threw our eyes far beyond the text-book of elementary mechanics; a walk through the Palace of Whitehall somehow made us remember without effort the dates and battles of the Civil War. And so, in the Museum in Kuching, the animals, the pictures, the maps and the weapons must in more than one child's mind have lighted a candle that will not be put out; and that is as important an achievement as any on earth.
The second purpose of the Museum, and the second inviolable reason for cherishing it, is the spreading among the peoples of British Borneo a knowledge of their history, their arts, and their achievements. Thus will be nurtured a proper pride and tolerance, and these are the foundation of prosperity and contentment.
Lastly, the Museum is a centre of research, enthno-logical anthropological, zoological, playing a part, a far from negligible part, in the search for untarnished truth: and in that search, and the zeal of those who carry on, lies the surest hope of the survival of the free spirit of man. "And ye shall know the truth, and the truth shall make you free"
The new building, so much needed, will cost a good deal of money, and there are always conflicting demands on the public funds. Men who strive for a cause with courage and integrity, and see suffering unassuaged and needs unmet, will always feel the paramountcy of their own fight. This must and should be so, or endeavour would cease. When the people of the city of Liverpool watched the spending of millions of pounds on their splendid new Cathedral, there was impatience and anger because of the need of their hospitals. Houses are greatly needed in Sarawak as in many places, and new roads and docks and clinics. But in making their decision to spend money on a new Museum building those responsible for it have shown their faith in the long future, and in the vision of the Rajahs who founded and fostered Sarawak; and they have ensured that, in Kuching at least, the words "museum specimen" shall be words not of dust and decay but of inspiration and delight.
(Contributed).
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, MAY 30, 1953.
91
This Sarawak.
Extract from a petition of appeal to the Supreme Court:—
"The humble Appellant has never had the benefit of any sort of education, being a pagan and so poor that he has no friends to help him out with perjury in Court."
Second Division Atmosphere.
One rather feels that given opportunity to visit many different parts of Sarawak one should take the more difficult parts first; as one grows older and enlargingly tired, spend more time in the more accessible places. That is perhaps the reason why the present writer has only in the past month been in the Second Division, —except in quick passing.
Knowledge to date is quite insufficient to say anything worthwhile in detail. But perhaps there are two things worth mentioning which make immediate impression—inter-racial relationships and inter-river communications.
The difficulty of getting about in between outstations in the Second Division seems fantastic in 1953. The topography of the rivers leads to very strong tides— famous of which is of course the Batang Lupar bore. (The first time we heard this at five o'clock in the morning we really thought that someone had stepped up communications smartly in Sarawak and that an express train was rapidly approaching!) The distances dividing the main rivers across the country is often negligible compared with the journey that has to be made down to the mouth, out to sea and up the other side again. Near Bijat but on the opposite bank of the Batang Lupar, in the last few years the river has started to cut up towards the Saribas. This is the sort of thing that would challenge the Kelabit, who would start encouraging that river and in no tune have a cut through. In some places, they have cut out huge bends in the upper Baram and released much rich agricultural land in the old river bed. Another striking example of this deliberate straightening (which is only an acceleration of time's natural evolution) is a cut in the Samarahan River below Kampong Melayu, which was started during the Japanese occupation and has replaced more than a mile of river-bed with less than a hundred yards of channel across the neck. This was done entirely by local voluntary effort; without much effort at that. Once you can get the river started into your new opening, periodical floods will do the rest. There are many places where this could be done in Sarawak, thus much expediting river travel. But perhaps by the time we get round to doing that we shall have learned that the simplest and cheapest way to move sideways in this country is not by river or by land, but by air?
As regards the inter-relation of races, one gets a feeling of particular group friendliness, notably in Saratok. In some way which it is hard to analyse exactly the faintly traced lines of demarcation and doubt which so easily and indeed naturally enough divide different groups seem less well-drawn there-abouts. Maybe one reason is that the Chinese probably settled in parts of the Second Division—such as Engkilili and Marup before anywhere else in Sarawak (apart from the seasonal coastal trading stations of the Santubong type). The majority of these Chinese married local native peoples and there
is a very strong absorption and admixture to-day. Another contributing factor is the quality of local leadership—government, commercial and by racial group.
The Upriver Datus.
It was delightful to travel in the Second Division with a Datu in the old ulu style. Datu Abang Zin, m.b.e.,	will not feel he is being in anyway
patronised if it is here recorded that men like him have a very special place in Sarawak. There are two groups of Datus:
(i) those who are in effect heads of native depart-ments or permanently available and invaluable con-sultants to government in Kuching; as are now the Hon'ble the Datu Bandar, o.b.e., the Datu Hakim and Datu Abang Openg, for example.
(ii) those in outstations who have a special local knowledge of Malay and other races, permanently available as advisers to Residents and D.O's.
Both groups have played a vital part in the past century of Sarawak. By definition Mohammedan, few have confined themselves to Malay affairs; the second group have often been more concerned with welfare, justice and development among the upriver pagan, non-Mohammedan peoples. Of late, both groups have tended to become less numerous,— though not less influential. In particular, the old style "Upriver Datu" is becoming a scarcer person; harder, to replace. Perhaps the doyen of these is Datu Zin Galau, m.b.e., of Marudi, with his incomparable experience not only of the Baram pagan—now largely Christian—peoples, but also of a long succession of Residents and D.O's—their H.C.Fs, and L.C.Ms. The late Datu Tuanku Taha, m.b.e., played an equally important part in the Third Division for many years, as does Datu Tuanku Mohamad now in Miri.
On a recent trip it was therefore a particular pleasure to be for several days with Datu Abang Zin, M.B.E., the only active service Datu in the Second Division since Datu Talip retired. In so many inconspicuous ways he showed in a few days the value of that special level of interstitial contact and bar-to-the-ground, a continuity, more or less permanently in one place and bridging—for those wise enough to use such bridges—the gulf of uncertainty that can so suddenly sometimes yawn between the newly posted Senior Service or Native Officer (at the Station usually for one hour or less) and the narrower Tua Kampong-Penghulu level of only part time Government servants. If such men are not to be succeeded or replaced by a suitable substitute link, something important from the past will have been lost for the future. No amount of local authorities and school boards, valuable as they may be, can do what a good Datu can do. A century of experience has, so far as historical records go, shown only trivial defects in the system here dis-cussed. One aside. That sort of job is essentially fluid, what Americans call "trouble shooting", unconcerned with office hours and paper work. Nor is it a post, necessarily to be filled in line. It is a case where it is the natural man for the job—or nobody! But nobody is negation, ain't it?
Bijat Munias.
The immense flocks of Munias infesting the impressive Bijat agricultural station was an un-pleasantly impressive Second Division sight. And the harvest had still not been completed by early May, 4—5 months behind some areas.
On this scale, Munias, commonly known locally as Burong Pipit (and in English also as Parrot Finches Mannikins) do heavy damage to crops. Perhaps the
92
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, MAY 30, 1953.
most destructive is the Chestnut Munia which does not nest in the south but arrives after nesting, in hordes; and the beautiful long-tailed Munia, blue, green and scarlet, whose nesting places in Borneo are unknown, —this in no way deterring it from arriving in vast gangs almost wherever the rice is late in being harvested.
It is said that rats, deer and other major pests have been brought under control at agricultural stations and are increasingly being controlled elsewhere. Insuffi-cient attention has been paid to these Munias, which may well take up to 10% of our rice harvest. Through Museum studies a good deal has been learnt about the habits of the species in recent years but much is still obscure about their migrations. Any further information would be welcome.
There is no doubt that the earlier padi can be planted consistent with other considerations, the less severe is the effect of Munias. It is after having com-pleted nesting that they form into large flocks with the young ones and move over wide areas. And Munias are among the very few Borneo birds which lay not just one or two eggs but (some of them) up to six and seven. As they are in some places almost colonial, large numbers breeding in a small area, such an army of ex-nestlings is no mean (hungry) force. And ripening rice grain is undoubtedly their favourite food.
Snake Bite.
Father P. Aichner helpfully writes once more from the R.C. Mission, Dalat. He is replying to a previous request in this column about information on local attitudes to poisonous snakes. He reports five main types of poisonous snake in that area. Native treat-ment, as outlined in the combined reports of his schoolboys, is as follows:—
"Treatment: The warm ashes of cigarettes to be put on the wound.
Or: Eat any kind of moss, chew it and spit it on the wound; then give the moss to the man who is bitten to eat.
Or: Rub the wound with the Akar Penawar. This is a blackish looking kind of wood, found in the ground. I was not able to get it, although many people know about it and its healing effect.
The person bitten by the snake is not allowed to be brought to his own house, otherwise he will die; they build a small house for him next to it.
The soot of clay-stoves, used of making sago-pearl, is also useful as first-aid treatment.
The snakes chiefly responsible for bites here are the cobra and the ular birang (water snake).”
Father Aichner adds that Mr. L. Noakes is locally believed to have possessed a walking stick of Akar Penawar. The present writer can confirm by saying he has two given to him by the District Officer, Keningau, North Borneo. Here the Dusuns believe that the possessor of such a stick cannot be bitten by such a snake if he carries it when walking. This belief does not seem to have been reported in the large intervening area between the Dusuns in the Keningau plain and the Melanaus of Dalat in the Third Division, in Sarawak. Perhaps the belief is widely held? The Museum should be glad to receive further reports on this subject.
Tugau and Alak Betatar at Mukah.
The Third Division Annual Report, 1952, for the
Mukah District (D.O. Mr. A. Meikle) contains an interesting summary of the supposed early history of Mukah, which is worth pulling on permanent record. The source of the information given is not indicated but it is presumably based on local folklore and is in general confirmed by legends from that area which were recorded in 1949-50 by the late Mr. F. Manis, Museum Research Assistant. There was also some correspondence by the late Mr. J. B. Archer and others about the central figure, Tugau, in the Gazette, from 1947 onwards. To quote from the Mukah report:
"lt would appear that round about 1400 the largest settlement of the Melanaus was in the Igan River and over this settlement ruled the famous Chief Tugau, who had his headquarters in Sungei Retus a tributary of the Igan. Besides ruling over the Igan River he had extended his power over Kedahat of Oya, Busui of Mukah and northwards far up the Coast. The Chiefs of Tutong and Belait were said to be on friendly terms with him also. At the time that the Melanau power would appear to have been at its height there was also the rising power of Brunei under a ruler known as Alak Betatar to contend with. Tugau is said to have sent a message to Alak Betatar demanding tribute. This Alak Betatar refused to do and demanded from Tugau tribute instead, which was also rather naturally refused. Open war then followed between the Melanaus and the Bruneis.
In the first place the Melanaus were successful. Under Besiong, brother-in-law of Tugau, the Bruneis were defeated at Tutong and Belait The Melanaus then pushed forward into Brunei. Here however they came up against a Brunei force under the Brunei Commanders Pateh Berbi and Semaun and were defeated. However Besiong and a few of his followers escaped to the Retus, but were followed up so quickly by Pateh Berbi and his Bruneis that Tugau was unable to raise the countryside and was forced to submit to the Brunei Forces of Alak Betatar. Basui was shortly afterwards defeated and the Melanau resistance elsewhere collapsed. Bintulu came under the sway of Brunei power of peaceable means.
It seems that Alak Betatar then did rather an unusual thing for those times. He allowed Tugau, Busui, Kedahat and others to go on ruling their people as dependants of Brunei and provided they paid him yearly tribute. Alat Betatar was the first Brunei ruler to become a Mohemadan taking the title of Sultan. It was later when Brunei as a state had been converted to Islam that the Brunei Pengirans replaced the local Chieftains, and it was the rule of these Pengirans which became oppres-sive."
This contribution and the main characters referred to are broadly confirmed also over a wide area of west Borneo. Semaun and Alak Betatar play a pro-minent part both in the written manuscripts of early Brunei tradition and in the protracted song cycles of the Muruts and other peoples in the Fourth and Fifth Divisions. There seems little doubt that Alak Betatar was some sort of Murut or Bisaya—in any case a pagan intimately related to the peoples of the interior, and separate from the Melanaus. He was converted to Islam, becoming the first Sultan of Brunei in the present dynasty. Pateh Berbi of the Mukah version is either the same or an echo of the culture hero, Datu Merpati, whom we have met in so many stories, both Malay and Dayak, from around Kuching, Santubong, the Sadong and elsewhere in the southwest.
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, MAY 30, 1953.
93
One of the most interesting features of these legends is the way that they are now being supported by material actually being excavated in Santubong, one of the centres of the Datu Merpati cult in folklore. There has been a tendency on the part of London-trained anthropologists, several of whom have been with us in recent years, to treat folklore in a rather off-hand manner. It is our own belief, supported by excavation experience (and stated once more) that the sort of folklore we get in countries like this is often founded on a fair historical basis; and that the genea-logies which first seem mythical and absurd, prove,— when collected from widely separated areas and examined both comparatively and against the evidence of material finds and Chinese documents like the Ming Annals,—to be surprisingly accurate indicators of general time trends and sequences.
Odysseus and Alak Betatar.
There is nothing to put a person off the classics so well as a classical education. This column had its nose thoroughly rubbed in dead languages long before it was fully alive. As a result, only recently and almost by chance has boyhood repugnance against Homer and Virgil been at long last reluctantly over-come. But lately, reading—after an interval of nearly a quarter of a century—the Odyssey in the sometimes not altogether exhilarating atmosphere of Kuching evenings, one was—for long breaths of time—trans-ported hundreds of miles as well as thousands of years.
Indeed, at some moments it was doubtful whether one was reading one of the upland Borneo sagas of Semaun or the words of the first great literate dramatic writer in the western world, that lyrical Greek whose very individuality has for pedantic reasons, been doubted by one school of scholastic thought.
The parallels between the sagas of Semaun and Alak Betatar in the beginnings of Brunei, Mukah and Bario, and those of Odysseus, Telemachus and Athene in the dawn light of archaic Greece, are at times striking. It seems almost difficult to believe that the longhouse song to-day is not in some sense a living continuation of the old, old disputed manuscript.
This is a matter which can more suitably be pursued in detail elsewhere. But it may be worth noting just a few of the common themes which immediately impress. The fundamental theme of the Odyssey is the son's search for his lost father. This is the fundamental theme not only of many of the sung sagas of the uplands but also of vivid Land Dayak legends several of which have been put on record in recent issues of the Sarawak Museum Journal.
The importance of sacrifice and of omen birds, particularly eagles, is an incessant theme from both sources. So also the precise procedure in greeting a stranger, giving him hospitality, enquiring from whence he came and so on, and so on. Equally the signi-ficance of dreams as guides to future conduct.
The glorification of personal conflict, even though it involves methods which some allegedly civilised persons of to-day would call treacherous or cowardly, is also dominant in the chanting over the Borak and the writing of the Greek. And (perhaps most of all), the attempts by cannibal ogres to consume the "hero" and his companions. Here, however, there is rather a difference. Odysseus encounters four major ogres, Polyphemus the Cyclops, Antiphates, Scylla and Charybdis. All these failed to consume him but his effort is centred on escaping from them—although in the process he blinds one-eyed Cyclops. This would not at all do in a Borneo saga, where the ogre, who is generally a man-tiger or a monstrous underwater
beast like Scylla, is invariably (regardless of superiority) in the end slaughtered—and generally consumed—by way of vengeance. But after all, the Greeks, tough operators though they were, did not have the ethic of head-hunting.
In Borneo petrification is very frequently associated with ogre stories. The way in which Poseidon took vengeance on those who helped Odysseus escape him, by turning their boat into stone, could, with insigni-ficant modification, be part of the Semaun saga or a legend from the Tinjar. All this is not to say that there is necessarily a common source; but there would be nothing particularly odd if there were. We know now that many beads being worn in Borneo to-day probably came from the Eastern Mediterranean, back into Greek and Roman times, just as bowls that are still being used in longhouses which were made in China many centuries ago. Johore Lama and Kota Tinggi in Malaya, the subject of Mr. Williams-Hunt's study mentioned below, have been proved to have been in particularly close association with the Middle East through India.
There is always the alternative psychological explanation that this sort of outburst in legend, spoken, written or sung, reflects certain basic drives universal in the human mind. The son's frustration over his lost "father figure“ is by now a well-known symbol, first brillantly illuminated by Freud.
Santubong and Johore Lama.
A recent issue of the Straits Times, whose Cecil Street so often and so intelligently describes and dis-cusses matters scientific, tells about some work being done by elegantly bearded Mr. D. P. Williams-Hunt, of the Federation Museum at Kuala Lumpur. Both at Johore Lama and Kota Tinggi on the southern main-land of Malaya large quantities of Ming and later pottery were found. One is rather terrified by the descriptions of the amounts by weight; it is hoped that Mr. Williams-Hunt will not find too much difficulty in tackling it all fragment by fragment as well as pound by pound. Mere bulk is likely to bewilder rather than to reveal in archaeology.
With all respect to Mr. Cecil Street, however, when he kindly refers to us as having found a similar site at Santubong, we must mildly disown the comparison. So far, on our main excavation site at Santubong, not one single piece has been found which can possibly be as late as Ming. This is the minor importance of the site——that it is the first located in this part of the world of Sung and probably late Tang mass occupat-ion. In Brunei we expect to find something perhaps rather between the two, between Santubong and Johore Lama, although so far we speak only after an hour or so of preliminary examination in company with Mr. Trumble and from the examination of a sackful of fragments which Mr. Trumble collected separately. The rest remains to be seen.
Brunei Pre-history.
The word pre-history must therefore be used with some reserve in discussing this sort of information— because in a way it is really history unwritten. It is something a good deal better than simply myth.
It should be particularly interesting to test this out in one of the sites around which so many of the legends centre in the end—the ancient buildings of Brunei town. Practically all old Borneo buildings were in wood and have therefore vanished in the decay of time. Some of the strongest legends centre on Kota Batu, “fort of stone'', which lies about a mile above the present Brunei township. With the support of the Brunei government and the helpful co-operation in
94
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, MAY 30, 1953.
advance of Mr. D. Trumble, it is planned that a Museum unit shall go to Brunei in the middle of June and start an exploratory dig at Kola Batu. It is probable this site is later than the beginnings of Brunei in the earliest Islam time. But from here it should be possible to follow up clues outwards. At least it will make a start. It is intended to close down this year's Santubong digging before then. Inform-ation from Santubong is becoming rather lopsided without the corrective of another dig somewhere else. If Brunei yields positive results this should assist and improve renewed Santubong digging presently.
Books, birds in spirit, moths, etc.
Among those who have been good enough to remember the Museum this month is Mr. Kho Shak Kim, of the Audit Office, who sent us several moths and butterflies. Mr. F. L. Phiaw of Betong sent a grass snake.
Mr. G. E. Wilford has kindly given a reprint of the classic paper on the An-yang archaeological site in China, which shows interesting parallels in pottery and other material with the results of the excavations at Bau undertaken by the Sarawak Museum in co-operation with the Raffies Museum two years ago,— which started off archaeological research in the Colony.
Dr. M. A. Lieftinck has sent another valuable reprint of a paper by Pro. A. W. Nieuwenhuis which we have been trying to obtain for some time past. Dr. Lieftinck, on behalf of the Bogor Museum, has also given a small collection of birdskins from east Borneo in exchange for some Sarawak material of the same species for comparison.
Mr. T. Courtney of the Marine Department has once again put us in his debt by getting lighthouse keepers to put birds, killing themselves against the light, in spirit and sending them back to Kuching from time to time. The new lot contains some migratory nightjars and a very puzzling group of Spider-hunters. This is the first we know of Spider-hunters migrating in this part of the world.
The Ford Foundation in the U.S.A. have been sending us some interesting publications, available in the Reference Library, including the new Pacific Review. From the Co-operative Development Depart-ment comes “Rebirth of the Kaka", an original and stimulating description by a group of Sungai Engkabang Sea Dayaks, a story of their own community in the past 50 years. This document was roneod for circulation to those concerned with co-operative development, but no doubt could be made available to those interested, on request; a copy is being placed in the Reference Library and another in the Archives.
We have also received from Holland the Forty-fourth volume of ADATRECHTBUNDELS. This is con-cerned entirely with Borneo and mainly with Indone-sian Borneo as it now is. Nearly all the papers are by Dutch ethnologists and administrators, and contain a wealth of material mainly brought together from other publications and now made available in one so-lid volume of 430 pages. The only material it contains from Sarawak is by the Curator, Sarawak Museum, on influences upon the culture of upland people in north central Borneo, and some extracts from Dr. E. R. Leach's report on a socio-economic survey of Sara-wak. The main value is in the information contained on the Dayak peoples living across the border from Sarawak to the east and southeast. Although there is a mine of information, it is not up to the scientific standard of recent surveys undertaken, (following upon Dr. Leach's above-mentioned report) in this colony. Under the present set-up it looks unlikely that
modern scientific studies of these people over the border can now ever be made, until many of their dis-tinguishing characteristics have been submerged.
A particularly interesting publication now received regularly in the Reference Library, is Indonesian Affairs. Although this is published by the Ministry of Information in Djakarta it contains good objective articles on a wide range of subjects, as well as slightly propaganda articles which nevertheless interestingly reveal the Indonesian point of view. The intelligence shown in approaching many of the problems discussed is of a high order, as indeed might be expected. Less expected is the amount of internal criticism and analysis in an official document of this kind; there is considerably more of this than would be allowed in many countries with more or less reason for feeling secure.
(Contributed)
Excerpts from Reports of Administrative Officers for the First Quarter, 1953.
District Officer, Kuching.
(Datu Abang Openg).
During the quarter a dispute regarding the site of fish trap "langian“ between fishermen at Kampong Bako has been settled in which it was ruled in accordance with the old procedure that no one is allowed to stop the other fishermen for setting the “langian" in a place which has been left without using it for 3 years.
The Malays in the Upper Sarawak River such as Kampong Landeh, Peluntan, Rumbus, Lidah Tanah and Batu Kitang suffered during the quarter, due to the fact that the recent flood caused damage to their gardens and houses, etc. The school house and the teachers quarters at Kampong Landeh were smashed by the flood.
Acting District Officer, Bau.
(Mr. P. Ratcliffe).
Orang Kaya Pemancha Nyarah Pa Riggin of Sing-ghi has petitioned His Excellency the Governor to allow his anak biak to farm in the Matang Reserve. Apart from the fact that under no circumstances can the Matang Water Catchment Reserve be farmed by anyone, this astonishing request re-emphasises the hitherto obstinate refusal of the Singghi Land Dayaks to farm the excellent swamp padi lands in their area. They would apparently rather move to a distant area and plant hill padi than grow swamp padi in the highly suitable lands which are on their doorsteps. This is absurdly uneconomical and His Excellency has further directed chat no new encroachments upon virgin hill areas will be permitted so long as these fine large swamp lands remain unplanted. This should now bring being the matter to a head. If the Land Dayaks will not plant their swamp lands they will have to be told that they will lose their customary rights over them and permission to plant these areas will then be given to the Chinese and Malays who are very willing to do so.
The disastrous floods in January caused great havoc to low-lying pepper gardens in the District, particularly in the Siniawan area. Even now, the full extent of the damage cannot be estimated. The vines have apparently been slow in dying but it is now clear that many Chinese planters have lost everything. Many compute their losses at over fifty thousand dollars. It is assumed by all that this mass destruction of
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, MAY 30, 1953.
95
pepper vines was caused entirely by the inundations but the position will shortly be investigated on the spot by an expert from the Department of Agriculture. But whatever the cause, many planters have been ruined and a serious blow has been inflicted upon the economy of the District. Rubber is still said to be a paying proposition despite the present low price, but few people are now keen to work as tappers on small gardens and only Dahan Estate continues with every appearance of prosperity, accepting virtually all offers of labours.
The police have done excellent work during the period under review, in particular at the time of the floods in January when they gave great help and assist-ance to those rendered temporarily homeless, thereby gaining much local gratitude and respect. The Force was twice visited during the quarter by the Officer Superintending Constabulary Sector, Kuching.
Acting District Officer, Lundu.
(Mr. P. B. Smith).
Information is beginning to come in on the where-abouts of illicit distilleries now that the public are becoming more aware of the goods rewards paid by Government for information. There is little doubt that distilling illicit arrak is a profitable occupation and large fines when the culprit is traced seems to be the only solution.
Much rubber is being planted in the district with-out first obtaining the necessary permit to plant. The Agricultural Field Assistant seems quite incapable of controlling this and the only cases brought to Court so far, with one exception, have been on the initiative of either the writer or the Native Officer who have come across illegal rubber while travelling.
Some disease amongst pepper planted along the Sebemban road has been noticed. Symtoms are a yellowing of the leaves, and seems to be caused by a root disease. Persons having this trouble in their gardens do not appear to want to destroy the diseased plants as most of them are bearing fruit.
District Officer, Sadong.
(Mr. J. F. Drake-Brockman).
For the first time a lawyer has appeared in Court at Serian. Two wealthy Chinese pepper planters were charged in the Police Court under the Natural Re-sources Ordinance with failing to make contour bunds in their gardens within the time specified in an order issued by the Natural Resources Board. The Depart-ment of Agriculture have been trying for a very long time to persuade the local pepper gardeners to adopt anti-erosion measures. Persuasion failed and this was a test case. One of the accused was represented by Mr. Dunbar of Mark Morrison and Company. How-ever, both accused were convicted and fined the maximum for a first offence, which is $200, They were both ordered to carry out the work. One of the accused appealed, and was again represented by Mr. Dunbar, but the conviction and sentence were upheld by the High Court.
Basu was appointed Orang Kaya Pemancha for the Kedup area to replace Baud, who has retired, after a rather unsatisfactory election in Tebakang Kubu. He is the first Christian to be appointed in this district. Basu did not receive very many votes, as several Tua Kampong were not present when the election was held and several other names were mentioned by the voters.
3 Tua Kampong refused to vote for anyone at all, on the grounds that they were quite capable of looking after their own villages themselves and did not require a chief of higher rank.
Since there has to be a Pemancha, Basu is probably the best man far the job, but his appointment may lead to friction between Christian and Pagans, and a fairly
large proportion of the people in his area will not take much notice of what he says or does. This system of group chiefs, known elswhere as Penghulu, was im-posed on the Land Dayaks only about 5 years ago, and cannot be said to have been fully accepted by them as yet. It is likely that the present system will have to be modified in the near future if it is to be of any value at all. At present each Pemancha has about 600 doors to control. Considering that most of their travelling has to be done on foot these areas are too large. In some cases the groups of villages which have been combined under one Pemancha do not have common origins and therefore do not feel that they have any-thing in common.
The Land Dayaks are for the most part so poor that their economic situation must be improved and their standard of living raised before they can be expected to take an interest in Local Government. To enable them to improve their own lot they must be educated, and as long as their primary education is left to the Local Authority, with little Government support and supervision, it is a case of the blind trying to lead the blind.
A fine school building of planks and belian attap has been put up by the Sebuyau Dayaks at Sg. Arus, near Sebangan, (Penghulu Birong). These people are very keen on education but have had great difficulty in finding a teacher. The present one is untrained and of rather low standard but very keen to go to Batu Lintang. Another building of similar construction will soon be put up at Entangor, where another teacher (untrained) is ready to start work.
A census of padi, livestock and pepper was taken by the Agricultural Field Assistant in Simunjan sub-district. The following figures were obtained: 73 head of cattle, 795 goats, 1,719 pigs, 92,593 pepper vines,. 23 of the cattle belong to Malays of Kampong Ensengei, and 12 are owned by Chinese on Gunong Ngili. The goats are nearly all owned by Malays. The pigs are fairly evenly spread throughout the Dayak houses and Chinese communities, but it is perhaps surprising that there are not more. In only 2 cases are there more than 2 pigs per door. At Sg. Arus there are 79 pigs to 19 doors and at Sual 65 pigs to only 9 doors. Both these places are near bazaars.
The figures of pepper vines do not include several thousands of vines planted by Chinese in the Gunong Ngili area, without title to land. The greatest number is at Rh. Jenta, Entangor, ulu Sebangan. Here 38 doors have 11,350 vines. Considering that some families must have none this represents a fairly large number per door. Unfortunately much of this pepper has been planted on very steep slopes. Terraces have been made but in spite of the Agriculture Department's assistance they do not always follow the contours, so that there is considerable erosion. Most Dayaks cannot afford to buy sufficient manure and many vines have turned yellow before reaching the top of the post.
A survey party is at work in the border area of Tebakang sub-district making a rough survey of land which is at present occupied by Chinese without title. It seems likely that the number of genuine squatters will turn out to be less than was originally supposed, although there are many cases of people making use of land without title which is adjacent to land for which they have titles.
THIRD DIVISION
Resident (Mr. D. C. White).
The fears of the District Officer, Mukah, as regards the padi harvest in the swamps have been more than justified and there has been little harvest in this area.
Chinese New Year was celebrated with customary fervour but with a slight reduction in the lavishness of the refreshments provided both alcoholic and otherwise.
96
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, MAY 30, 1953.
The Divisional Engineer has reported that progress in the Kut has been very slow owing to the difficulty of operating the dredger except at a convenient depth of water. There seems little doubt that this project is going to present more difficulties and probably be more expensive than was originally envisaged.
The Local Authority in Mukah continues to function satisfactorily and has undoubtly achieved a major suc-cess in the administration of its schools.
The explorations of the B.M.P. Seismic Parly at Tabo in the Mukah River have given rise to rumours that oil had already been found. Such is, however, not the case and I have informed the local papers con-cerned who published the inaccurate reports.
The harvest results in the Lower Rejang have been more than satisfactory and most people should have ample stocks for the year. It is hoped that they will not be as imprudent as usual and sell too much to Chinese traders.
The rubber block planting scheme has not made the progress that was to be expected. It is quite clear that the Chinese wanted easy land to plant on and are not prepared to tackle lands still under forest. Their idea was to get possession of the Dayak “temuda” near Sarikei. It has been made quite clear to them that the available Crown Land must be taken up first before the Government would undertake negotiations with the Dayaks to purchase rights over surplus farming land.
District Officer, Sibu District.
(Mr. G. Lloyd Thomas).
As mentioned above, the padi harvest this year appears to be considerably better than average. Chinese who farmed land leased from Dayaks admitted that their crops average 15 pikuls to the acre, but other sources put the yield from these areas at nearer 20 pikuls per acre.
This quarter has produced a spate of applications for guns from Chinese and these have cast light on the numbers of Chinese who are now engaged in pro-ducing padi and vegetable us well as the more common pepper. An inspection by the Agriculture Depart-ment in this connection revealed that some padi (ad-mittedly not a large area) was being grown on the very outskirts of Sibu itself.
The sharp fall in rubber-prices has undoubtedly had a marked effect on the consumer-goods trade, but this has not (at any rate, thus far) been so pronounced as is understood to have been the case in many other Districts, owing largely to the continued boom in timber and the still high prices for pepper. At the beginning of the year there were substantial exports, also, of illipe nuts, and this was further evidence of the fortunate position of Sibu in that its trade is diversi-fied and hence less liable to sudden depression than that of many other districts in Sarawak.
An application was made early in the year to recruit more skilled men from Sibu to work on shophouse construction at Kuala Belait and Brunei, but this was refused in view of the local need for the services of workers of these categories and the depletion of the numbers available by the earlier recruiting which had been approved.
Many Dayaks from upriver districts also came in during the quarter asking for documents to proceed to Seria and North Borneo to seek work in the oil-fields or with timber companies. These were referred to their own D.O's or attempts made to secure them local employment, but the latter is now extremely difficult as some of the larger timber concerns here now fight shy of Dayak labour, especially when these people have no homes in the near neighbourhood.
Although in this part of the year it is early for signs of newly-approved works being begun, prepar-ations for such works were very noticeable and steady progress was maintained with jobs begun but not com-pleted in the previous year. The resurfacing of the bazaar roads was extended to the roads round the markets and the connecting roads between Market Road and Channel Road; this work in particular seemed to be done commendably swiftly. The water-front coffee stalls were removed to a temporary site in Channel Road, to enable a start to be made with the new Customs Godowns, and the clearing of the area between the power station and the B.C.L's building (also part of the new Customs area), as well as the construction of a road from Court Road to Island Road, resulted in an entirely "new look" for this section of the waterfront. Steady progress was maintained with the construction of the new road to the airfield and the new bridge at Sungei Merah,
District Officer, Lower Rejang.
(Mr. H. P. K. Jacks).
The District Officer toured the Sarek district. Some of the houses are very isolated being some hours by outboard from each other. It was surprising to see so many long-haired Dayaks in these houses. The Dayaks themselves seemed to be contented though there were complaints of a shortage of suitable padi land.	The Colonial Timber Company are increasing their activities both at Kelupu opposite Daro and also at Rejang. Production at the jungle camp has been in-creased by over 100%, it is said, while at Rejang a new mill larger than the present one at Sarikei is to be erected. An engineer has already started work on the foundation. It will be necessary to dismantle the fort while the school has already moved to another site.
Vaccination against smallpox has covered 2,000 out of the project 10,000 for the year.
The Rubber Block planting scheme made slow pro-gress due to the fact that the Chinese are wanting temuda land belonging to Dayaks who want a high price for it. There is, however, plenty of State land which must be taken up first. The demand for rubber land has certainly been exaggerated. Only 143 lots have been applied for at Binatang out of 476 available.
The growing of various citrus fruit appears to pay well, particularly at Binatang, and it is reported that land is in some cases being used exclusively for this. The advantages of mixed cultivation as an insurance against price fluctuations are beginning to be realised.
The Divisional Engineer made four visits to Lower Rejang during the quarter.
Mr. Wang, an experienced engineer, arrived for duty in the Lower Rejang on January 5th. The amount of work in this district certainly calls for a man of his ability.
District Officer, Kapit.
(Mr. A. J. N. Richards).
January and February were divided between recruit-ing for the Sarawak Rangers and collecting licence fees and other revenue. As far as the Dayaks were concerned, engkabang and then the harvest were the most important. Engkabang was less and less, the further upriver from Ngemah. Many disputes raged at Song, but none at Kapit.
The harvest seems a little better than usual, but the majority of doors have none too much and it is only the very few who have padi in plenty. All that can be expected is that fewer people will relying on sago so early as last year.
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, MAY 30, 1953.
97
An increase in the number of private padi mills was projected in view of a probable better harvest. It was not until the Divisional Council on 30th March that a ruling was obtained to the effect that there was no limitation of such mills envisaged but only of those operating for profit.
A mosaic has been prepared from air photographs for the strip of land each side of the Rejang from the Poi to the Balleh. This is commonly referred to as the Mixed Zone but is mostly held by Dayaks under customary rights. It includes all manner of plantations and farm land besides several houses and cemeteries, but has never been mapped and is not covered by the usual lucigrams. Even the names of rivers and places are unknown outside the area.
Since the land below Ngemah is nearly all taken up and under title, people wanting more land are coming upriver and either buying cheaply or encroach-ing upon the rights of the local Dayaks. It is hoped that a survey of some kind can be made and the land divided between Mixed and Native Area so that the Dayaks will be protected and at the same time per-suaded towards better use of their land.
The Government Wharf at Song, which had been broken down and useless since October was replaced at a better site but was again twisted and broken at the first high water. The contractor made consider-able mistakes and now has to construct it over again before he is paid.
During the verification of weights and measures at Song, a daching of unsual appearance was found to be a piece of loot from a bandit camp in Malaya.
Normal trading was poor but the bazaars have little cause to complain. Engkabang and timber brought many to the shops even though rubber and rotan were low in price. The bazaars were almost deserted during March, but this is expected during harvest.
District Officer, Mukah.
(Mr. A. R. Meikle).
In January a licensed recruiter from the British Malayan Petroleum Company, Seria, recruited 30 Melanau seamen for service in the company's vessels. Other young Melanaus, short of sago to work, and surplus to local labour requirements, went off seeking work in sawmills in the Rejang and elsewhere.
Numerous Chinese, who came into the District from Kuching and Sibu to work in sago factories during the boom period, returned to their home areas.
The Dalat and Balingian sawmills provided a con-siderable amount of employment for local labour, but the former was fined for employing Dayaks to work timber outside the license area.
Piling and concreting the foundations for the water-works high level tank was completed, and the filter house buildings were nearing completion at the end of the quarter.
The installation of public standpipes through the kampongs as far as the Ulu Tillian bridge was also completed, and private services were installed as and when applied for. The piping of the District Officer's bungalow completed the installation of water supplies to existing Government quarters.
A proposal was submitted that Government make a grant of $5,000/- towards the total estimated cost of $10,000/- for a Dayak Rest House at Mukah.
A design for the Local Authority pennant to be flown below the Union Flag was submitted. This has now been approved by the Governor in Council.
Draft Bye-laws to regulate and license Hotels and Lodging Houses were passed by the Local Authority and forwarded for approval.
The Local Authority has decided to increase the fees payable in Local Authority Schools from 50 cents to $1/- per month as from 1/8/53. This increase falls
into line with Government policy, and is also warranted by increasing expenditure on education by the Local Authority.
In view of the fact that average attendance figures at all Local Authority Schools stood at over 90%, a suggestion that a pledge system be introduced to ensure regular attendance was rejected. The Tillian Private School, previously run under the auspices of the Roman Catholic Mission, was at the request of the latter and the School Committee taken over by the Local Authority on 1/1/53. The original teacher was re-engaged and a second one added.
A ballot was held at Dalat in January for the election of a new Kapitan China, vice Mr. Chua Swee Kim resigned. Mr. Lim Swee Kee, a well-known Dalat merchant, was elected by a large majority.
FOURTH DIVISION.
Resident (Mr. J. O. Gilbert).
The W.H.O. scheme led by Dr. Julian de Zulueta for the eradication of malaria in the Ulu Baram is probably one of the most important works with regard to health ever to be undertaken in Sarawak. Every assistance that can be given is being given to Dr. Zulueta. It is a pity, however, that funds for such things as housing, etc. were not available in the 1953 Estimates, as the Public Works Department has had to undertake considerable repairs to houses, furniture, etc. in connection with this scheme, which has had to be provided from this year's P.W.D. funds, and it is by no means certain that the Health Department will be able to refund this money.
Something must be done quickly with regard to providing Marudi with a decent water supply. It will be some years before a pipe supply is available, but meanwhile the Divisional Engineer has been asked to do everything possible to increase the storage of rain water.
I attached a photograph, kindly provided by the District Officer, of the Leo Matu landing strip. These landing strips are invaluable to the Borneo Evangeli-cal Mission, and I understand that they could not possibly afford to be doing what they are, if they were dependent upon ordinary costly river transport. The District Officer, Baram, is looking for a site for a land-ing strip at Marudi. If the site is easily available, I shall recommend to Government that an airstrip should be constructed, which I am sure the Mission will use. It will be of great assistance to the District Officer for sending messages upriver, and perhaps the District Officer might be able to make arrangements with the Borneo Evangelical Mission to accompany the Mission pilot when he is visiting upriver stations thus saving tremendous time for the District Officer.
During the later part of the quarter, Miri district experienced a severe drought, and only half an inch of rain was recorded for March; this resulted in severe shortage of water to the already poor water supply of Miri. Sand roads became very dusty and broke up badly.
Native Officer, Miri.
(Abang Maimoon)
Harvesting at Sibuti, Niah and Suai had been almost completed by the early part of the quarter. An excellent yield is reported in Sibuti area, whilst Niah and Suai suffered slight damage by the prevalent flood and padi was neglected in favour of other commodities.
The price of pepper has again increased. Most planters are now forcing their vines and expecting to harvest the first crops after only 18 months. They are afraid of a drop in price in the near future, and are doing all they can to produce an early harvest to cash in on the present high price. This means that the quality of pepper exported will be much inferrior to
98
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, MAY 30, 1953.
prewar standards, and will means also that the vines will have to be replaced much sooner than would normally be expected.
District Officer, Baram
(Mr. A. R. G. Morrison).
Dr. Julian de Zulueta commenced work during the quarter. His objects are to try and eliminate malaria in the worst affected Ulu areas by the use of residual insecticides such as DDT and Gammexane. All houses and farming huts on the main Baram River between Long Ikang and Lio Matu have now received an initial spraying and the results will be awaited with the utmost interest. Many difficulties have arisen. Transport is difficult and must be done entirely by un-economical and inefficient outboards since air trans-port is lacking. The population and particularly their farming huts are very scattered. Locally recruited Kenyah and Kayan anti-malarial workers are not remarkable for either industry or diligence although they are well paid and continual supervision is really required. Nevertheless the work, if successful, should prove to be a great boon to the Ulu peoples.
The news of the death of the late Datu Tuanku Taha in Kuching was received with great sorrow in Baram District where he had performed outstanding public services for so many years.
15 doors of Dayaks have moved over from the S. Sebatu, Pate Peking, to the immediate vicinity of the Murek House at Long Banyoh in the Baram. They actually moved over last May but, although the Ken-yahs of the area are extremely averse to their presence neither the Murek people nor Penghulu Gau ever re-gistered any protest. This can only, I think, be ascribed to timidity, to fear of Dayak charms (pengaroh) but if the Ulu people are so lacking in courage it is difficult to feel much sympathy for them when they lose their land. It was left to Native Officer Wan Hashim him-self to discover that the Dayaks had moved. During the quarter I held a Native Officer Court case at the Murek house and fined two Dayaks for being rude to Penghulu Gau and procedure for evicting the Dayaks was under active consideration. The trouble is that the Ulu people in the areas not far from the Dayaks settlements in the tributaries of Tinjar have, through years of spineless acquiescence, allowed the Dayaks to plant up numerous gardens on the Baram side of the watershed and evicting the Dayaks will cause much trouble which would not have been the case if the Ulu people had been quick to complain in the first place.
A request by various Dayaks to move into the Lower Tinjar was not approved. Here again, although I am satisfied that the Long Kipat people holding the temuda rights to the area strongly disapproved of such a move, they were very reluctant to come out with a good, hearty NO. Strict control of Dayak infiltration in the Baram seems absolutely essential if the best possible use of the District (the relative emptiness of which is quite astonishing for anyone like myself who has just come from the Rejang) is to be made now and in future from the point of view of all communities.
The tin system which has proved so useful in other Districts is now being introduced in the Baram. The original object was to use it for the Dayaks only but it is so useful and so little trouble to compile when travelling that all communities will eventually be covered. It is not proving very effective for tracing Dayak Kampars as so many Kampars have married in the District and are no longer regarded as such by the local Dayaks. However when completed the Tin system should be of great use.
The harvest has on the whole been a good one. At the end of the quarter some padi was even brought in for sale to the Supply Department, the local price for padi having fallen considerably.
Good progress has been made on the Tanjong Tahap Station. The way Manila Hemp is flourishing in the
deep alluvial soil there is quite remarkable and it would really seem as if this is a valuable potential crop for areas in the Lower Rejang.
Work on the Bazaar continued slowly. There seems to be a dearth of efficient contractors here and the standard of work in the Bazaar is very low. The shopoweners have opted for aluminium roofing and the glare is most unpleasant. The old temporary shop-houses were due to be pulled down at the end of the quarter.
The weather was very dry during the quarter which caused much inconvenience for many members of the Government Staff. Most of the quarters are not pro-vided with substantial storage tanks, they are situated on a hill some way from the river, and many Govern-ment servants have to spend on an average between $10 and $15 per month for coolies to bring them water to their houses.
Water is indeed a problem which faces all Govern-ment servants here. My own bungalow is no exception. My heart goes out to the inspired plumber who not only installed water borne drainage without any provision for water but also, by a real stroke of genius, located the septic tank in immediate proximity to the well from which drinking water is drawn in times of drought.
The upper Baram is now highly missionised. The people under Temonggong Tama Weng Ajang have mostly become Roman Catholics. The BEM strong-holds are in the Apoh, Akah and Ulu Baram. The last important house to make up its mind is Long Moh, the house of late Penghulu Mape Arang. It will be exceedingly interesting to see what these people decide to do. They have 4 alternatives, to follow the old customs, to accept the Bungan beliefs, to be-come Roman Catholics or follow the BEM. It would seem that most of the Ulu peoples are convinced of the disadvantages of their old customs but the Bungan beliefs provide a middle course.
What I can only describe as the Bareo Saga has been a major preoccupation during the quarter. At the end of last year Mr. Harrisson proceeded to Bareo to build an airstrip there. Landings on the completed airstrip in January were impossible due to an unusual spell of bad weather. Mr. Harrisson then fell seriously ill, apparently an attack of typhoid. An SOL geolo-gical party reached Bareo and were able to provide some necessary drugs but they decided to try and fly Mr. Harrisson to the coast. An SOL Auster duly landed at Bareo but failed to take off and crashed in trying to do so. Mr. Harrisson and the Pilot, Mr. Jeffares, who were in the plane had a miraculous escape from injury when the plane turned over but fortunately did not catch fire. The whole party then successfully walked out to the Akah and reached the coast in safety. Mr. Jeffares and an engineer have since returned to Bareo and successfully flown out the damaged Auster.
Mr. Harrisson and the SOL party were able to send out messages through the BEM wireless station at Long Tegangan which proved an immense convenience but, even so, periodic silences and the difficulty of knowing what was going on caused a considerable amount of anxiety and it is most fortunate that the whole affair should have terminated happily.
Acting District Officer, Bintulu
(Abang Zainudin).
Most paddy planters had harvested by the end of the quarter. According to various reports received, it appears that the natives will have to face the pro-blem of rice shortage this year owing to the fact that vast areas of paddy in the upriver were destroyed by floods at the end of last year.
On account of accumulated timber stocks now on hands, local concerns are feverishly exploring the pos-sibilities of exporting direct to Hong Kong. It is imperative that they do so because of the contracts
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, MAY 30, 1953.
99
with the Kuala Belait contractor have now practically been completed and, to survive, other markets must be found. The proposed scheme is to ship from Kedurong Bay and applications have been received for sites for log ponds at Sungei Plan Sebatang.
Kuching Market Price List.
20th April to 20th May, 1953.
RICE—(per gantang)
Local, White milling	...	...	...	$2.43
Govt. Siam	...	...	...	2.52
Rangoon	...	...	...	2.52
Broken	...	...	...	2.16
Local Milled Whole	...	...	...	2.28
SUGAR—(per kati)
Java, White (Govt.) Refined ... ... .36
Brown	...	...	...	Nil
Nipah Sugar	...	...	...	.20
SALT—(per kati)
Coarse	...	...	...	...	.10
Fine	... ...	...	...	.15
FLOUR AND BREAD—
Wheat Flour, per kati	...	...	.38
Bread per loaf ...	...	...	.10
MILK—(per tin)
Milkmaid	...	... ... .70
Golden Wheel ...	...	...	.65
EGGS—(each)
Duck, fresh	...	...	.19
salted	...	...	...	.15
Fowl	...	...	...	.20
EDIBLE FATS—(per kati)
Coconut Oil	...	...	...	.80
Pork Fat No. 1	...	...	...	1.60
2	...	1.20
PORK—(per kati)
Lean No. 1	...	...	...	3.30
Lean with fat 2	...	...	...	1.60
BEEF AND OTHER MEATS—(per kati)
Mutton (Australian)	...	...	...	2.80
Beef, steak	...	...	...	3.00
Beef, curry meat	...	...	1.60
Buffalo No. 1	...	...	...	3.00
curry meat	...	...	...	1.60
Kambing (daging)	...	...	...	3.00
POULTRY—(per kati)
Capons	...	...	...	3.20
Duck	...	...	... 2.25
Fowl, Chinese breed	...	...	...	3.03
Fowl, Dayak	breed	...	...	...	2.52
FISH—(per kati)
Fresh fish No. 1 ...	...	...	1.60
2	... ...	1.02
3	...	...	...	.39
Prawns 1	...	...	...	1.57
2 ... ...	...	1.13
Crab No.1	...	...	...	1.20
2	...	...	... .80
Salted	fish 1	...	...	... 2.40
2 ...	...	...	.92
3 ...	...	...	.51
roe ...	...	...	2.20
VEGETABLES—(per kati)
Bangkuang (Yam beans) ...	... $.25
Bayam ...	...	...	.40
Bean Sprouts	...	...	...	.30
Cabbage Imported ...	...	...	.73
Changkok Manis	...	...	...	.40
Daun Bawang	...	...	...	1.20
Ensahi Puteh	...	...	...	.63
Bunga	...	...	...	.53
French beans	...	...	...	.87
Garlic, fresh	...	...	...	.60
Kachang panjang	...	...	...	.40
Kangkong	...	...	...	.40
Keladi (China)	...	...	...	.40
Ketola	...	...	...	.40
Kribang	...	...	...	.15
Kundor	...	...	...	.26
Labu	...	...	...	.15
Ladies Fingers	...	...	...	.60
Lettuce (per tie)	...	...	...	.10
Lobak (Chinese radish) ... ... .50
Lobak, salted, imported	...	...	.70
Onions, Bombay	...	...	...	.35
Onions, small	...	...	...	.70
Potatoes, Bengal	...	...	...	.35
Pria (Bitter Gourd) ...	...	...	.70
Bamboo shoots, salted	...	...	.40
Trong (Brinjals)	...	...	...	.40
Yams	...	...	...	.20
Cucumber (Timun) ...	...	...	.30
Ginger	...	...	...	.55
Chillies (red)	...	...	...	1.83
(Green)	...	...	.84
Sauerkraut, imported	...	...	.80
local ... ...	... .60
Tamarind	...	...	...	.40
Tomatoes, fresh	...	...	...	1.00
TEA—
Tea, Lipton per lb.	...	...	3.70
Chinese per packet	...	...	.80
COFFEE—(per kati)
Raw, Java No. 1	...	...	...	2.60
Java No. 2	...	...	...	2.20
FRUIT—
Pisang Umbun	...	per kati	...	.15
Pisang Tandok	...	each	.10	to .20
Pineapples	...	per kati	...	.10
Papayas	...	...	.15
SUNDRIES—
Bean Curd	...	per	6 square piece ...	.10
Cake (white) ...	per piece ... .15
(yellow) ... ... .25
Kerosene Oil	...	per tin ...	5.90
...	per	bottle ...	.27
Charcoal	...	per	pkl. ...	8.00
semi-converted ...	... 5.00
Sauce (kitchup)	...	bot. (1) 11.00, (2) .70,	(8) .50
Blachan	...	per kati	...	.70
Dried prawn	...	...	1.80
Coconut, fresh	...	each	...	.22
Bako Wood	...	per panchang	...	28.00
Gambong, salted, imported per kati	...	.60
Sepat	..	...	.80
Cigarettes:
Players ...	... 3 sticks for ... .12
Craven "A"	...	3	...	.12
Capstan ...	...	3	...	.11
Rough Rider	...	3	...	.10
State Express	...	1 stick for	...	.05