 Vol. LXXIX.
No. 1140.
PRICE
KUCHING, Friday, 27th February, 1953.
50 CENTS
Contents.
Page.
The Kuching Ice Works	...	...	...	17
Obituary	...	...	...	...	18
Comings and Goings	...	...	...	18
Notes and Comments	...	...	...	19
Sibu Letter	...	...	...	...	19
Song of Earth	...	...	...	...	20
Flags	...	...	...	...	20
The Tatau valley and a crossing of watershed into the
Rajang valley ...	...	... ...	21
Notes on the Bintulu valley and the Tubau-Belaga
route to the Upper Rajang valley	...	...	26
This Sarawak (resuscitated)	...	...	...	27
Correspondence ...	...	...	...	27
Extracts from Administrative Officers' Reports for the
Fourth Quarter, 1952	...	...	...	27
The Potentialities of Sarawak's dry padi varieties ... 34
Kuching Racing	...	...	...	...	36
Island Club, Sibu	...	...	...	38
Sale of Property	...	...	...	...	38
Notice—Dissolution of Partnership	... ... 38
Kuching Market Price List ...	...	...	39
The Sarawak Gazette.
FRIDAY, FEBRUARY 27th, 1953.
The Kuching Ice Works.
On 26th February a large number of guests attended the opening of the Kuching Ice Works at Padungan Road, which cost approximately $350,000 to build. In explaining the undertaking, Mr. Tan Kui Choon, one of the Directors, made the following remarks.
"On behalf of the Directors of Kuching Ice Works Ltd., I am glad to say that it gives me the greatest pleasure to-day to welcome you to our Ice Works which was built and equipped with modern machinery which embodies the latest developments in the manufacture of ice under the terms and con-ditions of the Licence granted by the Sarawak Government under Section 3 of the Monopolies Ordinance to manifacture ice for sale and to sell ice within the District and Municipal Area of Kuching. I am glad to report that the erection and installation of this Ice Plant were completed within 6 months from the date of commencement of the Licence.
It is a great pity that, owing to pre-occupied business engagements, our Singapore Directors namely Mr. Tang Seck Fong and Mr. Watt Wai Yue are unable to be with us on this formal opening
day and it was due to their farsightedness and encouragement that Kuching Ice Works Ltd. was founded. My other co-directors are Mr. Lim Siong Khan, Mr. Lam Yat Wing, Mr. Lam Yat Sing and Mr. Yap Leong Swee. I wish to make special mention of Mr. Lam Yat Wing, who was largely responsible for the supervision of the installation of the plant.
I do not wish to describe to you the plant in detail except to say that our York Plant is capable of producing 15 tons of ice a day by working on one compressor and if two compressors work jointly the whole plant is designed to be capable of pro-ducing a maximum output of 30 tons a day. The agitation unit disposes of the minutest supended matter, always present in water, which even escapes filtration, making the resultant product a perfectly solid and crystal-clear block of ice as you see in the specimen displayed on the table.
With this plant in operation there will be no shortage of ice whatever in Kuching and the out-lying districts. In the past the shortage of ice affected adversely the fishing industry and now the fishmongers can have all the ice they want. There is every reason to believe that there will be an expansion of this industry with a consequent increase of fishing vessels going out to sea with adequate supplies of ice for longer periods and returning with a bigger catch to fill the needs of a large part of the population.
With the completion of the two cold chambers we are able to provide storage space for perishable goods and will extend this service to the public at reasonable charges. And we are here to serve the public not only selling the ice but also providing large cold rooms with suitable temperature for storage of fresh fish, meat, and vegetables.
At a recent meeting of the Council Negri, His Excellency expressed the faith of the Government in the progressive prosperity of this country, which justified the undertaking of large scale works towards its development and advancement. This enterprise is an expression of that same faith by the people. We believe in the bright future of Sarawak which has encouraged us in embarking on this venture, and we have no doubt that the same faith will encourage many more to engage in other fields of industry.
Again on behalf of the Directors of Kuching Ice Works Ltd., I sincerely thank you all for coming here to-day and I now have the greatest pleasure in asking Your Honour to declare the Kuching Ice Works open.”
The Hon'ble the Chief Secretary, Mr. R. G. Aikman, C.M.G., in declaring the works open, then gave the following speech.
18
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, FEBRUARY 27, 1953.
"In the first quarter of last year negotiations were entered into with Mr. Tan Kui Choon for the establishmemt of an iceworks, and he undertook to have this plant erected and in production within six months of the date of commencement of the licence. I must admit that I did not expect him to be able to complete the job within that time as there were very considerable difficulties in his way. The iceworks is not only completed but it has com-menced operations, and I congratulate Mr. Kui Choon and his fellow Directors on the successful way in which they have overcome the many difficul-ties which faced them when they decided to establish this plant in Kuching.
Whilst it is true to say that Sarawak is primarily, and indeed is likely to remain, an agricultural country, there is scope for the establishment of light industries in suitable places and the Directors of the Kuching Iceworks have shown their faith in this country by setting up this establishment, the formal opening of which you are attending to-day.
I understand that the plant will give employment to only a limited number of persons, but the good which it will do in this community extends far beyond mere employment of local labour. In a climate such as ours here a plentiful supply of ice at reasonable prices is not only desirable but a necessity, and particularly is this so in the fishing industry. Mr. Kui Choon in his remarks which he made just now has stressed this aspect of the matter and it should be a source of satisfaction to you all to know that, barring accidents and unforeseen circumstances, a plentiful supply of ice in this town is now assured and I think that it will be a great boon to the fishermen and those who have to do with the marketing of sea food.
One other feature of this undertaking which I should like to mention is the fact that it is one in which local interests have taken part; the dis-tributors of the ice are a local firm and it seems to me that it is all to the good that those people who have a stake in the country, who have their homes and interests here, should also take part in the establishment of new works and industries. If this enterprise proves a success, and I have no doubt that it will be, it will perhaps pave the way for the establishment of other useful undertakings which will add to the facilities available in this town of Kuching. It may be also that Mr. Kui Choon and his fellow Directors may be tempted to extend their enterprise to other parts of the country where I have no doubt that it will be very welcome.
I am sure that I speak for all of the guests present here to-day when I say, how very much we all appreciate being asked to come here to attend the opening of this plant, and not only do I thank Mr. Kui Choon, and his fellow Directors for giving us this opportunity but also I should like to con-gratulate him most warmly on the successful establishment of the Kuching Iceworks, which I now have much pleasure in declaring open."
Obituary.
The many friends of George Campbell Gillan will have heard of his death on 6th November, 1952, at the age of 78 years, G. C. Gillan was born on 18th August, 1874, and was educated at Glenalmond in
Perthshire, Scotland, and at the University of Edinburgh, where he studied Law and obtained the title of Writer to the Signet.
He was a Rugby Football enthusiast and played for his school and university eventually obtaining the coveted honour of playing as an international for Scotland.
He served twenty years in Kuching, for the greater part in the Treasury, and was placed on the permanent staff on 21st November, 1908. In January, 1917, he was Treasurer, Judge of the Supreme Court, and Member of the Supreme Court Council.
During his years of service his unvarying courtesy, charm and graceful figure made for him a host of friends and admirers.
He was granted seven months' furlough from 18th August, 1921, and permission to retire on pension thereafter.
He was appointed a Member of the Sarawak State Advisory Council in England on 19th March, 1925.
Many Government officers on furlongh will remember the friendliness of his welcome and his kindly help when he was Government Agent, London, during 1929-1930.
E. M. Marjoribanks.
It is with great regret we record the death of Datu Tuanku Taha, M.B.E., at his residence in Samarahan on the 10th of February, at the age of fifty.
He joined the Government Service in 1916 as a Customs Officer and in 1926 was made a Native Officer. In 1937 he was given the rank of Datu. In recognition of the valuable work he did shortly before the liberation, he was awarded the M.B.E., in 1946. In 1947 he was appointed an Unofficial Member of the Council Negri.
The late Datu served most of his time in the Baram District. In 1947 he was attached to the Secretariat for Native Affairs, and retired on pension on 1st January this year.
To his many relatives we express our sincere sympathy.
Comings and Goings.
As seems usual nowadays the outgoings exceed in numbers the incomings. Amongst Government officers we have had to say goodbye to Messrs. F. B. Drake, F. W. Roe, J. H. Nelson Smith and T. P. Cromwell, all of whom went on furlough during February—Mr. and Mrs. Cromwell leaving on the last day of the month. A few days before his departure Mr. Drake was, at a private ceremony at the Astana, decorated with the Insignia of a Member of the Military Division of the Order of the British Empire for extreme bravery in opera-tions in enemy held territory during World War II. We should like to congratuiate Mr. Drake on his award and to commiserate with him for having to wait some seven years before he could actually have the order conferred upon him. Another departure that has to be recorded during February is that of Mrs. R. J. Bettison who is going home ahead of her husband, who is to follow on furlough in April.
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, FEBRUARY 27, 1953.
19
Clerics of the Anglican Church in Kuching are sadly reduced in numbers by the depurture on leave of the Rt. Rev. the Bishop of Borneo, the Rev. N. E. Cornwall, and the Rev. S. J. S. Peach and Mrs. Peach. We understand that the Bishop of Borneo during his furlough will be in Westminster Abbey, as a Colonial Bishop, for the Coronation of Her Majesty Queen Elizabeth the Second. It is sad to know that the Rev. Peach will not be returning to Sarawak, as he has been advised by the medical authorities that it would be unwise for him to do so, but Mrs. Peach has very gallantly agreed to return alone in September to carry on as Principal of St. Mary's School.
The local manager of Pacific Traders Ltd., Mr. H. T. Rigden, and Mrs. Rigden and family have also left for England on furlough. Mr. Baltus, the local manager of Tels and Company, left on the 27th for a short furlough of two months, after which he will be stationed at Stanleyville in the Belgian Congo. We understand Mr. Baltus will shortly be married.
Those who have returned to Sarawak include Mr. J. O. Gilbert, Resident, Fourth Division, who passed through Kuching by air on the 12th February on his way to Miri where he was joined by Mrs. Gilbert, who travelled by sea, on the 22nd, Mr. and Mrs. H. E. Cornish returned from furlough on the 6th and Mr. Comish resumed duty as Post-master-General.
Mr. Rigdens place as Manager of Pacific Traders Ltd. is being taken by an old friend in Mr. W. K. Witt, whom many will remember com-menced business here on behalf of Pacific Traders some five or six years ago and who is no stranger to Kuching. He was on this occasion accompanied by his wife and son and to Mrs. Witt and family, who are newcomers to Sarawak, we extend a hearty welcome.
Notes and Comments.
Chinese New Year, February 14th, was ushered iu with the usual deafening explosions of many thousands of fire-crackers. His Excellency the Governor was seen, early in the morning, at the residence of Mr. Wee Kheng Chiang, sampling a jeroboam of champagne. At that stage he hoped to complete his rather formidable pro-gramme of visits by four in the afternoon. We also had an idea something like that but it was the evening of the 16th before we had finished our visiting. To all our Chinese readers we wish the compliments of the season and thank them for the sincere hospitality they always provide on this festive occasion.
The Kuching Rotary Club held their Annual Ladies' Night on 4th February in the good ship Rajah Brooke and a very enjoyable time was had by the seventy-five people present. Among the guests was blue-eyed, smiling Terry Abbott, Acting-Director of Medical and Health Services, North Borneo. Dr. Abbott first came to Sarawak during the BBCAU-BMA regime, when most of us held the exalted rank of major for a short time.
The Papal Internuncio for South-East Asia, Archbishop de Jonghe D’Ardoye, paid a visit to Sarawak during the month. We were also favoured
with a visit earlier in the month by His Grace the Archbishop of Sydney, the Most Rev. Dr. Mowll, and Mrs. Mowll.
On the afternoon of 17th February at St. Thomas’s Cathedral, Kuching, two very popular and well-known people were joined in the bonds of holy matrimony when Captain William Bradshaw, Master of the Rajah Brooke, was married to Miss Mary Fowlie, Health Visitor, Kuching. The Rev. P. H. H. Howes officiated. The bride, who was given away by Dr. Glyn Evans, looked radiant in a classic dress of gold and silver brocade with long detached sleeves and her short circular veil was held in place by a cap of the same material. She carried a long trailing bouquet of beautiful scorpion orchids. Captain J. Blease was best man.
Afterwards more than one hundred and fifty guests attended the reception at “Angby", the residence of Mr. A. T. Wedgwood, where they were received by Mr. and Mrs. E. Bomphrey. Mrs. Bomphrey wore a charming dress of white broderie Anglaise with white hat and gloves to match and black accessories.
Of course on these occasions the “mems” and "missies" really let themselves go and not since the Astana reception given for Her Royal Highness the Duchess of Kent has such a bright and animated scene been witnessed in Kuching. We are not quite sure whether it is true but it has been hinted that for some days before the event frantic efforts were made by a number of the fair sex to borrow various articles in order that they might complete their ensembles.
H.M.S. Alert, wearing the flag of Rear-Admiral A. F. Pugsley, C.B., D.S.O., R.N., paid us a short visit from 20th to 22nd February. Alert was anchored at Pending, but the usual entertainments for the officers and men were arranged and thoroughly enjoyed at Kuching.
The manager of the Borneo Company, Mr. C. B. Horn, and Mrs. Horn held a very enjoyable cocktail party at their residence. “Aneberg”, on the evening of the 23rd February. The occasion was ’an opportunity for Kuchingites to meet the Chairman of the Company, Mr. C. R. Akers, and Mr. K. H. Simpson, who are making a tour of the company's interest in Borneo.
Sibu Letter.
After the invigoration and stimulation of a Sibu Chinese New Year it is a little difficult to produce a coherent record of our activities before, during or after it, but there is a lot to report and the effort must be made. Amongst the items of December news which did not find their way into last month's letter there must be mentioned the Third Division Chinese Schools Common Examin-ations which took place from December 11th to 13th at 7 centres in the Division. At Sibu itself some 750 students were examined and, despite the most gloomy weather outside, spirits were far from damped as the very creditable percentage of pass marks proved.
On the 29th of December Wong Kwong Hee, the only son of Mr. Wong Sing Kheng, Headman of the Sibu Town Area, was married to Miss Ling
20
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, FEBRUARY 27, 1953.
Swee Eng, the eldest daughter of Mr. Ling Chai Toh, the Chairman of the Song Chinese Chamber of Commerce in the Foochow Association. That evening there was held what is believed to be the biggest ever Sibu wedding dinner party. No less than 2.000 guests attended and few bridal couples in all Sarawak can ever have started their married life with a more solid phalanx of good wishes behind them than did Wong Kwong Hee and Ling Swee Eng.
For the last part of December and early January the Puspa Warna Bangsawan Troupe with Siput Sarawak the star attraction came over from Singa-pore and played in the Rex Theatre and later at Sarikei. On the night of the 1st January the Rex staged a Kronchong competition (wherent your correspondent took a “busman's holiday”), which was won by Miss Gertrude Wong—a most promising singer who works for the Sibu Urban District Council.
Undoubtedly the most important event of February was the visit to Sibu of His Grace the Archbishop G.M. de Jonghe d’Ardoye, the Apos-tolic Internuncio of Indonesia, Sarawak and British North Borneo. He was joined by the Right Reverend Bishop Vos and on the evening of 3rd February a dinner was given in his honour at the Sacred Heart School. During the short time he was with us he made several visits including one to the thriving Mission at Kanowit and by his charm and informality of manner thoroughly endeared himself to all hearts. He was indeed a most popular visitor and we can only say we hope he liked Sibu as much as Sibu liked him.
On Wednesday the 18th of February we had with us Mr. C. H. Wilmot, O.B.E., Director of the British Council Colonies Department, who has been doing a most energetic Far Eastern tour. That evening he gave a most interesting talk on Local Govern-ment—a subject of the greatest importance to Sibu and indeed to all Sarawak to-day—and afterwards was entertained together with members of the local British Council Committee to "makan kechil” by Mr. and Mrs. Lee Swee Ling.
Harry Rafter, the Borneo Company's See-Saw-Mill expert, ("what I have already lost on the swings I can hardly be expected to lose on the round-abouts!”) has returned from his recent tour of Japan looking bronzed and fit. It took him two days to get through the Customs but there is no truth in the rumour that this was due to his attempting to import a Geisha Girl—"practically everything else but”, as one customs official ungrammatically, but expressively, put it!
There is still other news to tell: in particular of Chinese New Year itself but we are still awaiting the compilation of various statistics so this will have to wait till next month.
To conclude here are a few words about beards. Beards are relatively rare in Sibu aud so when they do appear they are naturally the subject of interest. Recently we have had 2 . First there was Macey (“Henry VIII”). This model certainly justified its existence on New Year's Eve but on being removed resulted in its wearer being both unrecogn-ised and unrecognisable for several days—a bit embarrassing in the Club, what? Then there was the Bill Dickie beard ("Wanted Man”) which showed signs of life for a few days but fortunately died off before it did any real harm to a promising reputation. Perhaps Mary Dickie did a “Delilah” to it! Now we have Scott (“Man Mountain Dean”)
J. R. B.
Song of Earth.
A mote am I, atomic dust, creator and inheritant; die I may not, change I must, to every eon relevant.
who positively flaunts the thing around on a bicycle! Don't any of these people know the dying Hindoo's secret?
I have been of barren sands, thawed from ice to river-roar; succoured wheat in harvest lands and slept upon an ocean floor.
From yellow clay of cryptic urn, buried tomb and edifice, with the cycle I return in timeless metamorphosis.
As I crumble with the spire I engender earth with earth; when I perish in the fire in the ashes I have birth.
And out of universal man to earth returning—as he must— I become, as I began, air, water, fire, dust.
J.H.W.
Flags.
The Coronation year has arrived, and soon we shall be ornamenting our towns and villages with bunting and hanging out decorations of every description. But it is when we come to flying flags that we are likely to go astray. The use of flags is a specialised matter, and an active display of the Science of Heraldry, and it would be a pity if so dignified an occasion as the Coronation of Our Queen should be marred by ignorant rnisuse of these honourable devices.
First let us take the Banner of the Royal Arms, consistently misnamed the Royal Standard. This banner should never be used by anyone but the Sovereign, over whose residence it is flown when the Sovereign is actually there, or on board a ship when the Sovereign is aboard. It is a personal flag and cannot be appropriated to any other use than that of the Sovereign.
A "standard", for those who are interested in technicalities, is a long tapering flag used in the olden days for the purpose of mustering troops and retainers to a given point. It did not originally display the armorial bearings of the owner, as it more generally does to-day, but consisted of some national emblem such as for instance the Cross of St. George of England, next to the staff, followed by the livery colours, which in turn would be charged with badges of the house, or other devices, sometimes the crest. These were often separated by two diagonal bands bearing the motto.
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, FEBRUARY 27, 1953.
21
which brings us to the Union Flag, which is the lighting emblem of the Sovereign, declared for use by the soldiers and sailors of the realm in specified circumstances. Almost invariably to-day this flag is referred to as the Union Jack, which is a mis-nomer, unless one is speaking of the Navy's Union flag flying from a ship's jack-staff at sea. Strictly, and as a matter of law, the Union flag should never be used on land, except over the residence of the Sovereign during her absence, or over a fortress or other Government building, but an official answer in Parliament, some years ago, declared what was presumably the pleasure of the Sovereign that the Union flag is the National flag, and may be flown as such on land by any British subject.
Please note the words “on land". The flying of flags at sea is far more rigidly controlled, and one can be snbjected to very severe penalties—and they are frequently enforced—for misuse of flags at sea.
The main British flags controlled by the Lords of the Admiralty are :—
(a) The White Ensign, which is a white flag bearing the Red Cross of St. George, and in the upper quarter next to the staff a reproduction of the Union device;
(b) the Blue Ensign, which is a plain blue flag with the Union device in a canton in the upper corner next to the staff;
(c) the Red Ensign, which is similar to the Blue Ensign, but with a Red background sub-stituted for the Blue; and
(d) the Union flag, which is too well known to need description.
All these Ensigns have been called into being by warrant for specific purposes wholly connected with the sea, and should never be hoisted on land by anybody without warrant.
The White Ensign is apppropriated to the Royal Navy, and to certain privileged persons to whom the right has been given by Royal Warrant. It is flown only at sea, and on naval establishments ashore, and on the Church of St. Martin's in the Fields in London.
The Blue Ensign belongs to the Royal Naval Reserve, and the Red Ensign is used by all vessels of the British Merchant Service, and is the flag to be used by the ordinary man.
The present Union flag dates from 1801, and is never referred to by the Admiralty as anything but the Union flag. It is flown from the jack-staff of a R.N. vessel when in harbour. It is the flag of an Admiral-of-the-Fleet, and flown at the main masthead when he is on board, and it is flown at the peak when there is a Court-Martial sitting.
So let us resolve to refer to it in future as a flag and not as a Jack unless we are specifically speaking of the Navy's Jack flying from its jack-staff.
The Union flag is also used by the Army (though its proportions are different) and also by Viceroys, Governors, and Consuls. The main thing for the uninitiated to remember is that the broad white stripe, representing the white in the Cross of St. Andrew, must be uppermost next to the mast.
In a Colony the Blue Ensign, suitably defaced with, say, the Colony arms, denotes an armed or unarmed vessel in the service of the Colony, and has no other meaning. It should never be used on land.
Flags on public buildings should bear the arms of the corporate body to whom the building belongs, and the flag of a private person should bear that person's arms if he has any. A private flag should be square or better double its height in length, and the entire surface should be covered with the arms. These flags of arms are properly speaking banners.
In conclusion it might interest readers if I quote from two recent letters to the Times of London by the Chairman of the Heraldry Society, Mr. J. P. Brooke-Little, who writes :—
“Traditionally personal heraldry played a great part in decorating houses at the time of Coro-nation. The use of house colours, and the flying of a house banner (a square flag bearing the arms), together with National Emblems and colours, is most attractive, and gives variety to a rather monotonous (sic) repetition of red, white, and blue. It is not difficult to have a banner made, and certainly not a breach of taste to fly one .............. Finally	I should like to stress that I advocate the use of the house banner not only at the Coronation, but on all high days and holidays. It is a colourful, dignified and charm-ing custom”.
and again
'I would suggest that the Union flag, and the house banner are the flags to fly at the Coronation. Any person or body corporate entitled to arms may place these arms on a square flag instead of a shield, and fly the banner over their residence or premises. It is no more vulgar to fly a banner than it is to use a hereditary title. Both emanate from the fount of honour. Surely it is no breach of taste to use what the Sovereign has given?".
I.D.
[We congratulate the writer on this learned article. However it is probably too much to expect many people to call the Union Jack the Union Flag. Popular usage, which is, after all, the final arbiter of our language, will prove too difficult to over-come.—Ed.]
The Tatau valley and a crossing of the watershed into the Rajang valley.
By Mr. F. W. Roe,
Director of Geological Survey, British Territories in Borneo.
General.
During a geological field trip up the Tatau river, the watershed was crossed separating this valley from the Rajang basin. In the course of the work observations were made on some of the resources in the Tatau valley, also on the mode of life of the inhabitants. Although the watershed separating the Tatau and Rajang valleys has been crossed before by a number of people, accounts of the routes are rare. The way taken is described below in some detail as the area is pleasant, the people interesting, and the crossing not difficult. Others may thus wish to follow this route; if they do, it will enable them to see something of Sarawak's varied scenery. The writer's object in making the expedition was a reconnaissance examination of the
22
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, FEBRUARY 27, 1953.
geology of the Tatau valley, and of the Rajang Formation rocks of the watershed. This aspect will however be only briefly referred to in this account. The main features of the area are shown on map Hind 1113, sheet 7, on the scale of 4 miles to 1 inch. Details of the route across the water-shed are given on the attached sketch map.
The party consisted of J. C. Robinson, P.W.D. engineer from Jesselton, and rock-collectors Goh Geok Soon and Kadri bin Johari; Punan carriers were obtained in the Tatau valley. Inche Wan Raman, son of Tungku Bujang, Native Officer at Tatau, accompanied the party for part of the time, and both he and his father gave invaluable and kindly assistance with the local transport and administrative arrangements. The work was carried out between the 18th and 31st October, 1952, using the Geological Survey Department launch L'Aubaine. A note on the weather is of interest. In early October heavy rain for over a week caused the biggest floods since 1933; the river rose about 20 feet above the normal level and flooded the valley lands. Damage was done to young padi, and at numerous places the bare pole frames of former houses could be seen, the kajang having been washed away. In late October the weather was excellent, being sunny and dry, but there was still sufficient water in the rivers to allow long-boats to be taken farther upstream than usual.
Geology.
The geology of this area is described in a number of reports, it having been studied by Shell group geologists at various times during the last 30 years. The main features will be described briefly. In the Tatau valley there is considerable lowlying river land; the couutry however becomes more hilly inland: travelling from the coast, swampy flats give way to undulating country, and finally hills bordering the mountainous watersheds. Quater-nary deposits extend from the coast to Tatau and consist mainly of mud, sand, and peat accumu-lations. At one place near the river recent drilling by the Shell Group has encountered artesian water, but this is probably only a small local occurrence: the water spouts from a bamboo tube, the top of which is about 4 feet above ground level. At Tatau, Rajang Formation rocks, believed to be of Eocene age, occur and near the town are the strik-ing mountains of Buan and Sap. Upstream the Tatau divides into two tributaries, the Kakus and Anap, which drain the western end of a large basin of Oligocene and Miocene sedimentary rocks: these consist mainly of shale, but there are some sand-stone, siltstone, and limestone beds. Intrusions of basic igneous rock, some of which are reported to be dolerite, form the group of mountains of which Bukit Mersing is the main peak. The harder, older, Rajang formation rocks build the watershed separating the Tatau valley from the Rajang river and extend into the Rajang basin. The weathering and erosion of these rocks should give relatively fertile alluvial soils of mainly clayey-silt, with some enrichment from constituents derived from limestone and basic igneous rocks.
Population.
Malays, which general name here includes a number of Mohammedan Melanaus, live near the mouth of the Tatau river. Iban houses are limited to the middle section of the Tatau valley, and Punans live in the Kakus and Anap valleys, where
they have numerous settlements. In the Kakus valley there are two Punan long-houses, the lower containing about 12 doors, and the upper, Rumah Kisea, about 30 doors. On the river bank between these two houses is a fine Punan Cemetery with coloured totem poles. Many Punan families from these two long-houses have smaller houses up river where they go, for periods varying from a few months to a year or two, to plant padi, cut belian, collect jungle produce, or to hunt. The Punans in the Kakus valley are wealthy; it is said that if during early 1952 they worked steadily for two weeks felling belian they could earn $500,—it is claimed that the families at Rumah Kisea own nearly 50 outboard engines. Most of this money has been gained from the sale of belian. The price in Tatau was said to be $360 per ton in 1951 for first quality belian lengths of 28' x6" x6", but in late 1952 the price had decreased to $280. For smaller sized belian timber $240 per ton was paid, but the price had decreased to between $120 and $160 in late 1952. Belian ataps were $2 per hundred; quantities of canes are also brought to Tatau. The Punans in the valley make the usual attractive hats, some decorated with coloured designs, others by patterns worked in coloured beads. A newly built Bukitan house of 10 doors is situated on the Palawan river about 20 minutes journey from the mouth where the old long-house was originally located. Chinese live in Tatau where there is one saw-mill and 18 shophouses, including 3 coffee shops. Numerous Chinese boat-hawkers trade up and down the Tatau river; to some extent it appears they get round regulations against settlement by having their boats almost permanently tied up near some of the long-houses.
Resources
Mineral resources in the valley comprise coal and guano; there is still a possibility that oil might be found. Coal occurs at a number of localities, but the seams found to date are too small to be worth working under present conditions. It is possible that, if in the distant future small industries should develop in the valley, some of the local coal could be used as a fuel supply. The oil possibilities have been examined over a number of years by the Shell group; the search is still proceeding and seismic work is in progress in the district.
Guano occurs in the limestone caves near the source of the Kakus; the extent of the deposits is unknown. Accounts suggest them to be small but there are no records of the guano having been tested. It is said that from time to time small amounts are extracted for local use.
Forest produce is worked by the Punans who extract belian timber and ataps, also canes. The area is relatively well forested and some of the timber appears to be above average quality. The Sungai Kakus watershed has recently been consti-tuted a forest reserve.
Agricultural potentialities appear to be better than in many other parts of Sarawak, patches of fertile soil being commoner than usual in the valley. The Tatau river drains a basin built mainly of shale, but containing some beds of sand-stone, siltstone, and limestone, also intrusions of basic igneous rock. The erosion of these should give relatively fertile alluvium. Much of the river land is fairly level or gently undulating, and appears to have potentialities for padi production. Crops along the Tatau and Kakus valleys looked
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, FEBRUARY 27, 1953.
23
good, although riverside padi had suffered in recent floods: jagong was common, and fruit trees, such as bananas, frequent at several places. Land that looked suitable for padi growing was common, and had not been planted with rubber as has occurred in the lower Rajang valley although at a few places there were groups of poor-looking rubber trees. It seems that the planting of rubber trees might well be prohibited until the padi possibilities had been tested. The guano in the caves near the source of the Kakus river might provide a local source of fertiliser for the valley and be useful for such crops as pepper.
Animal life in the valley appears more plentiful than in many other parts of the country. Wild pigs were numerous in the Kakus valley and rusa common; Wah Wah occur and ordinary monkeys are fairly numerous. Many birds were seen, mul-ticuloured kingfishers being particularly abundant.
Routes from the Tatau Valley into the Rajang Valley
The Tatau river is readily navigable by launch to the point where it divides into its tributaries the Kakus and Anap. Navigation is possible, with launches drawing 3 feet, for about 10 miles up the Kakus, and about 5 miles up the Anap. Such launches can readily reach Rumah Kisea on the Kakus, and when the water is high could reach the mouth of the Mayeng, and, if a small amount of dead timber was removed from the river, could go to the mouth of the Penyarai. Shale forms this portion of the Kakus valley and the river runs in a well defined channel the sides of which are usually of clay, while the bed is free of gravel banks.
Crossings from the Tatau valley into the Rajang valley since World War II are said by the Punans to have been made by W. A. Visser, N. P. de Boer, and Altinke, Shell Group geologists. The routes followed were:
(a) From the Ulu Kakus, the tributary S. Beyak was followed and the divide crossed into the Rajang valley near Belaga.
(b) From the Kakus valley, the tributary S. Puti was traversed, then the watershed crossed and the S. Bah followed until it joined the Rajang.
(c) The Anap valley was followed, then that of its tributary the Palawan : a jungle route along the ridges leads into the Rajang valley.
The writer went up the Kakus valley, then that of its tributary the Mooroojau to near the source of this stream, finally a jungle route was followed over the ridges forming the watershed and down into the Sematai valley: this stream is a tributary of the Bah which flows into the Rajang. The way taken is shown on the attached sketch map; it presents no difficulty in organisation, is not hard to follow, but persons making the journey need to be fairly fit physically. Details are given below :
(a) Rumuh Kisea, a Punan long-house on the Kakus river, can be reached by launch. Arrangements for carriers should be started here and the whereabouts of the few Punans who know the jungle tracks into the Rajang valley should be ascertained. It may be necessary to take carriers from this house, or they may be collected from the small “country” houses further up the Kakus valley. Many of the
Punans here seem to have the equivalent of a "town-house" and a “country-house”. The “town-house” is in the main long-house and a smaller “country-house” maintained up-river where they go for padi planting, collecting fruit, felling belian, or for hunting and fishing.
(b) Rumah Uvang is a 4 door Punan “country-house” on the bank of the Kakus river opposite the mouth of the Mooroojau; it is easily reached by outboard. The headman is Uvang anak Mail, who is a fine jungle man with an extensive know-ledge of the tracks and jungle-lore, and is invaluable for any expedition.
(c) Kuala Mooroojau to Kaki Bukit camp: the route follows the Mooroojau valley, but has to be made on foot. In dry weather with lightly laden carriers, it takes about three hours; the average time for carriers with the usual load is five hours; the journey takes about eight hours with heavy loads, or in wet weather.
(d)	Kaki Bukit camp to Bukit Sulap Batu on the watershed. The route from Kaki Bukit climbs sleeply up the ridges from the Mooroojau valley and, following spurs separating the rivers, switch-backs considerably. With selected Punans carrying no loads it takes 4 hours to reach Bukit Sulap Batu, which is probably about 1,300 feet high; loaded carriers would take about one day to reach this place.
(e)	The Rajang valley watershed. From Bukit Sulap Batu the track drops steeply into the Sematai valley; with unloaded Punans the descent takes 1 hours, but if loads were carried it would take about half a day. It is about 3 hours walk in the waters of the Sematai to the Sungai Bah, and carriers with loads take about half a day. At the mouth of the Sematai, the Borneo Company Limited have a timber station, and in the sur-rounding jungle there are timber cutters’ camps. A track of about 14 miles leads down the Bah valley to the Rajang river.
The Mooroojau valley provides a good example of how the nature of the topography is controlled by the underlying rocks. The lower valley consists mostly of relatively soft shale which has eroded to give a low-lying, muddy, country; occasionally fragments of coal in the river bed indicate seams to occur in the shale. Towards the headwaters of the Mooroojau tough rocks of the Rajang formation give rugged country with steep ridges separating deep valleys. These rocks consist of hard shale, schist, siltstone, feldspathic grit and sandstone, cut by veinlets of white quartz; they dip steeply at. angles varying from 45 to vertical. The valleys in this type of terrain are attractive; clear streams flow between steep hillsides, deep pools and water falls are common, as are stretches of river where sparkling water ripples between banks of gravel and sand. The hard Rajang formation rocks form the watershed, and are well exposed at Bukit Sulap Batu which consists of tough massive sandstone: this rock formation extends into the Sematai valley and Rajang basin.
The Punans in the party included two well-known local characters. Uvang anak Mail is probably the best known jungle-man in the Kakus valley; he is familiar with the different tracks into the Rajang valley, and has been far into the Rajang valley up the Balui. He is an old man, probably over three score years, but is an invaluable guide having a pleasant personality and being
24
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, FEBRUARY 27, 1953.
strong and resourceful in the jungle. On one occasion when the party was caugbt by darkness on a steep mountain ridge and unable to return to base camp, the lack of water, common on the ridges, resulted in all suffering from thirst. After a rest Uvang, at about ten o’clock that night, using flares made of a special wood he had found, cut, and dried over the fire, climbed down the mountain slope and brought back water for the party; no mean feat on the jungle clad mountain side in a dark night. He also produced edible bark which he claimed to be most nutritious. His son, Kayong anak Uvang, is about 20 years old, has
an exceptionally strong physique, and an excellent knowledge of the local shooting and fishing. Nasal anak Surlong, another member of the party, it was claimed is the best teller of Punan fairy tales in the Tatau valley. On the return journey he entertained a house party one night; the recital started at dusk, and went on until dawn. The party took their ease stretched on mats on the floor, no lights were allowed, and the tale was chanted in the darkness, the assembled company producing the background noises from time to time: these consisted of a series of howls and shrieks, strongly reminiscent of St. Andrew’s Night celebrations.
SARAWAK GEOLOGICAL OFFICE MAP NO.45
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, FEBRUARY 27, 1953.
25
Notes on the Bintulu valley and the Tubau-Belaga route to the Upper Rajang valley.
By Mr. F. W. Roe.
General.
The Bintulu valley and the overland route from Tubau to Belaga in the Rajang valley is shown on 4 miles to 1 inch maps HIND 1113, sheets number 3 and 7. The overland route is however best seen on the Sarawak Land and Survey Depart-ment's revised 1952 Preliminary Sheet No. 10, on a scale of 2 miles to 1 inch. Details of the Tubau-Belaga overland route were obtained locally, and are given on the attached sketch map. The geology in the Bintulu valley has been mapped by Shell Group geologists and the area was examined using these records. The party consistcd of J. C. Robin-son. Public Works engineer from Jesselton, rock-collectors Goh Geok Soon and Kadri bin Johari. The field work was done during October, 1952, using the Geological Survey Department launch L'Aubaine.
Geology.
The general geology of the Bintulu valley has been mapped in some detail. At difficult times during the last 30 years various geologists of the Shell Group have worked in the area. No details of the geology will be given here as the numerous Sarawak Oilfield reports contain a mass of reliable information. The main formations are rocks of Tertiary age which consist mainly of shale, with some sandstone and occasional limestone bands. The rocks have weathered to form undulating country and separating the hills are muddy river valleys. Coal seams are known in the area and there are still possibilities that oil might be found.
The Tubau-Belaga Overland Route.
The following information about the Tubau-Belaga overland route was obtained in the Tubau area from the following persons. Howell Herrick, a survey assistant in the Land and Survey Depart-ment, who was working near Tubau; The Sarawak Government's Upriver Agent at Tubau, and from Nawi anak Ngelai, Tuai Rumah of Rumah Takis, which is the third house upstream after Labang: this house is located near the mouth of the Sungai Takis. Nawi anak Ngelai stated that he has made the journey from Tubau to Belaga on several occasions, and that the track is worn deep into the hillside by the bare feet of the many people who have used it. This statement was made after a few drinks, and was recounted together with tales of his exploits with certain officers who landed by para-chute in 1945—his descriptive powers seem to have benefitted by these contacts.
From Bintulu to Tubau up the Kemena river a launch can be used. At three places rocks occur in the river bed, but these do not normally break the surface of the water; the first two rocks are not far apart and are about three miles upstream from Labang, the third locality is near the mouth of the tributary Telavei, about two miles before Tubau. These rocks do not show at the surface, and are neither marked on the maps, nor by a notice on the river bank : it is wise to take a local
waterman knowing their location, although if the water is calm the locality is indicated by slight surface ripples.
Launches do not go beyond Tubau, a long-boat can be used for some distance, then one has to travel on foot; the route is shown on the attached sketch map. Details of this section are stated to be as follows:
(a) From Tubau to the confluence of the Tubau and Pesu rivers is about half-an-hour’s travel in a long-boat using an outboard engine.
(b) Beyond the mouth of the Pesu, the journey up the Tubau river to the Langunan takes about one day. The first section to Rumah Maring Batok, the last house, takes about three hours using an outboard engine: from here to the mouth of the Langunan the long-boat usually has to be paddled, and the journey takes about 7 hours. If the water is high an outboard can be taken and the distance would then be covered in about three hours.
(c) From the Langunan river to Rumah Tamang Ubong on the Belaga river is said to take about 4 hours. Boats have to be left near the mouth of the Langunan (the locality is referred to locally as Pengkalan) and one travels on foot up the valley. At the source of the river there is said to be a low col leading over the watershed, and after crossing this the route is downhill following the valley of the Paku. Near the confluence of this tributary with the Belaga river there is the Kenyah long-house, Rumah Tamang Ubong.
(d) Rumah Tamang Ubong to Belaga Kubu is said to be one day's journey. After two hours paddling down the Belaga river the section is reached where the river loops round Bukit Jayang, and there are numerous falls. A jungle route follows the mountain side past these falls and takes about 10 hours to cross. Once the falls are passed Belaga Kubu is about 15 minutes down river.
The writer would appreciate any information about the route from anyone who has made the journey. The time of 4 hours for crossing the watershed via the Langunan and Paku valleys seems remarkably short, as does the time of 1 day's travel down the Belaga river, but numerous questions failed to shake the determined reply that these were the usual times taken.
26
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, FEBRUARY 27, 1953.
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, FEBRUARY 27, 1953.
27
This Sarawak (resuscitated).
The following appeared in the “Sarawak Tribune" during the month :—
"Tenders should be forwarded in a sealed envelope marked "PO POINT STAIRWAYS" to the Accountant-General, Kuching, not later than 28th February, 1953.
Government docs not bind itself to accept the highest or any tender."
CORRESPONDENCE.
Institute of Social Anthropology, University of Oxford.
8th February, 1953.
The Editor, Sarawak Gazette.
Sir,
PENAN AND PUNAN.
In 1949 there was discussion in your columns abont the correct referents of the terms 'Penan' and ‘Punan’. I am publishing in an anthropolo-gical periodical a review of the history of these terms and the conflicting views held about them; but as it will be some time before the article appears I think a brief statement of my conclusions may interest yonr readers.
(1) There is at least one nomadic people in Borneo calling themselves ‘Punan'. This has been represented in Sarawak by the groups kuown as Punan Aput, Punan Batu, and Punan Busang.
(2) The Punan Ba are a distinct people from the nomadic Punan. They are distinct in social structure, in organisation, in language. and in many other cultural features. They are also quite distinct from all the other so-called 'Jungle Punan' and from the settled ‘Penan’ of the Bintulu district. They are part of the Kajang people.
(3) A third distinct people have preciously been known as ‘Punan’ and 'Jungle Punan’. Their correct name—that is, the name they call them-selves and by which they are distinguished from other Bornean peoples—is 'Penan' (pronounced p nan). This people includes the settled Penan and the nomadic groups of upper Sarawak such as the Penan Mago (‘Punan Magoh’), the Penan Lusong, the Penan Geng (‘Punan Gang'), etc. The Penan are quite distinct in language, organis-ation, and culture from the Punan and from the Punan Ba.
Rodney Needham.
[In a covering letter Mr. Needham invites corres-pondence direct with him on the matter. In addition he intends to submit an article (more detailed than the above) for publication in the Sarawak Museum Journal. Ed.] R. C. Mission, Dalat.
21st December, 1952.
The Editor, Sarawak Gazette,
Kuching.
Dear Sir,
MAIL SERVICE.
Postage rates have increased. Nobody com-plains about that, but the mail-service in some out-stations is so bad that it is time to let the public know about it. Everybody knows that commuuic-ations in some parts of Sarawak are difficult and one takes it without grudge. But if there is a daily connection with Sibu via the famous Sg. Kut and Dalat one fails to see why the Post-Offices of Sibu and Kuching cannot make some arrangements to send the mail via that way, if the sea-way is impossible on account of the rough weather.
Philatelic.
The Association of British Malaya, Malaya House, Trafalgar Square,
London, W.C.2.
The Editor,
The Sarawak Gazette, Kuching.
Dear Sir,
BORNEO ANNUAL REUNION.
25th January, 1953.
May I once again seek the hospitality of your columns to report that there will be a buffet luncheon at the Royal Empire Society, Northum-berland Ave., London, W.C.2., on Wednesday, June 10th, 1953, for residents and ex-residents of Sarawak, North Borneo, Labuan and Brunei.
A fork meal will be served so that participants may move about to meet as many of their friends as possible. The cost of the luncheon will be 7/-(excluding wines). Admissiou will be by ticket which must be obtained before the 4th June from the undersigned.
Last year's gathering attracted more than a hundred people of whom the majority were ex-residents. It is hoped that all those on leave who are able to do so will keep this date and so help to bring up-to-date contacts to these who are no longer able to see modern Borneo for themsclves.
Yours sincerely, W. A. C. Smelt.
Extracts from Administrative Officers' Reports for the Fourth Quarter, 1952.
FIRST DIVISION.
Acting Resident (Mr. A. R. Snelus).
The proper administrative work of the Resident is considerably hampered red by his additional duties as Secretary for Native Affairs and by having to sit in one or other of his capacities on a large number
28
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, FEBRUARY 27, 1953.
of Committees. In this connection it is recorded that the writer attended during the quarter thirty (30) meetings of nine different committees in his official capacity and five meetings of three other committees in an unofficial capacity, apart from his attendance at the Residents' Conference and Council Negri. He also unavoidably had to cut several other meetings.
Considerable preliminary work was done towards the initiation next year of a community develop-ment project at Kampung Muara Tuang and Bundong in the Samarahan.
Much preliminary investigation of the problem of removing the squatters from the frontier areas of Serian District and resettling them elsewhere in the Division was also carried out. There are still numerous Chinese squatters along the Simanggang Road as well, for whom agricultural land with some security of tenure must be found as soon as possible.
The continual failure to use the Singghi swamp area for wet padi is most disappointing. Some firm action will have to be taken.
It is hoped that the Curator will be able to pay an early visit to Bau to settle birdsnests problems as soon as he returns from his Kelabit trip.
Acting District Officer, Bau.
(Mr. P. Ratcliffe).
The Bau-Krokong road is now “completed", which means that vehicles can use it. Nobody could describe it as a good road, but in comparison with its state six months ago, the transformation is remarkable and the population is grateful.
The P.W.D. pipe-layers here have really done splendid and extremely hard work by having the pipe line virtually completed by the end of the year. This has been no easy job. Throughout the bazaar and residential area, practically every inch of the way has had to be blasted through hard and huge rocks. Work continues and it is now estimated that the water should flow once more by the middle of February.
The Mission School at Krokong is an excellent-run establishment, clean, well-attended and very alive, with an extremely capable Batu Lintang-trained teacher, who is really achieving something.
Approximately 200 ounces of gold were reported to have been won by the five mines during the quarter. This is a decrease of about 20% on the last quarter and is directly attributable to the bad weather. The Borneo Co. geologist continued his prospecting in the Puak area.
District Officer, Sadong.
(Mr. J. F. Drake-Brockman).
Mr. Kon Siong Luk, the Capitan China of Teba-kang, died in Kuching on October 11th, aged 67. He had been appointed on January 6th, 1927. Throughout his long period of service Mr. Kon Siong Luk was of great assistance in maintaining cordial relations between Government and the Chinese community and, indeed, between all races in Tebakang.
A Malay was sentenced at Tebakang to 2 years R.I. in accordance with Malay Undang-Undang, for committing incest with his daughter. It is com-
monly believed locally that the poor fruit crop, floods and damage to padi by rats, measles epidemic, fowl plague, etc., are due to the fact that the Malays concerned did not offer the necessary sacrifices, or pay the fines required by Dayak custom.
Prospects for the next harvest, especially in the predominantly swampy areas downriver from Teba-kang, are good. On the other hand. owing to late planting and lack of weeding, some of the up-river areas, particularly around Tebedu, will have a very poor harvest again.
Mr. Smart of Ewart and Company I.td. and his staff have completed their work on the Simanggang road trace and evacuated the government quarters at Tebakang which they have occupied for 2 years.
Acting District Officer, Lundu.
(Mr. P. B. Smith).
During a visit to Lundu in November, His Excel-lency the Governor held a discussion with the more important members of the Chinese Community and strongly urged them to join in Local Government affairs with all other races in the district and give themselves a stake in the country of their adoption. Talks have since been held but the prevailing feel-ing amongst the Chinese is one of caution and they have asked for Chinese langunge copies of literature on Local Government and a translation of the Local Authority Ordinance before they make np their minds. An opinion often expressed is “We will join the Local Authority if Kuching have a Local Authority with Chinese in it."
The large padi swamp on Tanjong Purun has only been partly farmed, mainly due to the great destruction of the padi on this swamp last year by mice, bengas, and empangau. A survey has been made by the Agricultural Field Assistant who estimates that only 230 acres have been planted out of 420 acres, and that out of the 160 persons having land in the area only 60 have planted their full acreage. Action will be taken in 1953 to ensure that this swamp, which can support a crop every year, will be planted up to capacity in future.
Fruit trees in the district flowered but did not bear fruit and there has been no fruit on sale in the bazaar. This is a great contrast to last year when fruit was so abundant that it was almost un-saleable.
District Officer, Kuching.
(Datu Abang Openg).
Through the suggestion of the Malay Adviser, the Honourable Datu Bandar, clearing of the compound and graveyard of the Kuching Mosque was carried out voluntarily by a large number of the Malay com-munity during the quarter. It was decided by the Mosque Committee to have this voluntary clear-ing done quarterly by the Moslem community.
The Development project at Kampong Muara Tuang and Kampong Tanjong Bundong, Sama-rahan, has been discussed with the kampong people, and the Senior Native Officer Abang Morni has been instructed to deal with this. According to his report the people of both Kampongs are in favour of the proposal.
Three Malays were elected by various Tua2 Kampong in the Municipal area to sit as Malay
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, FEBRUARY 27, 1953.
29
Councillors in the Municipal Council, They are Mr. Marikan Salleh, Abang bin Joll and Haji Taha Baki.
SECOND DIVISION.
Acting Resident (Mr. A. F. R. Griffin).
The Division remained quiet—the Skrang and Lemanak Dayaks however reported stone throwing at Dayak longhouses at night by unknown persons; although all the reports were carefully investigated by the Police no trace of strangers could be discovered. Stone throwing rumours invariably arise during the fruit season and are presumably manufactured by the Dayaks themselves with the hope that other Dayaks will be too frightened to gather fruit and leave more for themselves. The fruit season has been extremely good this year.
The Simanggang Junior Service building pro-gramme of 16 new quarters has been completed, but the occupation of the quarters is held up temporarily until the quarters are connected with electric light by S.E.S. Co.
The 1952 Divisional Programme of Major Works has been satisfactorily carried out. Much of the credit for this should go to the Divisional Technical Assistant, Mr. Edmund Voon.
There was one change of Senior Service staff and one addition in October. The Divisional Agricul-tural Officer, Mr. M. McSporran, was replaced by Mr. William Crocker; the former left on leave to New Zealand. In November, Mr. W. O. Steele arrived to take up his duties as Divisional Education Officer, a new post.
I regret to report the death of Penghulu Sait which occurred on December 30th. Penghulu Sait fell from a fruit tree near his own house at Enteban. He was well known throughout the Division and was liked by all. As a young man he was appointed Penghulu but later relinquished this post. In 1951 he was re-elected Penghulu and was proving extremely able. A man of progressive ideas and unafraid to speak out, he had made himself wealthy (judged by Dayak standards). A first class padi farmer, Sait was given the title of Ken Sanji by the Japanese; the shortened form "Sanji" stuck to him ever after and upriver Dayaks seldom referred to him by any other name. Sait was a striking figure in his bright red tunic coat given him may years ago by His Highness the Rajah. He leaves a widow and 2 chidren.
Acting District Officer, Simanggang and Lubok Antu (Mr. D. C. Walker).
A visit to part of the Ulu Ai in October brought requests to ‘pindah' from almost every house visited. Low yields and pest damage were given as evidence that the land was no longer fruitful. Larger areas are being farmed each year because of the diminishing yield per acre. Land consisting of partly swamp and partly hill was invariably asked for. The conditions of life in the real swamp areas do not attract people who are used to hills and clear streams. One entire house is farming in West Borneo this year, paying tax to the Indonesian Government and doing their share of road labour. How urgent the situation is is difficult to estimate without a proper investigation but it seems evident that within a few years it will be necessary eiher to move ont a substantial proportion of the population systematically into laid out areas under Government
supervision or to revolutionise farming methods. The latter alternative is undoubtedly the better if practical. There are already a few cattle in the Ulu Ai but no one knows anything about the use of manure or composting except in so far as they have found out that the land from underneath a long-house is good for pepper vines. A drive for mixed farming would require a major scheme includ-ing animal multiplication, a demonstration farm, distribution of planting material, experiments in the best use of pig manure, a large staff of instructors and so on. It might perhaps be worth considering as a suitable project for the expenditure of development funds. Whether the land or the people would respond to such a scheme is doubtful but it may be worth trying on a small scale in an attempt to solve an intractable problem. Local capital would of course be needed. Pepper is a possible source if the price remains at a reasonable level. Many doors have planted a few vines which seem, to an inexpert eye, to be in poor condition for the most part and subject to pests. Instruction and supervision of this crop, including an organis-ation for marketing, might well produce good returns since the advice would be directed to an activity which the people have already embarked on and would not have to overcome the usual initial resistance against changing the way of life.
It is understood that a contract has now been signed by the managers of the Simanggang Chinese School for $55,000 for rebuilding part of their ambitious new school. This will replace the present old structure of which the lease has expired and which is due for demolition under the new bazaar plan. The opportunity of collecting money during last years boom conditions was not seized and there has been considerable difficulty in collecting enough money for the modified scheme.
The harvest from down-river areas, including Stambin and Bijat, was not good this year and many farmers have been asking for assistance owing to having sold a large proportion of their crop to dealers. Advances to farmers against next year's crop have relieved the situation to some extent but it seems that farmers are in many cases not putting aside sufficient for the year and the encouragement of thrift is necessary if labour is to be kept on the land at critical times.
In up-river areas, particularly in the Ulu Lemanak, there is a severe seasonal shortage of rice and the people are living now on root crops where they have no means of buying rice. In areas other than the Lemanak, where planting is late, this year's crop is reported to be growing well after good burns.
It is reported that rat damage is considerably less on this year's planting and the area of planting somewhat larger so, as far as can be estimated at this stage, the prospects for the 1953 harvest are good. About 22,000 pikuls are anticipated and this will be checked by sample testing of yields in April or May. The area has already been gazetted under the Wet Padi Land Rules and care has been taken to explain fully to the people their obligations under the Rules.
Acting District Officer, Saribas (Mr. I. Harper).
There has been no appreciable drop in the Betong Dispensary attendances where many of the clients
30
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, FEBRUARY 27, 1953.
come from the bazaar and are not dependent on seasons.
The Red Cross baby clinic continued to average 25 mothers—with varying numbers of children in tow—a week.
Acting District Officer, Kalaka (Mr. R. G. Keech).
The last trip done by the Travelling Dispensary was in the week ending October 3rd (i.e. only once during the qnarter). The hull of the boat had been reported rotten in the early September and the Medical Department had arranged a replace-ment from Kuching. This did not arrive in October as promised. I am extremely anxious about this on account of the people of the Seblak and of Roban Bazaar.
Eighty-two small boats left the District in December taking Malay families to the Batang Lupar to collect Durian . Eight hundred and ninety people went all told and returned safely later in the month. Lempok (dehydrated durian) and Tem-puyak (durian dried and salted) is made from the fruit which in some years finds a good market. The price in Saratok now is : Lempok 70 cents per kati: Tempuyak $2 per gantang. The Malays this ycar just about covered their expenses, I am told, Weeding of padi fields at Kabong was neglected on account of this expedition but it makes a pleasant break, like hop-picking in Southern England.
The Agricultural Assistant has made in vain con-stant requests for coffee seedlings from his Depart-ment and indeed all the more sensible farmers are on the look out for experimental cash crops. They are beginning to know how unreliant they are on obtaining steady prices for rubber. Many are planting pepper—but this crop too some consider spoils the land, and the cultivation of pepper detracts too much from the farming year. The Department's assistance in providing coffee seed-lings would be much appreciated.
THIRD DIVISION
Resident (Mr. D. C. White).
On 2nd December, The Sacred Heart Mission in Sibu celebrated its Golden Jubilee. Bishop Vos visited Sibu for the occasion, his frst visit since he became Vicar Apostolic of Kuching.
The decision to build a new sawmill at Rajang has been well received by the people there, even though it means some initial inconvenience. The Manager of the Colonial Timber Company has guaranteed to employ Rajang men as first priority and, as he can employ directly 175 men apart from those engaged in ancillary jobs, employment for almost the whole kampong is assured.
The appointment of Dr. Wong Toh Hoo has greatly increased the attendances at the Sarikei dispensary and underlined the inadequacy of the premises provided.
It was a considerable surprise to me as well as the Superintendent of Lands and Surveys that the price of shop lots showed no depreciation although commodity prices have fallen. There is un-doubtedly a large amount of cash still in the possession of the local people particularly the pepper planters, and, I believe, it is largrely the latter who are still anxious to invest their funds in bricks and mortar. It seems probable that the price of land will remain high for some time.
District Officer, Lower Rajang. (Mr. H. P. K. Jacks).
Ex-surveyor Awang Bujnng bin Pengiran Ali died at Kampong Skaan, Matu, on 21st October. He had received his Long Service badge in 1951.
The Senior Native Officer, Sarikei, toured three penghulus' areas during the quarter and spent some time on the rubber block planting scheme. He also met the District Officer, Knnowit, and a boundary between the two districts was clarified.
Meetings were held in Rajang during the quarter to explain the proposals for moving some of the houses out of the kampong area. This will be necessary to make way for the expected develop-ment following on the establishment of the Colonial Timber Company's second sawmill. This is expected to be larger than their present one at Sarikei and various buildings and quarters for Government staff will have to be constructed. The people of Rajang realise that it will be to their advantage and are prepared to more further inland. It is hoped that in a year or so Rajang will become a busy place once again after a lapse of a quarter of a century.
There has been some opposition among the Dayaks to surrendering their rights in one of the blocks earmarked for alienation to the Chinese for rubber planting.
Some progress was made in the Binatang district in the allocation of land for block rubber planting but it has become apparent that the demand for land has been greatly exaggerated.
It was estimated that many more Chinese have planted padi this year and an increase in output may be expected.
Representatives of the Farmers' Union met the two Superintendents Lands and Surveys and the Divisional Agricultural Officer in regard to farming land made available to them at the southern end of the Sirik peninsula.
All the new shop blocks in Sarikei were completed and nearly all were occupied and doing business by the end of the quarter. A great deal of rubbish had to be cleared up afterwards. The fruit season added to the difficulties of maintenance in both bazaars. One street cleaner in Binatang became demented and had to be replaced. It is not known whether this was the cause.
Acting District Officer, Mukah (Mr. A. R. Meikle).
Many Dayaks had finished their own supplies of rice by the end of the quarter. This state of affairs was largely due to their own fault, having sold too much of their crop for ready cash earlier in the
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, FEBRUARY 27, 1953.
31
year. Some were reduced to eating sago, which they intensely dislike, others set to working timber or collecting rotan to earn the cash to buy rice. Fortunately there is no shortage of work for those that are willing, though jelutong and rubber tapping were hampered by the weather.
The fishing section of the Melanau Community took full advantage of the calm weather in October and November, but early in December the landas came in full force and barong fishing had to be suspended during the rest of the month.
Sago working was also seriously interrupted by the rain which accompanied the storms of December. Kampong Kuala Oya is distinguished by the number of persons planting vegetables. This kampong is continuing to grow both in size and prosperity compared with 3 years ago.
Elsewhere amongst the Melanaus new and improved houses are still appearing in the kam-pongs, despite the shortage of ripe sago. Balingian is a melancholy exception.
Swamp padi planted by Melanaus on the Oya river was doing well at the end of the quarter, and there was more planted than the previous season.
Dayak swamp padi, however, has been badly affected by the continuous floods in December, and much of it destroyed.
There are fairly good reports on hill padi, from all rivers, with no unusual pest damage, so that present indications are of an average harvest.
The craze for pepper planting has taken hold of the Dayaks, particularly in the Baoh and Tamin areas of the Oya river, but few gardens are doing well owing to luck of sufficient attention.
Applications for land for sago planting continue unabated.
5 New Junior Service quarters at Mukah and Oya were completed, while the new dispensary at Dalat and market at Mukah required only finishing touches.
Preliminary clearing with a view to widening and deepening the Sungei Kut started early in November and good progress had been made by the end of the year.
In November Sarawak Oilfields Limited Seismic Survey party established a main camp at Kampong Tabo, approximately 13 miles up the Mukah river, plus a smaller stores camp at Kuala Mukah. This party, consisting of 4-5 European seismologists, etc., and about 150 clerks, draftsmen, outboard drivers, mechanics, cooks and coolies, expects to take about 10 months over an extensive Seismic survey on both sides of the Mukah river. Very little labour has been engaged locally though many in the party are of local origin, since the party moved in as a complete and experienced entity. Relations between all grades of this party and both Government and the public have been very good.
Those who hoped for a Christmas dinner from the cold storage in Kuching were disappointed for the second year running as gales held up shipping, and they found a Tillian duck a tough and expensive substitute.
Acting District Officer, Kanowit (Mr. A. R. G. Morrison).
The District Court had a somewhat painful and at times blasphemous session in the Meluan Kubu upon an occasion when a swarm of the little semi-domesticated but far from stingless Dayak bees
(renyuan) had invaded the Kubu with the mis-guided intention of making their homes there. The whole Kubu was full of buzzing and none could sit there for many minutes without being stung. I retired to the living quarters adjoining the Court Room and by calling in all available Dayaks and making them sit round the table at which I was working and plying them with tobacco with orders to smoke hard, a sort of acrid smoke screen was put up which did discourage the bees somewhat.
I much regret to report the death of Lance Corporal Mapan who died suddenly in his sleep on the night of 26th November at Meluan. Cause of death was diagnosed as heart failure. Mapan came from Lingga. He was an old timer in the Police and much of his service had been spent in the Ulu. He had an intimate knowledge of the Ulu Kanowit area and he had done excellent work in Meluan. He was a very valuable and loyal member of the Constabulary and his death is a very heavy loss.
I hsve been much exasperated to find that despite the never ending complaints from the Chinese about the shortage of padi land, many Chinese who were given titles to padi land on the old estate land two or three years ago have not planted there this year and some have never planted there at all. It is difficult to know why they applied for these titles. They do not appear to have tried to dispose of them. I suspect that many of them applied for land as a pure speculation and may not even have been aware of what land they applied for. It cost them very little and they have never bothered to do anything about it.
Business is now very bad in Kanowit. I am much afraid that some towkays will encounter serious difficulties in paying off their Government loans. It seems likely that the long term result will be to alter the entire make-up of the Bazaar. Many of the old established traders may have to sell out to prosperous pepper planters from the Lower Rajang who seem to be the only people with much money in hand at present.
Dr. Zulueta, Malaria Specialist of the World Health Organisation, visited the District during the quarter with his small daughter. He investigated the spleen rates in the Kanowit River up to Julau and from Julau up to Nanga Serau in the Sungei Julau. He also ascended a fair distance in both the Poi and the Ngemah. He was kind enough to provide me with a few preliminary figures of the spleen rates for children from 2-14 years of age which were as follows.
No. of No. of	Spleen
Area.	children enlarged rate
Examined. spleens.	(%)
S. Kanowit between
Kanowit and Julau 104	8	8
S. Julau between
Julau and Ng.
Serau	72	8	11
S. Poi as far as
R. Umang	110	13	12
Batang Rajang
between Ng. Poi
and Ng. Ngemah	49	6	12
Sg. Ngemah as far
as Rh. Peng. Radin	120	33	28
Total	455	68	15
32
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, FEBRUARY 27, 1953.
I had not expected the peculiar increase in the malarial incidence in the Ngemah. Apart from the Ngemah Dr. Zulueta did not regard the spleen rate as being unusually large. Dr. Zulueta altogether examined about 700 children in the District includ-ing school children in Julau Bazaar and the figures given were selected to show me the geographical variation in the incidence. Dr. Zulueta informed that he suspected that there was a much higher incidence among the Dayaks who live in langkaus and who do not make proper use of their long-houses. There seems to be less malaria among the genuine longhouse dwellers.
District Officer, Kapit (Mr. A. J. N. Richards).
Considerable damage was done to padi on low lying land during October since it was covered by flood water for a week. Padi flooded not so deeply has survived and is doing better than usual. The damage is most unfortunate just at a time when more and more people were tryiug to use swamp and level land. Padi was beginning to ripen at Belaga by the end of December.
A flying trip was paid to the Ulu Balleh early in December to put in forest marks (Pak Umai) in the Putai and on the Balleh edge of the Gayum P.F. The Temonggong's temporary farm houses near Ng. Nguan were deserted, yielding only a few mushrooms for travellers. The hillsides are covered with charred stumps of fine timber, albeit outside the Protected Forest.
His Excellency the Governor, accompanied by the Hon'ble the Resident, paid a visit to Belaga at the end of September, returning on 3rd October. The rivers began to rise a few days afterwards and reached their highest on 10th October, six days before H.R.H. the Duchess of Kent was expected to visit Sibu. Both the Rajang and the Balleh were up: the water reaching to the doorway of the Fort at Belaga, to the road in front of the Fort at Kapit and three feet above the pangkalan railing at Song. Some huts in the Belaga river were washed away and a ten door house in the Ga'at swept down as d bris to be found near Kanowit. The heights above M.S.L. were 84 feet at Belaga and 53 feet at Kapit.
District Officer, Sibu (Mr. G. Lloyd Thomas).
Two serious fires occurred in December; the first, on December 1st, started on a motor lighter trans-porting drums of oil from the suppliers' vessel, which was moored in the river. The burning lighter, abandoned by its crew. drifted downstream and on to the s.s. “Angby”; by a most fortunate chance the latter vessel had steam up and was able to cast off from the wharf and steam out into the river, although not before parts of this ship had been damaged by the fire. Although the Fire Brigade came commendably rapidly to the river-side, they were unable to tackle the fire on the lighter, which drifted further down-stream, blazing from stem to stern, until the volunteer crew of an outboard-driven longboat (consisting of police and the juragan of the “Ingleburn”) succeeded in getting an anchor, with line attached, secured to the bows of the burning vessel and then securing further anchors to the original one, when the lighter was brought to a halt some yards from the true
left-hand bank of the Igan and opposite the down-river end of Kampong Datu. The lighter con-tinued to burn there until the remains of it finally sank. Two members of the crew of the “Angby” and one of the original crew of the lighter were detained in hospital for treatment for burns and the lighterman subsequently died. It is understood that the Shipping Department have sumbitted a full report on this occurrence and that an inquiry will be held in regard to this matter.
The second conflagration occurred on December 22nd, when a Dayak house opposite the Govern-ment wharf, on Pulau Kerto, was burnt out.
Some of the Malay-owned houses at the bazaar end of Kampong Pulau were pulled down during the period under review, after payment of compen-sation to the owners, to enable further road-construction to proceed. Not all the owners had been found new lots by the end of the year and temporary permission for them to retain part of their houses in Kampong Pulau for occupation pending the re-erection of their houses on new lots was granted to these people, with their own agree-ment. A scheme has been prepared, in consultation with the Resident, the Superintendent of Lands and Surveys, the Asst. District Officer and Malay Tua2 Kampong, for the lay-out of new Kampong lots and thus avoiding the overcrowding of existing Kampongs by the erection in them of houses for the people who have agreed to move from Kampong Pulau. This scheme awaits approval in detail and the grant of the necessary funds for its imple-mentation.
The modifications to the runway at Sibu airfield, referred to in the previous report, were started in October. Subsequently visits of inspection were paid here by the Acting Deputy Director of Public Works and officials of the Civil Aviation Depart-ment. Singapore, who also held discussions with the Divisional Engineer and the Resident regarding the exact improvements to the runway which were required. The airfield was re-opened to commercial traffic on the 29th October and since that date the number of arrivals and departures from Sibu by air has steadily increased. Many special flights were flown to deal with the “backlog” of passenger-bookings caused by the suspension of the service during most of October and schedule flights in and out of Sibu were increased to eight weekly by the end of the period under review.
FOURTH DIVISION.
Acting Resident (Mr. J. R. Outram).
The District Officer's remarks regarding the desirability of developing air communication with the Kelabit plateau have my whole-hearted support. At the time of writing, the new airstrip at Bareo has not yet consolidated enough to be serviceable; this is, I believe, due to unusually heavy rain. The advantages of air access to the plateau were recently emphasized when Mr. Bruce Morton, the B.E.M. pilot, flew from Lawas to Bareo in 55 minutes; he had hoped to land there but Mr. Tom Harrisson, on the ground, advised him that the strip was not serviceable and so he circled over it for about 20 minutes. He then flew from Bareo to Long Tebangan, on the Akah, in 25 minutes. There he landed and took off again for Lutong, which he reached in just under one hour. The Bareo strip is 500 yards long with overruns to 600 yards. I am certain that the Kelabits them-
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, FEBRUARY 27, 1853.
33
selves would willingly extend the strip as may be necessary to accommodate a Rapide, and I suggest that two intelligent Kelabits be selected and trained as wireless operators and weather reporters. Radio could then be installed and Bareo be included in the Malayan Airways feeder service to connect with Lutong. There seems little doubt that this service would pay handsome dividends, not only from the carriage of passengers but also from that of freight.
The whole Division has suffered from the appall-ing weather experienced during these three months. We had ten days almost continuous rain early in October and this did much damage to the Dayak padi in the Kemana and Tatau rivers. Baram up-river padi also suffered in places by flooding. Where flooding did not occur, however, the padi harvest prospects throughout the Division are distinctly good.
In December we saw the roughest seas that have been known here for 25 years. The Miri port was closed for nine days; no cargo could be unloaded and no tankers could be moored. Tankers con-sequently queued up in Miri Roads while bunker vessels went elsewhere. The storage tanks at Lutong were filled to capacity and consequently production had practically to cease at Seria. The Kuala Baram/Kuala Belait sand road was washed out and became impassable; traffic continued along the beach at low tide. The Bulak Setap road was also washed out, leaving a gap of fifty yards in one place.
This depressing month also witnessed the failure of Sarawak Oilfields Limited to find oil at Bulak Setap and Subis and the cessation of drilling at both places after depths of 11,000 feet had been reached. Deep drilling will shortly commence at Luak and Tudan, while core-drilling is planned at four points near Kuala Bakong and in the Ridan area between Marudi and Labi. The Seismic survey party has now moved into the Third Divi-sion. Owing to the collapse of the Setap Road, it has so far been impossible for the Company to start extraction of their equipment from the location.
This has, I think, shown that the maintenance of the Bulak Setap road beyond Beraya by Govern-ment is impracticable and that the projected road to Berkenu must follow the coast over Tanjong Batu before striking inland.
All the roads around Miri suffered badly from the weather, which also delayed work on the Marudi bazaar development.
The final tragedy of the month occurred at 2 a.m. on New Year's Eve when the Peninsular pontoon ferry overturned in midstream with two vehicles containing four Europeans and also with two Malay operators on board. All these managed to get out and swim ashore except for Mr. J. Cameron, who was trapped in his car and drowned. The reason for the accident was the unusually strong ebb tide and high water banking up against the ferry and eventually covering the ramp and forcing the ferry down. The upriver cable first snapped, the ferry turned over and then the other cable parted also. This tragedy, happening as it did at the close of the usual New Year's Eve Dance, was very keenly felt by the whole community.
District Officer, Baram (Mr. F. B. K. Drake).
Dr. Zuluetta, of the World Health Organisation, visited the district during December, and travelled
up the Baram doing a preliminary survey. As a result of his findings, it is proposed to start a detailed study of the effect of D.D.T. on malaria under local conditions, using th Baram river as a demonstration area for the trial. Dr. Zuluetta hopes to return early in the new year to start this project.
I returned from the tour of the Kelabit plateau on 19th October, after 55 days away from Marudi. The main themes of requests everywhere were “Can we have airfields and air-transport” and “What light, but valuable, crops can be grown, to ease the immense burden of carrying damar on our backs all the way to Lawas or Marudi”. Suggestions have been made that pony tracks should be built from Lawas, to overcome the transport problem, but even if approval is given to make these tracks, it will presumably be many years before they are of much use to the Kelabits. The people are not very "animal-minded” at present, and will have to be taught how to care for and handle ponies, and numbers of ponies will be brought up only slowly. With countries everywhere else rapidly becoming air-minded, surely it is better to skip this form of slow outmoded transport, and proceed straight to air-travel. I believe the Kelabit plateau could make a very considerable contribution to the food supplies of Sarawak, provided it could be got out. Excellent crops of padi are obtained, particularly at Bareo, where there are large areas of swamp, largely unused, as there is no point in growing more than they need. Owing to the influence of the Borneo Evangelical Mission, even their trad-itional use of excess padi—turning it into "borak" —is decreasing. Apart from assisting the deve-lopment of the Kelabits, air-transport would be a great boon to the Administration, as a trip now taking nearly two months could be completed in 2 to 3 weeks, with all the saving this implies in wages and time.
Acting District Officer, Miri (Mr. P. Scanlon).
During the quarter the World Health cum Sarawak Government B.C.G. vaccination team visited the district and successfully vaccinated with B.C.G. all those persons who were shown by the tuberculin test to require it.
Complaints were received during the quarter from Sibuti about damage caused to padi by rats. Several local pied Pipers offered to exorcise the "semangat tikus". Their offers were rejected and the Assistant Agricultural Officer, Mr. Ong Chin Ghee, arranged two extremely successful anti-rat campaigns using zinc phosphide in the Sibuti river during November. To everyone’s great satisfaction the Sibuti stank of dead and decaying rats for days. Other houses are now asking for similar campaigns and it is hoped to arrange them regularly and auto-matically in future years. This was discussed and agreed at the District Council Meeting.
13 Junior Service quarters at Miri were com-pleted during the quarter being most of the work on the junior staff quarters for the new hospital.
Acting District Officer, Bintulu. (Mr. R. F. Mole).
Considerable damage has been caused to wet paddy during the quarter by floods. The Batang Kemena was twice in high flood, once early in October and once in December, and the water reached a height unknown for 10 to 15 years. A certain amount of replanting was possible after the
34
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, FEBRUARY 27, 1953.
first flood, but the second came too late for this. In the upper reaches of the river and its tributaries damage is assessed at roughly one-half, and head-men estimate that the paddy outturn will not last them more than six months. In the Tatau area the damage done by the October floods was not so serious, but the December floods are said to have ruined from one-half to three-quarters of the paddy planted in the upper Anap. Damage in the lower reaches of the Kemena and Anap/Tatau has been slight.
As a result the demand for imported rice is likely to be very much increased during 1953, and the likelihood of Government purchasing local paddy is slight.
The Kayans, Punans and Penans from the Tubau area, who always have insufficient paddy owing to their greater preoccupation with working forest produce, say that, on accouut of the floods, they will have only sufficient for next year's seed.
Owing to the two exceptionally high floods, a record number of logs was extracted: 15,800, cubing 12,200 tons. The Hock Lee sawmill accounted for about half of these, followed by the Hock Sen sawmill and the Bombay Burmsh Trad-ing Corporation, Limited.
Exports of timber amounted to some 3,050 tons. This includes three shipments, two to Australia and one to Hong Kong, by the Bombay Burmah Trad-ing Corporation, Limited, totalling 1,751.94 tons. The remaining 1,296.02 tons was sawn timber, the major part of which went to Brunei for the Oil Company’s construction programme at Seria.
The introduction of compulsory grading for belian attaps and the prohibition of culls, which came into force on 1st November, had an immediate effect on production. In October 1,337,800 pieces were produced in the Bintulu Forest Division; this fell in November to 861,400 and in December to 621,250 pieces.
332,700 lbs. of rice were received from Kuching during the quarter and distributed in the usual manner. As indicated above, it is likely that very much increased quantities will be required during 1953.
For the best part of a fortnight at the beginning of December the port was virtually closed to shipping, owing to very rough seas. The Sarawak Steamship Company, however, did well to maintain their regular services more or less to schedule.
The Potentialities of Sarawak's dry padi varieties.
by R. W. R. Miller, Director of Agriculture.
Part 2.
This part of the article will describe some small scale experimental methods now being used. It is impossible to describe here all the countless experi-ments that have led up to the work and all that can be done is to indicate the present position. Some of the operations described may appear to bear little relation to farming practice; this may or may not be the case but the fact remains that they
are producing padi, and producing it under con-ditions that a skilled padi farmer would regard as impossible. The methods used are in themselves simple and there seems no reason why they cannot eventually be adapted to practical farming. A further point is that, although everyone in Sarawak is interested in the development of padi production, it has generally only been possible in the past for skilled swamp or hill padi farmers with access to considerable areas of land suitable for their systems to take any constructive action with regard to the matter. The methods now to be described do suggest means by which anyone, with only a small area of land, can grow at least a small quantity of padi; furthermore the methods do suggest a basis on which interested people can conduct some experiments of their own (it is worth emphasising that the amateur investigator frequently does stumble on important facts that the professional has missed). There are far too many people in the world to-day talking and writing about the need for increased padi production in South East Asia, but there are far too few who are prepared to actually grow padi; there is now no need for this criticism to apply to Sarawak. Many people who try the methods described will undoubtedly have some failures to start with and this is to be expected; if nothing else, though, the failures will give them some experience of the trials and tribulations that every farmer has to face as part of his everyday experience.
The methods used are based on the system of short term crop cultivation which was described in this journal in March, 1951.
The land must have a soil containing a fair pro-portion of clay otherwise there seems to be few limitations as to type of land that can be used; it is immaterial whether it is exhausted and lalang infested.
Establishment of a close sward of natural grasses (in effect a lawn) by frequent close cutting is the first step. The turf is an excellent check on soil erosion; it does not hinder rapid run-off of storm water whilst still retaining some moisture in the soil for the padi plants.
Rows three feet apart are marked out roughly along the contour and the planting holes are made at one foot intervals along the rows. The holes are made about eight inches in diameter and eight inches deep. An eight inch soil auger of the type used for making bore holes has been found to be a very easy and quick method of making the holes. The holes are filled with grass cuttings and leaves or in fact any kind of waste organic matter; it does not matter whether the material is rotted or not provided it is rammed down as tightly as possible. Usually if the hole is left open for a few days the contents will get a good soaking in a storm but if this does not happen it will be necessary to use a watering can liberally before closing with a two inch layer of soil. The spare soil not used for closing the hole is spread over the surface between the holes. Some weeding is necessary along the rows but the turf between the rows is merely kept closely cut. The sponge of rotting organic matter in the hole does retain a great deal of moisture and provided heavy rain falls every few days this moisture is adequate for vigorous growth of dry padi plants. Short dry periods of up to about two weeks are always liable to occur during the padi season in Sarawak and they can prove disastrous to both wet
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, FEBRUARY 27, 1953.
35
and dry padi crops; although of course they will receive a check, it has been found that dry padi planted on these planting holes will not only tolerate such dry periods but will even continue growing reasonably well. During the dry periods it has been found that large responses in growth can be obtained to even small amounts of water, applied from a watering can on a small scale or by flooding from a pump on a larger scale.
The seeds can be planted in each hole at the rate of about ten per hole but birds take many of the seeds and on the whole it is better to plant the seed in a nursery and transplant to the holes. Provided a little watering is done it has been found that some at least of the dry padis can be transplanted in the same way as wet padis.
As indicated earlier large responses are being obtained to fertiliser applications and indeed it is usually essential to use them in this system on the poorer types of land at least. Imported fertilisers are expensive but padi is now becoming a valuable market garden crop and it pays to use them although it might not have paid pre-war. No definite recom-mendations can be made at this stage as to the best dressings to use and a great deal of experimental work remains to be done on the matter. Both the “N.P.K. mixtures" supplied by Borneo Co., Ltd., and the "Sterameal mixtures" supplied by the Sime Darby & Co., Ltd., would appear to be suit-able for the purpose. Total dressings of up to two ounces per hole have been used, and it is possible that even heavier dressings will prove economic. A little and often rather than one large dose again appears to be a good general rule. There are indications that the best way to apply the fertilisers is to make a small hole with a pointed stick two or three inches deep in the middle of a group of plants and then to drop the fertiliser in the hole and close it with a little soil.
Various pests can of course do a great deal of damage on small experimental plots. Nurseries have to be protected from birds by wire netting. Rat damage has been negligible largely due to the excellent co-operation of the household cat; on a larger scale zinc phosphide baits should prove quite adequate. At one time it was thought that stern borers would prove troublesome but provided there is adequate moisture in the hole and the plants are growing vigorously, damage only seems slight from this cause. It is when the plants start to flower and seed that the trouble starts, and insect and bird damage can then be disastrous. There is only one method that so far has proved at all effective and even this is far from perfect; in brief it consists of lightly tying the plants together round a bamboo stick erected in the middle of the hole and then clipping sheets of newspaper round the plants so as to form a paper tube round the ears. Provided the paper is carefully put on, it withstands rain and wind surprisingly well and does prevent birds getting at the ears; many insects are prevented from reaching the ears and a little Agrocide powder scattered in the tube effectively discourages the rest. After rain the paper does dry out quickly and there does not seem much risk of rotting of the ears occurring due to fungus infection. All this may sound very laborious but in experimental work one often has to do laborious things; in any case many people these days spend a lot of their time dealing with paper and paper clips in their offices and there seems no reason why a good deal of time should
not also be spent with paper and paper clips on experimental padi plots.
No figures of maximum possible yield per acre by this system are yet available but some figures are available that will indicate the potentialities. The variety to which the figures apply is Padi Serin of which seed was supplied by the Agricultural Assistant at Tarat. The figures were obtained on poor soil in Bedil House Garden. The only deter-mination of 1,000 grain weight that has yet been possible was made on the seed used this year and this gave a weight of 22 grams; this figure is low and it is probable that it will be exceeded in this year's harvest. Many of the ears this year possess 200 grains or more and one has been recently counted containing 273 grains. The dry padis do not tiller very freely and 3 or at most 4 tillers per plant does seem to be the maximum of which the variety is capable under the conditions in Bedil House Garden; however, if ten seeds are planted per hole, observa-tions this year suggest that it should be possible to regularly get at least 20 ears per hole. On the basis of a 1,000 grain weight of 22 grams, 200 grains per ear and 20 ears per hole, the yield works out at approximately 0.2 lbs. of padi per hole. It is really quite wrong to calculate a yield per acre from the provisional figures obtained in these small scale experiments but it is interesting to do so and does at any rate indicate the possibilities of the system. On the basis of 0.2 lbs. padi per hole, 3 foot rows and holes 1 foot apart in the rows, the yield per acre would work out at approximately 22 piculs per acre (or say 550 gantangs per acre reckoning twenty-five gantangs to the picul). It is emphasised that these small scale experimental results are being obtained on poor exhausted land that in the ordinary way would not support a crop of padi at all—the prospects of further improvements in yields being obtained are good. The spacing of 3 foot by 1 foot is of course a wide one compared with normal padi farming practice where about 1 foot by 1 foot spacing between hills is normal. A closer spacing of the holes than 3 foot by 1 foot would probably be practicable and might not adversely affect the yield per hole up to a point: closer spacing might therefore lead to much higher yields per acre. How-ever there are large areas of exhausted or even derelict land suitable for the system available in Sarawak and ease of working may prove to be the most important consideration affecting the spacing of the holes; it may well be better at present to concentrate on increasing yields per hole than yields per acre.
Enough has now been said to show that intensified dry padi cultivation does possess considerable poten-tialities for development in Sarawak and that every-one can play their part in the development—not in the swamps which many people find so unpleasant and unhealthy, but on the far pleasanter and healthier undulating land. Sarawak often hears of the far higher crop yields obtained on her neigh-bours' richer soils; for once, thanks to the exceptionally high rainfall, Sarawak may well be able to lead her neighbours and possibly even establish a unique intensive system of padi farming. In conclusion it must be emphasised that although this intensive dry padi farming can undoubtedly in good years make major contributions to Sarawak's padi supplies and even yield an exportable surplus, intensive wet padi cultivation must still provide the foundation of our subsistence supplies. If by any
36
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, FEBRUARY 27, 1953.
chance there was a major drop in world rice prices (though at present this seems most unlikely), then intensified dry padi cultivation might of course again become uneconomic as it is dependent on expensive imported fertalisers.
Conclusion.
Sarawak Turf Club.
SPRING MEETING, 1953.
31st January and 7th February.
Race 1. The Sabah Handicap.
Ponies Division III. 4 furlongs.
Messrs. C. E. Sandbach & Ong Kee Hui's 1. Bujang Samsu	9.3	Samsudin
2.	Bintang Aru	9.8 (9.1) Liben
3.	Bujang Brunei	9.1	Sebi
4.	Tanjong Hijau	10.0 (9.7) Putit I
Also ran :—Oriental 10.6 (9.13) Mat I, Brisbane River 10.4 Tau En, Kudat Prince 9.10 Lohor, Silver Star 8.6 (8.8) Ek Pah, Lintang Lad 8.5 (8.0) Bujang, Sunny Boy 7.7 (7.0) Mat II.
Distances: 1 length, length, 2 lengths.
Time: 1 minute 9 2/5 seconds. Tote: $2.20.
Brisbane River was first to show up but was soon overtaken by Bintang Aru and Bujang Samsu. Bintang Aru led a closely bunched field down the straight but was caught by Bujang Samsu a furlong out, these two ponies running locked together for some yards before the latter drew away. An objection lodged by the jockey of Bintang Aru against Bujang Samsu for interference was over ruled.
Race 2. The J. B. Archer Memorial Handicap.
Ponies Division II. 5 furlongs.
Mr. Phillip Soh Fu’s
1.	Smoke Screen	8.4	Tau En
2.	Suiyuan	8.13	(8.6)	Eddie
3. Victory Parade	8.9	Samsudin
4.	Hot Spur II	8.3	(7.13) Liben
Also ran:—Cabaret 8.8 Ek Pah, Miss Kudat 8,5 (7.12) Mat II.
Distances: 2 lengths, length, 2 lengths.
Time: 1 minute 26 seconds. Tote : $2.50.
Smoke Screen led all the way from Victory Parade and Miss Kudat with Suiyuan lying handy. Suiyuan put in a good late run to gain second place.
Race 3. The Flying Fox Handicap Ponies Division I. 5 furlongs.
Mr. Phillip Soh Fu's
1.	Happy Ending	7.7	Seblie
2.	Lucky Boy	11.5	(10.12)	Joon Loi
3.	Chienlimah	9.1	Matnor
4.	Kaswari	8.1	(7.8)	Manan
5.	Gobi	8.9	Samsudin
Distances: 3 lengths, 2 lengths, 2 lengths.
Time: 1 minute 23 seconds. Tote: $4.90.
Chienlimah got nicely away but was overtaken by Lucky Boy after half a furlong and the rest of the field closed up at the 3 furlongs. Happy Ending took the lead in the straight and went on for an easy win.
Race 4. The Chai Chiang Handicap.
Horses Division II. 5 furlongs.
"Ecko" Stable's
1.	Bunga Singapura 8.4	Tau En
2.	Knight Gallant	9.0	Samsudin
3. Remember Me	8.10	Haie
4.	Atlantas	8.10	Matnor
Also ran: —Kanda 8.12 Ek Pah, Brightstar Minstrel 8.10 (8.5) Mat I, Musketeer 8.4 Wan Nordin.
Distances: 3 lengths, 1 lengths, length.
Time: 1 minute 7 2/5 seconds. Tote : $3.50.
Bunga Singapura led from Knight Gallant all the way. Kanda lay third until the straight where she was overtaken by Atlantas but Remember Me finished strongly to overhaul both of them for third place.
Race 5. The Spring Handicap.
Horses Division I. 5 furlongs.
Mr. Ong Soo Keng's
1.	Blondie	8.2	Tau En
2.	Alton	8.7	Matnor
3.	Craughan	8.0	Lundu
4.	Cherith	11.1	Ek Pah
Also ran:—Rosy Morn 8.9 (8.2) Marup, Gay Bird 8.3 (8.7) Sirat.
Distances: 2 lengths, 2 lengths, Distance. Time: 1 minute 6 seconds. Tote: $2.10,
Blondie led Alton by several lengths all the way. Alton was going well at the end and closed a large gap. Craughan pulled away from the remainder of the field to gain third place.
Race 6. The Sekama Handicap.
Ponies Division III. 5 furlongs.
Mr. Ong Kee Hui's
1.	Tanjong Hijau 8.8	Mat III
2.	Lintang Lad	8.0 (8.7)	Bujang
3.	Phoenix	8.11(9.4)	Mat I
4. Silver Star	8.0 (8.7)	Sintek
Also ran :—Tidak Apa 9.6 (9.13) Seblie, Brisbane River 9.1 (9.8) Omboy, Bintang Aru 8.12 (9.5) Liben, Oriental 8.12 (9.5) Putit, Bujang Samsu 8.10 (9.5) Sahari, Kudat Prince 8.6 (8.13) Mat II.
Distances: 5 lengths, 3 lengths, 1 length.
Time: 1 minute 27 seconds. Tote: $31.10.
This being an apprentices' race there was the usual trouble of riders being unable to control their mounts at the start and the race was, as expected, delayed for some time. When the field finally got away Tanjong Hijau was quickly out by himself and gained such a tremendous lead that it was obvious nothing could catch him. Lintang Lad and Phoenix led the rest of the field and the order remained the same throughout the race.
Race 7. The Brown Jack Stakes Ponies Division II. 1 mile.
Mr. Phillip Soh Fu's
1.	Happy	Ending	9.10	Seblie
2.	Mongol	8.1	Eddie
3.	Cabaret	9.5	Lundu
4.	Hot Spur II	8.6	(7.13) Liben
Also ran:—Bintang Selatan 9.10 (9.3) Joon Loi, Victory Parade 8.3 Samsudin.
Distances: 2 lengths, distance, 1 length.
Time: 2 minutes 23 seconds. Tote: $3.10.
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, FEBRUARY 27, 1953.
37
When the field settled down Mongol was the leader from Cabaret. Hot Spur came up into second plnce at the 5 and Happy Ending started to make up ground. Happy Ending took the lead at the 3 furlongs and went on for an easy win.
Race 8. The Ong Ewe Hai Memorial Trial.
Ponies Division I. 1 mile.
Mr. F. Wee Cho Bian’s
1.	Suiyuan	7.7 (7.1)	Manan
2.	Atom Boy	8.13 (8.6)	Mat III
3.	Lordship	7.7 (7.8)	Liben
4.	Kaswari	9.12 (9.5)	Omboy
5.	Chienlimah	10.7	Matnor
6.	Gobi	9.5 (8.12) Putit
Distances: 4 lengths, length, 3 lengths.
Time: 2 minutes 22 seconds. Tote: $7.80.
Suiyuan led all the way and won without being extended. Lordship lay second until a few yards from the post where he was checked by a muddy patch on the rails and Atom Boy overtook him for second place. The top weight, Chienlimah, had been lying 3rd until the straight but the going was too heavy for him.
Race 9. The Matang Handicap.
Horses Division III. 6 furlongs.
"Sarawak” Stables
1.	Stars Remember 10.0	Matnor
2.	Heretic	9.12	Lundu
3.	First Ra	9.11	Haie
4.	Ramu	9.8	Samsudin
Also ran:—Sunny Valley 10.0 Ek Pah, Aurora 8.7 Usop, Fortune's Favourite 8.0 Wan Noordin.
Distances: 3 lengths, 2 lengths, length.
Time: 1 miuute 24 seconds. Tote: $8.00.
Ramu led First Ra and Stars Remember to the 4 furlongs where Stars Remember took the lead and went on for an easy win without coming uuder the whip. Heretic made up ground in the straight to gain second place.
SECOND DAY.
Race 1. The Padungan Handicap.
Ponies Division III. 3 furlongs.
Mr. Ong Kee Hui’s
1.	Tanjong Hijau	9.2 (8.9)	Mat III
2.	Bintang Aru	9.5	Tau En
3.	Bujang Samsu	9.6	Samsudin
4.	Silver Star	7.10	(7.11)	Sintek
Also ran:—Brisbane River 9.6 (8.13) Mat I, Bujang Brunei 8.9 Sebi, Lintang Lad 7.7 (7.10), Bujang, Sunny Boy 7.7 (8.3) Asing.
Distances: 1 length, length, neck. Time: 49 4/5 seconds. Tote: $6.40.
Bujang Brunei and Silver Star delayed the start. Lintang Lad dashed into the lead but soon gave way to Tanjong Hijau and Bintang Aru. The field closed up in the straight but Tanjong Hijau hung on to his lead.
Race 2. The Siol Handicap.
Ponies Division 11. 4 furlongs.
Mr. Wee Kheng Chiang’s
1.	Victory Parade	8.2	Samsudin
2.	Hot Spur iI	7.9	(7.6)	Mat II
3.	Smoke Screen	9.0	Asing
4.	Suiyuan	9.6	(8.13)	Eddie
Also ran: — Miss Kudat 8.12 Lundu, Bintang Selatan 8.9 Tau En, Cabaret 7.12 (7.9) Bujang, Tidak Apa 7.10 (7.9) Seblie.
Distances: 1 lengths. length, 3 lengths.
Time: 1 minute 6 seconds. Tote: $7.00.
Hot Spur II was first to show up. Then Victory Parade, Smoke Screen and Suiyuan overtook him in that order. Hot Spur II fought back in the straight and came up into second place.
Race 3. The Untong Handicap.
Ponies Division I. 4 furlongs.
The Lim Sisters’
1.	Lucky Boy	11.7	(11.0)	Joon Loi
2.	Kaswari	7.7	(7.4)	Manan
3	Gobi	7.8	(7.10)	Asing
Happy Ending 7.12 (7.8) Seblie
5.	Chienlimah	8.6	(8.7)	Matnor
Distances: 3 lengths, 1 length, Dead Heat.
Time: l minute 4 seconds. Tote: $2.60.
Off to a straggly start the field was soon strung out. Lucky Boy established a comfortable lead and never looked like being caught at any stage of the race.
Race 4. The Shaw Brothers Cup. Horses Division III. 5 furlongs.
Mr. Ong Soo Keng's
1.	First Ra	8.6	Haie
2.	Heretic	8.13	Lundu
3.	Sunny Valley	8.3	(8.5)	Ek Pah
4.	Musketeer	8.7	Usop
Also ran:—Brightstar Minstrel 8.13 Samsudin, Ramu 8.0 Eddie.
Distances: length, length, 1 length.
Time: 1 minute 8 seconds. Tote: $3.40.
From the start it was Brightstar Minstrel from
First Ra but the latter went ahead at the 4 furlongs. Heretic led into the straight and First Ra dropped back. First Ra, brilliantly ridden by Haie came again in the last half furlong to beat Heretic on the post.
Race 5. The Penrissen Handicap.
Horses Division II. 1 mile.
Mr. Ong Soo Keng's
1.	Blondie	8.9	Tau En
2.	Atlantas	8.6	Matnor
3.	Kanda	8.5	Ek Pah
4.	Stars Remember	8.4	Haie
Distances: 2 lengths, 5 lengths, 2 lengths.
Time: 1 minute 53 seconds. Tote: $1.80.
The order was Blondie, Kanda, Atlantas, Stars Remember. As the field swept into the straight Atlantas came up into second place and the order remained the same for the rest of the race.
Race 6. The Sarikei Handicap.
Ponies Division III. 6 furlongs.
Messrs. Ong Guan Tee &
Chong Kia Huan's
1.	Silver Star	7.7	(7.11) Sintek
2.	Bujang Samsu	8.8	Samsudin
3.	Bintang Aru	8.7	Ek Pah
4.	Tanjong Hijau	7.12	Mat III
Also ran:—Brisbane River 8.5 (8.2) Mat I, Phoenix 8.4 Tau En, Oriental 8.2 Asing, Bujang
38
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, FEBRUARY 27, 1953.
Brunei 7.13 Sebi, Kudat Prince 7.10 (7.3) Mat II, Lintang Lad 7.7 (7.8) Bujang.
Distances: 1 length, length, 2 lengths.
Time : 1 minute 46 seconds. Tote: $19.80.
Race 7. The Kuala Belait Cup.
Ponies Division II. 6 furlongs.
Mr. Wee Kheng Chiang’s
1. Victory	Parade	8.7	Mat III
2.	Mongol	8.4	Eddie
3.	Cabaret	8.0	(8.2)	Bujang
4.	Lordship.	9.6	Tau En
Also ran:—Bintang Selatan 9.5 Usop, Smoke Screen 9.0 Asing, Tidak Apa 7.7 (7.4) Seblie.
Distances: Head, 1 length, 2 lengths.
Time: 1 minute 44 seconds. Tote: $6.20.
Race 8. The 1953 Sarawak St. Leger. Horses Division I. 1 mile.
“Ecko” Stables
1.	Bunga Singapura 8.0	Tau En
2.	Alton 8.2 (7.9) Eddie
3.	Knight Gallant	8.4	Samsudin
4.	Gay Bird	9.11	Ek Pah
5.	Craughan	9.6	Lundu
Distances: length, 3 lengths. 2 lengths.
Time: 3 minutes 25 seconds. Tote : $3.40.
Race 9. The Ong Ewe Hai Memorial Cup.
Ponies Division I. 9 furlongs.
Mr. Phillip Soh Fu’s
1.	Happy Ending	8.1 (7.10)	Seblie
2.	Kaswari	8.0 (7.9)	Manan
3.	Chienlimah	8.12	Matnor
4.	Atom Boy	7.13	Asing
Distances: 5 lengths, 2 lengths, 3 lengths.
Time: 2 minutes 38 seconds. Tote: $3.30.
First time past the stand the field was closely bunched. At the 6 furlongs Happy Ending and Kaswari racing neck and neck made a break of a furlong from Chienlimah and Atom Boy. Happy Ending took the lead in the straight and went on for the easiest win of the day. Chienlimah and Atom Boy made up ground at the end but it was too late.
Island Club, Sibu.
Bowling Averages for January, 1953.
No. of Aver- Handi-
Name.	Rolls.	age.	cap.
J. J. Howard	4	196	-	24
J. G. C. Kirby-Turner	9	195	-	22
A. Webb 14	191	-	16
D. Dickerson	4	187	-	10
D. F. Henderson	18	177	+ 4
Dr. D. Niblett	12	174	+ 9
G. Lloyd Thomas	6	172	+	12
G. H. Rackham	16	169	+	16
L. R. Poole	4	161	+	28
L. E. Macey	5	157	+	34
D. Mansfield	15	157	+	34
D. C. White	7	151	+	43
A. L Proctor	8	151	+	43
W. H. Dickie	16	148	+	48
Miss B. A Pargeter	5	140	+	60
Mrs. D. Niblett	14	134	+	69
Mrs.W. H. Dickie 4 125 + 82
Mrs. L. Macey	14	113	+100
Monthly Bowling Competition for
January, 1953.
Name.	Score.	Handi-cap.	Total.
W. Dickie	362	+	48	410
D. Mansfield	373	+	34	407
Mrs. Niblett	321	+	69	390
L. Macey	322	+	34	356
A. Webb	364	-	16	348
Mrs. Macey	242	+ 100 342
Dr. Niblett	315	+	9	324
Mrs. Dickie	230	+	82	310
Rolled on Wednesday 4.2.53
The Cup was won by W. H. Dickie Esq.
Sale of Property.
The Custodian of Enemy Property, Sarawak, intends to offer for sale by auction or tender valu-able properties including one shophouse without vacant possession in Padungan, Kuching; shop-house lots, Padungan; industrial sites, Padungan; agricultural lands, Simanggang Road; rubber gardens and estates in the First Division including the Samarahan Rubber Estate.
Interested persons should write to the Custodian of Enemy Property, Kuching, indicating the nature of the property in which they are interested when full particulars will be forwarded.
The accounts relating to the workings of the rubber gardens and estates are available for inspection in Kuching on payment of a fee of $100.
No tender should be submitted except on the official form supplied by the Custodian of Enemy Property and each tender must comply with the conditions of tender which will be supplied on request.
D. L. LEACH, Custodian of Enemy Property.
Notice.
NOTICE IS HEREBY GIVEN that we, the undersigned, Chiew Lik Chui, Yong Ung Chey, Wong Lik Tung alias Wong Ming Tung, Wong Tiing Ming and Lee Kie Bek all of Sibu, co-partners of Thai Lai Company, No. 2, Old Street, Sibu, do hereby declare that we have, on the 12th day of February, 1953, sold and transferred all our shares and interests in the above company to our only remaining co-partner, Kiu Tung Siong (S.N. R.I.C. No. S. 207847) of Sibu.
As from 12th day of February, 1953, Kiu Tung Siong will be the sole owner of the said Chop Thai Lai and all debts due to and owing by the said Thai Lai Company will be received and paid by the con-tinuing partner, Kiu Tung Siong, who will continue to carry on business on his own account, i.e. he shall SOLELY enjoy profits that may accrue and be res-ponsible for losses that may incur after the 12th day of February, 1953.
Retiring partners: (1) Chiew Lik Chui
(2)	Yong Ung Chey
(3)	Wong Lik Tung alias Wong Ming Tung
(4)	Wong Tiing Ming
(5)	Lee Kie Bek
Continuing partner : Kiu Tung Siong
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, FEBRUARY 27, 1953.
39
Kuching Market Price List.
20th January to 20th February, 1953.
RICE—(per gantang)
Local, White milling	... ... ...	$2.80
Govt. Siam, White	... ... ...	2.52
,, Rangoon ... ... ...	2.52
Broken ... ... ...	2.16
,, Pulut ... ... ...	2.40
Local Milled Whole	... ... ...	2.28
SUGAR—(per kati)
Java, white (Govt.) Refined ...	...	.38
Brown	...	...	...	—
Nipah Sugar	...	...	...	.20
SALT—(per kati)
Coarse ...	...	...	...	.10
Fine ...	...	... ... .15
FLOUR AND BREAD—
Wheat Flour, per kati	...	...	.40
Bread per loaf ...	...	...	.10
MILK—(per tin)
Milkmaid	...	...	...	.70
Golden Wheel	...	...	...	.60
EGGS—(each)
Duck, fresh	...	...	...	.20
,, salted	...	...	...	.18
Fowl	...	...	...	.20
EDIBLE FATS—(per kati)
Coconut Oil	...	...	...	.75
Pork Fat No. 1	...	...	...	1.60
,, ,, ,, 2	...	...	...	1.20
PORK—(per kati)
Lean No. 1	...	...	...	3.30
Lean with	fat ,, 2	...	...	...	1.60
BEEF AND OTHER ME ATS—(per kati)
Mutton (Australian) ... ... ...	2.80
Beef, steak	...	... ... 3.09
Beef, curry meat	... ... ...	1.60
Buffalo No. 1	... ... ...	2.98
curry Meat	... ... ...	1.58
Kambing (daging)	... ... ...	3.00
POULTRY—(per kati)
Capons ... ... ... 2.98
Duck ... ... ...	2.72
Fowl. Chinese breed ... ... ... 2.82
Fowl, Dayak	breed	... ... ...	2.26
FISH—(per kati)
Fresh fish	No.	1	...	...	...	1.90
,,	,,	2	...	...	...	1.29
,,	3	...	...	...	.50
Prawns	1	...	...	...	1.72
,, 2	...	...	...	1.24
Crab	,,	1	...	...	...	1.20
2	...	... ...	.80
Salted fish ,, 1 ... ... ... 2.40
2	...	...	...	1.20
,, ,, ,, 3	...	...	... .70
,,	,, roe ...	...	...	2.20
VEGETABLES—(per kati)
Bangkuang (Yam beans) ... ... $.15
Bayam	...	...	...	.37
Bean Sprouts	...	...	...	.30
Cabbage Imported ... ... ... .66
Changkok Manis	...	...	...	.37
Daun Bawang	...	...	...	1.20
Ensahi Puteh	...	...	...	.58
,, Bunga	...	...	...	.45
French beans	...	...	...	.98
Garlic, fresh	...	...	...	.50
Kachang panjang	...	...	...	.43
Kangkong	...	...	...	.37
Keladi (China)	...	...	...	.36
Ketola	...	...	...	.44
Kribang	...	...	...	.15
Kundor	...	...	...	.15
Labu	...	...	...	.10
Ladies Fingers	...	...	...	.60
Letuce (per tie)	...	...	...	.10
Lobak (Chinese radish)	...	...	.50
Lobak, salted, imported	...	...	.70
Onions, Bombay	...	...	...	.85
Onions, small	...	...	...	.77
Potatoes, Bengal	...	...	...	.31
Pria (Bitter Gourd)	...	...	...	.67
Bamboo shoots, salted	...	...	.40
Trong (Brinjals)	...	...	...	.38
Yams	...	...	...	.20
Cucumber (timun)	...	...	...	.29
Ginger	...	...	...	.56
Chillies (red)	...	...	...	2.05
(green) ... ... ... 1.01
Sauerkraut, imported	...	...	.90
,, local ... ... ... .58
Tamarind ... ... ... .44
Tomatoes, fresh ... ... ... 1.04
TEA—
Tea, Lipton per lb.	...	... 3.70
Chinese per packet	...	...	.80
COFFEE—(per kati)
Raw, Java No. 1	...	...	...	2.60
Java No. 2	...	...	...	2.20
FRUIT—
Pisang Umbun	...	per kati	...	.15
Pisang Tandok	...	each .10 to .20
Pineapples	...	per kati	...	.12
Papayas ... ,, ... .15
SUNDRIES—
Bean Curd	...	per 6 square piece ...	.10
,, Cake (white)	...	per piece	...	.15
(yellow) ... ,, ... .25
Kerosene Oil	...	per tin	...	5.90
,,	...	per bottle	...	.25
Charcoal	...	per pkl.	...	8.46
,, semi-converted ...	...	5.46
Sauce (kitchup)	...	bot. (1) $1.00,(2).70,	(3) .50
Blachan	...	per kati	...	.70
Dried prawn	... ,,	...	8.10
Coconut, fresh	...	each	...	.20
Rako Wood	...	per panchang ... 28.12
Gembong, salted, imported per kati	...	.60
Sepat ,,	,,	...	1.02
Cigarettes: Players ...	... 3 sticks for	...	.12
Craven “A"	...	3	,,	...	.12
Capstan ...	...	3	,,	...	.11
Rough Rider	... 4 ,,	...	.10
State Express ... 1 stick for	...	.05
v
ADVERTISEMENTS.
[Feb. 27, 1953.]
[6-6]
[3-2]