 Vol. LXXIX
No. 1150
PRICE
KUCHING, Thursday, December 31st, 1953
50 CENTS
Contents
Page.
In Memoriam—M.V. Heartsease ... ... ... 217
His Excellency the Governor's Address to the Council
Negri	...	...	... ...	217
Notes and Comments	...	224
Comings and Goings	...	... ... 225
Queen and Commonwealth	... ... ... 225
M.V. Heartsease ... ... ... 226
Mildred Hope Paley	... ... ... 226
What's in a Name?	... ... ... 227
Japanese Journey	... ... ...	228
Simanggang Schools Teach One Another ... ... 229
Correspondence	...	... ... 229
Hahn on Brooke ... ... ... 229
Choric Stanzas ...	... ... 230
Excerpts from the Reports of Administrative Officers for the Third Quarter, 1953 ...	...	... 230
The Good Old Days ...	... ... 240
Random Jottings	...	... ... 241
A Gourmet's Dream	... ... ...	241
Crossword Puzzle No. 2	... ... ... 242
Sarawak Club:—
Bowls for November, 1953 ...	...	... 242
Bowls Competition for November, 1953 ... ...	242
Golf—Scotland v. The Rest	...	... 242
Golf—Ladies Foursomes (Stroke) Competition ... 243
Golf—December Stableford Competition (Men) ... 243
Kuching Market Price List ... ...	... 243
The Sarawak Gazette
THURSDAY, DECEMBER 31st, 1953
In Memoriam
M. V. Heartsease
12th December, 1953
"I will never believe again the sea was ever Ioved by anyone whose life was married to it. It is the creation of Omnipotence, which is not of human kind and understandable, and so the springs of its behaviour are hidden. The sea does not assume its royal blue to please you. Its brute and dark desolation is not raised to overwhelm you: you dis-appear then because you happen to be there.....
What else may we expect from it, the nameless thing, new-born with each dawn, but as old as the night?” H. M. Tomlinson, The Sea and the Jungle.
His Excellency the Governor’s Address to Council Negri
The following is the full text of the address delivered by His Excellency the Governor to the Council Negri at the opening of the Budget Session on Tuesday, 1st December, 1953
The Council Negri meets on this occasion to consider the Budget for 1954 and it is usual for me to give you some account of the political and financial state of the country and the work of the Departments of Govern-ment during the year. There is no doubt that for all of us in Sarawak, 1953 will be remembered as Coro-nation Year. The floods of January, the drought of August, the "sudden death” of pepper, the headlong fall in rubber prices—these have been our lot during the year, but in time they will be forgotten or overshadowed by the memory of those few happy days when we all celebrated the Coronation of Her Majesty the Queen with one heart and voice. A great deal of hard work was done by Organising Committees and with their energetic help our main purpose that the children of this country should enjoy themselves and have some-thing to remember with pleasure and excitement in the years to come was, I think, achieved. I believe, too, that the underlying message of unity, faith and service which the Coronation brought to this country and to each one of us did not pass unheeded. Mr. President, the Representatives of this Council, who were privileged to attend the Coronation in Westminster Abbey, returned to us. I know, feeling that they had shared a deeply-moving experience with that great representative gathering and I know that they represented this Council and this country most worthily—we could not have sent to the mother country better ambassadors and delegates.
Politically the country has had a peaceful year and steady if unspectacular progress has been made in many directions. Careful scrutiny of the Estimates will show that we are not relaxing our vigilance in any way. We know that not only are we surrounded by countries which are deeply infected by the disease of communism but also we ourselves show traces of infection in a vital and tender part of our anatomy. The schools are still our main anxiety. We know from the number of children leaving these peaceful shores for China and from the amount of communist literature directed towards our youth that the number of those interested in or active in the propagation of this creed has not diminished. Better schools, better supervised: healthy literature and better information: the teaching of English: the early settlement of squatters and land problems in general: the development of co-operation and local government: these are the creative weapons of attack which we are using against communism. And our defence gains in strength. In my speech a year ago, I said that it was our intention to increase the Constabulary by as much as one-third and I asked your assistance in finding the necessary recruits. So excellent has been the response that all vacancies have been filled with recruits of a very satisfactory
218
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, DECEMBER 31, 1953
quality. We have now an additional 400 rank and file with, of course, the necessary and consequential increases in Inspectors and Officers. I will deal, however, in greater detail with the Constabulary later in my speech.
I spoke at some length last year on the subject of constitutional advance and I put before you the broad outlines of a plan which I and my advisers considered might be acceptable to the people of this country. I asked that the fullest discussion should take place at all levels. Nearly 20,000 pamphlets have been issued in four languages on this subject and I trust that they have been widely distributed and read. The results of meetings so far held in the District and Divisional Councils have not all been studied as yet, but I hope in the near future to be able to gauge the public reaction to the proposals and will then issue to Residents amended proposals for the consideration of Divisional Councils.
The expansion and development of local government has shown steady progress during the year. As you are aware we do not intend to create any new Local Autho-rity whose jurisdiction is confined to one race. Our experience at Mukah, Limbang and Sibu has shown that the Mixed Local Authority embracing all races is a far more effective and satisfactory body. The formation of these full Local Authorities is, however, a slow process requiring careful and tactful preparation in order to acquaint people of every race with the principles of Local Government and convince them of the advantages thereof. During 1953 a great deal of work of this care-ful preparatory nature has been done and it is very satisfactory to know that the number of our Mixed Local Authorities will shortly be increasd from 4 to 7 by the addition of the Lawas District and the Lundu District, both of which will include all races living with-in the boundaries of the Districts, and the Kalaka Sea-Dayak and Malay Local Authorities which will combine with the Chinese Community to become the Kalaka Local Authority.
By the end of this year the Kuching Municipal Council will have completed its first year's work under its own estimates. While full financial control was vested in the Council in January this year, staff difficulties and lack of equipment necessitated much of the road maintenance work being done by the Public Works Department on a contract basis. As the Council acquired equipment—lorries and so forth—it was able to take over more and more of the actual work of the Municipality and by September a full-time Engineer was seconded from Central Government Staff and the Council was in full control
The heavy demands made on the 7th mile quarry brought about a shortage of stone which in turn largely precluded the Council from carrying out any big road construction programme. However, since July, resur-facing of Satok Road has been completed and extended to the Suspension Bridge and the motor roads in the museum grounds have been metalled, drained and sur-faced. Rock Road has been patched in readiness for realignment in 1954, and general maintenance of all roads has been carried on.
The Council has very wisely concentratcd on plan-ning, building up equipment, and training its staff, the results of which will be seen during the coming year. Two senior members of the staff have been sent abroad for training, one to Australia for a course in general administration and the other to Singapore for training in fire prevention. The latter officer has now taken over the Kuching Fire Brigade which is under a strict course of training and plans are already in hand for training members of the Public Service Corps, Boy Scouts, cinema attendants, and othcrs, in fire prevention.
Plans and specifications are completed for the erection of the first part of a new central Fire Station which will be sited in the Padungan area, and a new up-to-date fire engine has been ordered and is due to arrive by the end of the year.
After a detailed survey lasting many months, the Council is adopting a new policy in relation to the con-duct of its public markets in which many abuses have been taking root over the past few years. Certain struc-tural alterations have been put in hand which will benefit stall-holders and public alike, and it is hoped that this will result in cheaper food for the public and a more equitable return for the operators.
The important question of overcrowding has been exercising the Council for some time and the Council has accepted responsibility for initiating a housing scheme for Kuching, and steps have already been taken to seek expert advice from Singapore.
Since the Emergency in August, 1952, you have voted large sums of money for the improvement of the Constabulary. New methods and facilities for the training of recruits have been introduced at the Train-ing School in Kuching and with assistance from the Federation Police eight of our Inspectors have received a course of training in Malaya and six more are still there under training. The new barracks at Bukit Siol have been in use for some months and 3 platoons of the Field Force have been raised and are in training, the first of which will be leaving the camp as a fully trained force this month. Some of our Gazetted Officers, Inspectors and N.C.O's have also received a special course of jungle training in Malaya.
An Assistant Commissioner has been appointed to take charge of the Special Branch, which will be strengthened numerically, and by the introduction of fully trained personnel. This branch of the force is concerned with the collection and assessment of information—in fact, it constitutes the ears of the force.
Badrudin Barracks are in the course of conversion to provide accommodation for the Constabulary Head-quarters which will be moved from the other side of the river. New Police buildings at Miri, Sarikei, Bau, Serian and other places are due for early erection.
As you will see in the Estimates, the Gazetted Officers’ establishment has been increased to 38 and there has been a substantial increase in the Inspector-ate. The general purpose of these proposals is to provide a smaller but better officered and, therefore, more efficient Police Force. Improved transport and radio equipment has also been provided or is on order.
As you are aware the Force known as the Sarawak Rangers was formed and established by law during the course of this year. Our men who volunteered for service as trackers in the Federation now join the Sara-wak Rangers and after training are used either as com-batant platoons attached to British Regiments or as trackers. The Force continues to earn high praise from Commanding Officers in Malaya and we can well be proud of this contribution to Malaya's great and successful struggle against communism. 372 Sarawak Rangers are now serving in the Federation.
During the course of the year a Sarawak tracker received the George Medal for conspicuous bravery in action and our men have received four Commander-in-Chief certificates for outstanding work. I cannot obtain from the Federation an accurate figure of the number of bandits killed by our men during the time they have served with the Army in Malaya, but I am told that it is about 50, which is a very satisfactory figure. These tough well-trained fighters provide a very welcome and stalwart addition to the defences of Sarawak.
I regret to have to inform you that three of our men were killed in action during the course of the year.
There is another body which receives little publicity but is doing good unobtrusive work and is undoubtedly a very valuable factor in the defence and security of Sarawak, and that is the Public Service Corps. This body was established on a permanent basis in August, 1952, and at present its operations are confined to
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, DECEMBER 31, 1953
219
Kuching Municipality and the rural area of the Kuching and Serian Districts, and its main activities are first aid, fire fighting and liaison. The First Aid Branch has six posts established in the Kuching Municipal area. These posts are manned by personnel who have had a thorough grounding in first aid from qualified doctors.
The Fire Fighting Branch is intended to assist the Municipal Fire Brigade, and equipment to the value of $4,000 has been ordered and will be paid for from the Public Service Corps’ own funds.
The Liaison Branch has been formed to provide the people in rural areas with a rapid and safe means of communicating intelligence to Government directly or indirectly. Its members also act as interpreters to the police or administration and establish liaison between the police and the public. There are thirteen import-ant areas in the Kuching and Serian Districts where liaison officers of the Corps are organised and available.
The Public Service Corps receives encouragement and guidance from the Resident and the Secretary for Chinese Affairs, and it is hoped that in time it will be possible to extend its scope to other heavily populated areas in the country. There are over 200 members of the Corps who are keen and active, but they do need encouragement not only from Government but also, and more important, from the people whose interests they serve.
In this review of the year’s work, I would like to introduce a personal word of thanks to the senior and junior staff of Government for their loyalty and hard work. It is not always appreciated how much more complicated and heavy the work of Government has become. I think the present staff have very worthily upheld the high standards of integrity and public service handed down to them by their predeces-sors.
The Whitley Councils, to which I referred at length in my address last December, have now been at work for over a year. Their usefulness has been amply proved by the large volume of business which they have successfully completed. I am confident that they will continue to prove their worth in maintaining un-impaired the happy and amicable relations which exist between Government and its officers.
I will now refer to those important financial matters which will occupy most of your time at this Budget session.
This year has been in some ways a turning point in our financial and economic affairs. The period of high prices has come to an end and the acute shortage of labour and imported materials has eased noticeably. Up to the end of 1952 Government was accumulating large revenue surpluses, but was finding it difficult to get urgent and important projects carried out because of the shortage of skilled pcrsonnel, materials and labour. This year our surplus of revenue over expen-diture is much less but we have been more successful in getting work done; we expect that 1954 will follow the pattern of 1953.
The revenue this year promises to exceed the estimate by about 4 million dollars. This excess is mainly the result of unexpectedly large receipts from export duty on an exceptional pepper crop. The free balance at the end of 1953 is estimated at 57 million dollars. From this balance you will be asked to approve the transfer of 12 million dollars, the same amount as last year, to the Development Fund, to leave a free balance of 45 million dollars with which to start the year 1954. You will observe how the free balance is shrinking through these large transfers to the Development Fund which must be made if we are to carry out our Development Plan. I wish the free balance could have been larger, bccause, as I explained at some length in my Budget address last year, it is far from being sufficient to finance our Development Plan and provide a reserve for bad times.
For the second year in succession the prospects are that the prices of our staple export products will be less remunerative and that, in consequence of the decreased buying power of the general public, dutiable imports will decrease. We expect, as a result, that in 1954 the revenue from Customs and Excise will fall by 1 million dollars, to 17 million dollars. It is a matter for congratulation, therefore, that in spite of these adverse revenue prospects we are able to present a balanced Budget without proposing any increases in taxation.
The estimates provide for a revenue of $34,835,750 and an expenditure of $34,452,757 to give a surplus of $382,993 for the year. Over $8 millions of the expenditure is of a capital nature, including $5 millions for major projects of a development character outside the Development Plan, and over $2 millions for non-recurrent public works.
The process of completing our organisation by filling the numerous vacancies in the establishment has made considerable progress this year and the cost of running certain of the development schemes which have become well established has been transferred from the develop-ment budget to the ordinary budget. Mainly for these two reasons the provision for recurrent expenditure in the ordinary budget has had to be increased by over 2 million dollars to over 26 million dollars.
Government is satisfied that this expenditure is necessary and desirable, but it must be recognised that at the present level of revenue our recurrent expen-diture is rapidly approaching the safe limit. It cannot increase further, unless revenue also increases, except by undesirably reducing the funds available for develop-ment schemes, and Head of Departments are being warned that only in most exceptional circumstances will supplementary provision for recurrent services be permitted in 1954.
Turning, now, to the Development Budget, it will be seen from the estimates that by the end of 1953 we shall have spent about 26 million dollars on a large variety of schemes and projects. Included in that total is nearly 11 million dollars for some 50 completed items. This is no mean accomplishment in the difficult circumstances that have prevailed and we should bear it in mind when we complain about the slow progress that is being made with some of the larger and more difficult schemes. The Director of Public Works and his staff should be given full credit for what has been achieved in trying circumstances. Our warm thanks are also due to the members of the Development Board, appointed by this Council, which includes representatives of all five Divisions, for the time and energy they have devoted to this important work.
On the advice of the Board, the Development Plan is now being revised and, after examination by the Board, will be presented to you for approval at, I hope, your next session in April, 1954.
The Development Estimates propose an ambitious programme of expenditure for next year, amounting in all to nearly 29 million dollars. Only if favourable circumstances prevail will it be possible to finish the work. Among the important items included are over $1 millions for roads, bridges and wharves, and nearly $2 millions for waterworks. Expenditure of this magnitude will effect great improvements which will benefit the whole community.
The gradual recession of trade from the high level of two years ago has continued, and in 1953 there has been a further contraction in both the value and volume of the Colony's trade, mainly on account of the fall in price of rubber. Up to the end of July the trade balance in general commodities (not including oil imported from Brunei and re-exported from Sara-wak), showed an apparent adverse balance of $6 millions. However, as the bulk of the pepper harvest is exported after July it is anticipated that this un-favourable trade balance will be reduced and will be turned into a slightly favourable balance by the end of
220
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, DECEMBER 31, 1953
the year. Imports have been at a higher level than in 1952 but this can, to a large extent, be accounted for by Government imports of material and equipment for various projects in hand.
The disappointing feature of this year's trade has been the continual fall in the world price of rubber, which, so far as Sarawak is concerned, has resulted in the exports of the commodity being 20% less than in 1952. If the low level to which the price has lately fallen continues, a further drop in production can be expected.
Exports of pepper, mainly black, have exceeded all expectations and it is anticipated they will reach an all-time record of 7,500 tons.
Customs and Excise revenue up to the end of September amounted to $18 millions, and it now appears that the final figure for the year will be approximately $21 millions, giving a surplus of $2 millions over that estimated for the year. This surplus is accounted for by a surprisingly high level of imports having been maintained and a larger pepper harvest than was anticipated.
Work is in progress in building additional godowns and a new Customs office at Sibu; a new Customs inspection godown at Kuching will shortly be com-pleted, and plans are also being prepared for improving the godown and Customs office accommodation at Miri.
A Deputy Director of Agriculture was appointed and arrived in June, and a Rubber Regulation Officer arrived in August. These two appointments should relieve the Director of Agriculture of much routine work which has in the past prevented him from touring the country as much as he would have liked or is desirable. The padi harvest in 1953 was above average and in some areas exceptionally heavy. The stock position of rice at present is adequate, and there is a tendency for prices in producing countries to decline, but Sarawak is nowhere near reaching self-sufficiency in rice at the present time. A larger acreage was put down to padi in 1953 and first reports show that this has been maintained for the next harvest. There still remains an urgent necessity for every effort to be made to make the country self-supporting in foodstuffs, and the Government has continued its pro-paganda among the rural communities to plant padi and alternative foodstuffs. Some damage to early planted swamp padi in the coastal districts of the 1st Division may have taken place due to exceptionally prolonged dry weather, but the hill farmers should have obtained very satisfactory burns this year.
Interest in pepper-growing still remains very keen and new planting is taking place on a considerable scale. Exports to the end of September were 63% higher than for the whole of 1952. In the circum-stances prices have been maintained remarkably well.
The Department of Agriculture was fortunate in securing the services of a plant pathologist to study the serious "sudden death" disease of pepper, and while further research is still required, it seems clear from his preliminary observations that the spread of this disease might be reduced by the adoption of measures to prevent soil wash and erosion. Such measures have, of course, long been advocated by the Department of Agriculture from the point of view of general soil conservation.
With prices of rubber lower than they have been for many years, interest in the crop has declined and planting of new gardens is not taking place on any appreciable scale. Adequate supplies of kernel seed and budded rubber are available for supply to planters.
A most important development in the rubber field has been the purchase by Government of the Sama-rahan Estate, a former Japanese-owned property which the Rubber Fund Committee is now developing with the help of the Managing Agents as a model demon-stration estate and source of supply of budded stump planting material. It is estimated that this estate will be capable of producing half a million budded stumps
annually, and in the process of producing these, rehabilitation of the estate itself will be undertaken.
The sago industry is also going through a difficult period. A great many of the gardens in the Third Division were seriously over-cut during the time when the price was high, and it will take some years for them to recover. During the course of the year there have been some differences of opinion expressed regarding the quality required before export of the flour is allowed. Government is sure that the best interests of the trade will be served by a rigid main-tenance of a high quality of export flour. The Sago Flour Advisory Committee is at present undertaking a full investigation into the difficulties which this trade is undergoing.
A Veterinary Officer has been appointed and is at present gaining experience with the Department of Veterinary Services in Malaya. He is a fully qualified officer of considerable experience but as he had no previous service in this part of the world it was decided that he should serve a short period in Malaya to gain useful local experience before coming to Sarawak. A sudden outbreak of disease among buffaloes in the Mukah district of the Third Division has shown how urgently his services are required. The Government stock of middle white pigs and imported breeds of cattle have been increased. A notable arrival is the Herefold bull "Rufus”, a gift of the Australian Govern-ment.
Mr. D. L. Leach, Director of Lands and Surveys, retired in June of this year after 23 years of useful service to Sarawak, and Mr. F. R. K. Kitto has been appointed to succeed him. The Department is still hampered by a shortage of trained staff—efforts are being made to obtain the more vital technical assistance from Malaya and Hong Kong. Applications for land are on the increase, and the delay in obtaining the necessary survey of an area before a title can be issued grows in proportion. You will notice in the Estimates that Government considers that this situation must be tackled in this year's Estimates by a very considerable increase in the strength of the Department, including the appointment of a Deputy Director. There in no doubt that considerable dissatisfaction is felt in some Divisions where approval of an application takes a matter of years. lf your Council approves the necessary provision, it is hoped that within the next five years the Department will be up-to-date with its applications.
An important operation is in progress over an area of 80 square miles on the coast between the Sadong and Samarahan. Besides the usual work of settlement of rights to land, land utilisation plans are being pro-duced covering the whole area. These plans will be of considerable value in the demarcating of unoccupied land for settlement of squatters and others. When the unit finishes in this area it will move to the Simanggang Road and commence similar work in the area between the 15th and 32nd Mile.
Over 2,000 acres of land situated at Bau, Samarahan and on the Matang and Simanggang Road have been acquired from the Custodian of Enemy Property, and it is intended to utilise some of this land for the resettlement of squatters.
The air photo section is maintaining good progress in the preparation of maps of the 4th and 5th Divisions.
The Geological Survey Department continues the work of providing this country with a map of mineral occurrences and general geology. This work will, of course, take some years to complete and though not spectacular is of the greatest importance to the future. A map of the Bau area has been completed and information is being prepared for publication. The Department has continued to render assistance to the public and to other Government Departments by its advice on many problems involving knowledge of geographical conditions, and particularly with regard to soils, building foundations, water works and road-making material.
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE DECEMBER 31, 1953
221
The Forest Department's present main task of the selection and settlement of an adequate permanent forest estate still makes good progress, and during the year the area of Forest Reserves and Protected Forests will have been increased by nearly 25% to a total of 9,349 square miles, and a further 700 square miles are in process of constitution. The headwaters of the Batang Baleh, where the country was in grave danger of denudation, have now been surrounded by a broad belt of Protected Forest, covering nearly 3,500 square miles; and the protection of the headwaters of the coastal belt from the Oya to Bintulu is also nearing completion.
Local demand for timber has remained low, but the quantity of timber exported has maintained a higher level than in previous years, in spite of a depression in the United Kingdom hardwood market during the second half of the present year. The figure of total exports for 1952 was overtaken in August, and the whole year 1953 should see the shipment of not less than 180,000 tons, in terms of round timber, as com-pared with approximately 128,000 tons in 1952. It is, however, very possible that we are now nearing a peak of production from forests that are workable with our present system of communications, and that future exports may depend much less on problems of supply than on market fluctuations overseas. There has already been a noticeable stiffening in the quality standards demanded by some of our leading customers, and it is important that the possibilities of further markets should be explored so that we may have our eggs in as many baskets as possible. During the year we have sold timber to ten different countries, but the United Kingdom and Hong Kong continue to take about 70% of our total shipments.
The Public Works Department has made good pro-gress on the very heavy building programme set out for them in 1953. There has been considerable im-provement and extension of the accommodation and training facilities provided for our larger Police force and for the new VHF telecommunications scheme which is included in the development programme. The new Government offices, the broadcasting studio and transmitting station in Kuching are well advanced, and the new Government offices in Sibu are also near-ing completion. The surfacing of the Kuching-Serian Road has been completed, and work on the Bau Road reconstruction is continuing. It may be advisable to restrict activities on this road during the forthcoming wet season on account of the very high cost of con-struction under such conditions, and owing to the difficulties encountered it is unlikely that this road will be completed before the end of next year. Road reconstruction programmes are also proceeding in the Third and Fourth Divisions. The Sebuyau quarry is now in operation, and a trial shipment of block stone has been sent to the Third Division. The quality of the granite is exceptionally high. At Sibu the construction of permanent terminal buildings at the airfield is pro-ceeding. As you are no doubt aware, the runway had to be closed for a considerable period to allow repairs to a section which showed some subsidence. At Bintulu the bomb-damaged landing strip is being reconstructed to form a link in our feeder air service, proposals for which I will mention later in my address.
With the arrival of a Water Engineer and an Assist-ant Water Engineer we should at last be able to make some progress towards providing the people of this country with a regular, pure and ample supply.
Construction of the Batu Kitang Waterworks (for which a contract has been signed between Government and the Jewell Filter Company) will commence early next year. Minor improvements to the gravity supply to Kuching including renewal of one of the mains for which pipes have long been on order should alleviate to some extent the water shortage until the Batu Kitang supply comes into operation. A Water Engineer is now undertaking investigations at Sarikei, and at Mukah the new installation is complete except for the erection of a storage tank.
The oil depot at Bukit Biawak near Kuching is practically finished and work is in hand for the removal of Pending Station further up-river where there is less danger of bank collapse. At Sibu the port develop-ment scheme has begun with the construction of Chinese launch wharves and access thereto, and the foundations for the first two large godowns. Progress on the dredging of the Sungei Kut Canal has been slow, but with the help of a dredging expert from Holland and additional equipment it is hoped to speed up operations in the near future. New bazaar areas at Limbang, Bekenu and Simanggang have required a great deal of preliminary earth-filling. Work is pro-ceeding somewhat slowly owing to our lack of heavy earth-moving machinery.
Since May, 1953 the Posts and Telegraphs Depart-ment has been deeply engaged with preparations for executing the Telecommunications Development Schemes; materials from the United Kingdom are now arriving in quantity; the underground cables, small exchanges and telephones for Kuching have almost all arrived. The main automatic exchange will not, how-ever, arrive until June 1954. Much work has been done on the rewiring of subscribers' premises in the Kuching Town area in preparation for connecting to the underground cables when the latter are laid. Detailed plans for excavation of about 30 miles of trench, in which will be laid 50 miles of cable, are well in hand and tenders will be called for shortly. Good progress is being made in the erection of build-ings for VHF radio stations and staff quarters all over the country.
It is already clear that Sarawak cannot provide the considerable number of additional technical assistants required to run our new and modern telecommunica-tions scheme efficiently. The Postmaster-General will, of course, fill every post in his Department with Sara-wak men or women if candidates with adequate qualifications and experience come forward; it has, however, been necessary to recruit from the Federation and Hong Kong since sufficicnt people with the educational standards required and experience in this modern machinery have not been found in Sarawak.
Reorganisation of Departmental clerical and account-ing systems has been planned to deal with the great increase in work which will occur in 1954 and this reorganisation is nearing completion.
It is encouraging to note that, in spite of the serious drop in the prices of many of our primary products, there are more new and improved school buildings being erected than in recent more prosperous times. The donations of generous patrons have been sup-plemented by the efforts of pupils themselves who have contributed both time and talent to concerts and sales-of-work and other efforts to raise funds.
At the meeting of Council Negri held last December I referred to the decision to charge school fees in Government schools; fees, with arrangements for remission in needy cases, were introduced in August Works Department on a contact basis. As the not seriously reduced the number of children attending these schools. This satisfactory result reflects credit on the communities concerned, and on headmasters and others responsible for explaining to parents the reasons for this change.
Some Local Authorities have shown interest in the possible advantages of a Pledge System for ensuring that children shall remain at school for at least four years and attend regularly over that period. Legisla-tion was passed by Council Negri last September which enables Authorities to introduce by-laws with these objectives in view. A most important step in the devolution of responsibility for Primary Education will be taken next year when the Kuching Municipal Council assumes responsibility for some 8,000 children in the Primary Schools within the Municipality.
222
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, DECEMBER 31, 1953
The continued progress being made in the English Secondary School system is evinced by the fact that this year over 400 candidates have entered for the Cambridge Certificate Examinations as compared with 248 in 1952, which was in turn more than double the corresponding figure in the previous year. 16 students are attempting the Higher School Certificate Examina-tion this year, and practical science subjects are being takcn for the first time. There has also been con-siderable expansion of the Chinese Secondary School system. A new Middle School has been established at Miri, at other places schools have been rebuilt and expanded, and the Board of Management of the Kuch-ing Chinese Schools has embarked on an ambitious building programme.
A Government announcement has recently been issued regarding the award of Scholarships during the next few years to candidates whose higher education would otherwise be hendicapped by financial circum-stances. The announcement covers courses in a wide range of subjects in which qualified men and women are likely to be needed in Sarawak in the foreseeable future. We attached very great importance to this vital section of our educational programme as is shown by the generous financial provision included in the estimates being submitted to Council. The Scholar-ship programme will have to attempt to cover the wide field of our needs. All our students cannot become doctors, lawyers or engineers, and in a balanced pro-gramme qualified agriculturalists, forestry officers, teachers and administrative officers are also essential, and it is hoped that during the next stage of our pro-gramme applicants for vacancies in these categories will be forthcoming in adequate numbers. During recent months further scholarships have been awarded for courses in Singapore or Malaya in dentistry, science, and surveying, and for an apprenticeship in workshop practice. In all, 34 men and women from Sarawak are studying overseas and will in due course return to serve the community. Among this number are no fewer than 10 men and women studying me-dicine or dentistry. Further scholars will shortly leave for the United Kingdom for training in printing and co-operatives. Six teachers have recently commenced professional courses in the United Kingdom.
I have emphasised the Government scholarship scheme because it will not escape your notice that the estimates make provision for the employment of a number of additional expatriate officers. These men and women are being brought here because local can-didates with the requisite qualifications are not at present available. Our system of education and our scholarship scheme are together designed to rectify this situation in due course. I can assure you that the most stringent enquiries are made not only as to the necessity for a new post but also as to the pos-sibility of filling it by a local candidate before applica-tions are invited from outside this country. I repeat that it is the policy of this Government to fill every post which falls vacant with a citizen of Sarawak if one is available with the necessary experience and qualifications. I am sure that you will endorse the policy of making a very generous allocation of funds to this Overseas Scholarship Scheme.
A new Principal has arrived to take charge of the Batu Lintang Training Centre and School. A further 34 students have this year qualified for the Grade IIIA Teacher's Certificate. Up to the present this course has been limited to two years because of the urgent need for trained teachers. As from next year this junior course will be extended to three years to cater for the growing need for teachers capable of dealing with the Higher Primary classes. It is expected that seven students will obtain the Grade IIA Teacher's Cer-tificate on completing the first fulltime course for this Grade. These teachers, with a minimum academic qualification of Form III Secondary, will be employed mainly as specialist teachers of English by Mission and Chinese Schools, There are indications that applica-tions for the teacher-training classes, and for the higher
Primary Class, in 1954 will result in keen competition for the limited number of vacancies.
We are fortunate at the Rural Improvement School, Kanowit, to have the help of a Community Develop-ment Officer appointed under the Colombo Plan who is now able to take charge of this scheme whilst the substantive Principal is on leave. The acreage under rice cultivation has been increased considerably and more attention is being given to the cultivation of vegetables and the care of livestock. More machinery has been introduced and a workshop erected. Recruit-ment of promising pupils in adequate numbers and the satisfactory settling of ex-pupils on suitable land are problems which require further investigation.
Adult literacy work in connection with the Muara Tuang Community Development project is providing valuable information. By the end of the year there will be at least 200 adults who have learned to read and write and to do some simple reckoning. The Divisional Education Officer and his assistants are to be congratulated on the enthusiastic and successful leadership they have given in this scheme. Further valuable information and experience on Community Development work has been gained by Mr. Wilson in his work amongst the Sea Dayaks at Budu in the Second Division.
An Education Officer has now been posted to Miri to take charge of the educational activities in the 4th and 5th Divisions. This is a furthcr step in the pro-gramme for providing more satisfactory professional supervision and guidance for schools of all types throughout the whole country. A new Lady Education Officer has arrived recently to organise the education of women and girls. There are still, however, vacan-cies for three Education Officers and until these posts are filled it will not be possible to initiate some further stages of educational development which are envisaged.
The work of the Education Department is being supplemented to a very valuable extent by the activities of the British Council. The provision of students’ libraries, the distribution of "book-boxes" to teachers, and the organisation of cinema shows for schools are greatly appreciated. The Study Course for Secondary Teachers held recently in Kuching was very successful. The provision of experienced coaches in football and athletics has done a great deal to stimulate interest in these activities among our young people.
Since May 1953, much work has been devoted to the creation of a Co-operative Central Bank—work culminating in meetings on the 4th and 5th October attended by upwards of 100 representatives of 83 Co-operative Societies from the First, Second and Third Divisions. The Co-operative Central Bank was regis-tered on 4th October and is now operating; it is a non-commercial Bank, doing business with and on behalf of registered Co-operatives only.
An officer of the International Labour Office, an expert on Chinese Co-operatives, visited Sarawak between April and July to study and report on develop-ment of Co-operation among the Chinese.
Progress continues with 14 more Co-operatives registered among the rural people. This year special emphasis has been placed upon education in Co-operation of both staff and the members of Societies. Registrations have decreased in number, but this is mainly because the staff has been preoccupied with the improvement of existing Societies.
A Divisional office of this Department is now being established in Sibu. You will be asked to approve in the estimates provision for considerable expansion in 1954.
The Medical and Health Services continue to expand. Mr. C. F. Mummery, Chief Dental Officer of the Federation of Malaya, came at our invitation to advise us on matters connected with the improvement of dental facilities in Sarawak. As a result of his visit, certain legal aspects are engaging the attention of the Dental Board, and we are proposing early in 1954 to
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, DECEMBER 31, 1953
223
start an experimental School Dental Service, making use of the services of the Sarawak nurse who will shortly be returning from New Zealand after receiving a special course of instruction there.
The Government Dental Services in Sarawak have recently been strengthened by the appointment of an additional Dental Surgeon who obtained his degree in Singapore, having studied on a Sarawak Government scholarship.
The anti-malarial work being conducted with the help of World Health Organisation personnel is going ahead very well. The headquarters have been moved to Marudi in the Baram where an attempt is being made to control malaria up to the headwaters of the river by means of residual spraying. The assistance for two months of an expert entomologist from the University of Malaya has been invaluable. If this experiment in malarial control under the conditions peculiar to this part of the world are succcssful, it gives us very great hopes for the future health of the people of the rural areas of Sarawak.
The other activity of the World Health Organisation in Sarawak, B.C.G. vaccination against tuberculosis, has reached its second stage, that is to say: the first round of vaccinations has been completed and atten-tion is being confined now to new-born children and certain special groups.
In an attempt to improve the medical services in the extreme ulu, two Kelabit youths have been recruited and by the courtesy of the Oil Company are now being trained in their Kuala Belait hospital under the auspices of the Brunei Branch of the British Red Cross Society. On completion of their training they will return to the Kelabit Plateau as paid servants of the Government in the Medical Department.
The Social Welfare Council has held regular monthly meetings and numerous small relief committees have been established at district level. These Relief Com-mittees have constitutions widely differing from each other, and in each case uniquely suited to local con-ditions. They are all subsidised by the Social Welfare Council which under the energetic chairmanship of the Director of Medical Services has done outstanding work for the community during the last year.
The Information Service has made progress in the past year. The two monthly newspapers produced by the Information Office—Pembrita in Dayak and Pedoman Ra'ayat in Malay—has increased their circulation in answer to public demand. Over 6,000 copies of each are now printed and a hundred copies of Pembrita are at the Commanding Officer's request sent each month to the Sarawak Rangers in Malaya.
The engagement on 1st January last of an ex-perienced and well-qualified Chinese officer has made it possible to establish close and mutually beneficial contact with the Chinese press in Kuching and Sibu (which he has twice visited for this purpose) and to produce six original booklets in Chinese, for free distribution, covering health, agricultural and constitut-ional subjects. Illustrated Chinese and Malay versions of the Annual Report on Sarawak for 1952, excluding the statistical and formal parts, have been produced and 5,000 copies circulated.
Two Malay members of the staff, the photographer and the artist, received training in Singapore and Kuala Lumpur. As the result of this training seven films, two in colour, of Sarawak have been produced and a special film was made for, and used by, the B.B.C. in their Commonwealth television film. The Informa-tion Office now provides, at considerable financial saving over the outside commercial arrangements formerly in effect, a constant supply of photographs, and you will be asked to provide money in the coming year for the construction and equipment of a photo-graphic processing room which will effect a further large saving. The lnformation Service photographs have been widely used in Sarawak and considerable numbers have been accepted for publication abroad. The artist, in addition to his regular work in designing
for office publications, has been much in demand by other Government Departments, for the production of posters and other visual material.
The four film units have been heavily engaged and the unit established in the Third Division with its own boat has carried out an especially arduous programme.
Reading rooms have been furnished and opened in Sarikei, Limbang, Engkilili and Lubok Antu and plans are in hand for Betong and Binatang. It is our intention to furnish and provide literature for reading rooms in as many places as possible where premises can be found locally, and the Information Officer will be grateful if members and Government officers will seek and inform him of suitable rooms in their dis-tricts.
Turning to the broadcasting service, the transmitters are installed and working at the Green Road trans-mitter station and I hope members of the Council will be able to find time to visit and inspect the station and the studio building before they disperse.
The opening of the service depends upon the com-pletion of the studio building which, because of short-age of labour, has taken longer than was expected. The engineer will need at least two further months to instal the equipment and complete the training of the staff, but the service should be in operation by the middle of the year.
The Programme Organiser is by dint of much enquiry and travel assembling a staff so far recruited entirely within Sarawak. It is just as essential that, before the service opens, the minimum programme staff should be engaged and basically trained as that the engineering equipment should be installed and staff trained in its use, and the finding and training of the programme staff is proving an arduous task. For these reasons, I consider the decision of the officials con-cerned to delay the opening of the service a few months beyond the originally fixed date is justified.
I have approved in principle the recommendations made to me by the appropriate officers for the setting up of a broadcasting advisory board widely representa-tive of the different communities, interests and areas of the country. It is proposed that a number of members of your Council shall be invited to became members of this board, and their advice will be cordially welcomed.
You wisely recommended a year ago that a sum of money be set aside for the purchase of low-priced but efficient wireless listening sets and arrangements have been completed for the purchase of an adequate number of sets identical with a model widely used and proven efficient in the Federation of Malaya.
A member of the Administrative Service, who has been closely associated with the broadcasting service plans from the beginning, is now taking a course with the B.B.C. in London and will take charge of the administrative side of the service upon his return to Sarawak early next year.
The increasing importance of aviation in the affairs of the Colony and the growing need for an internal air service has necessitated the creation of a separate Department of Civil Aviatuion, replacing the Civil Aviation section of the Public Works Department. An Assistant Director of Civil Aviation Sarawak has been appointed and has assumed control of the Depart-ment.
Internal air service surveys have been carried out by the Department of Civil Aviation and a programme of development to further the initial phases of an Aviation Development Plan is making steady progress.
It is hoped that before the end of 1954 the North Borneo feeder service which is already in existence will be extended to include Brunei Town and Lutong near Miri in Sarawak. Work is at present being done on the Bintulu air strip and it is our intention to establish an internal service twice weekly with stops at Kuching, Sibu, Bintulu, Lutong, Anduki, Brunei
224
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, DECEMBER 31, 1953
Town, and Labuan. The possibility of making air strips at Simanggang and Sarikei is also under consideration.
The Honourable Mr. Justice E. H. Williams, Senior Puisne Judge, Hong Kong, was appointed Chief Justice of the Combined Judiciary in place of the late Sir Ivor Brace, and arrived in the Colony to take up duty on the 25th May. For a considerable portion of the year two of the Judges were on leave and in consequence there was difficulty in constituting a Court of Appeal during this period.
There is little which calls for comment on the work of the Judicial Department. The incidence of serious crime fortunately continues to remain low. There has, however, been a very marked increase in the number of cases tried in the Police Petty Courts. At the present rate of hearing the number of cases tried in the Police Courts during the year will be four times the number tried in 1951 and twice that in 1952; in the Petty Courts the number of cases will be twice that of 1951 and 1952. The increase arises mainly in Kuching, Sibu and Miri where the bulk of such cases are traffic cases. Magistrates in these centres have difficulty in coping with the amount of work thrown on them. On the Civil side the number of cases heard remains fairly constant and high.
The records of the cases tried by the lower Courts show that magistrates continue to do their work care-fully and conscientiously.
I would like to refer very briefly to our relations with our neighbours—an important matter to countries and individuals alike. We were delighted in Septem-ber to welcome here in the capital our distinguished visitors from West Kalimantan under the leadership of the Resident Co-ordinator. We were charmed by their friendliness and interest and I think it can truth-fully be said that the visit was a great success. It was certainly of great value to senior officers of the Govern-ment as it enabled them to talk over their problems with men of understanding and experience of similar problems in Indonesia. There is no doubt that we can be of great assistance to each other in many directions and it is hoped that this informal and friendly meeting will be the forerunner of others and that the Heads of Sarawak Departments will endeavour to keep in close touch with their opposite numbers across the frontier. Nothing but good can come from a closer relationship and frank discussion of common problems.
The Sarawak-North Borneo-Brunei Conference was created during the course ot the year under the chair-manship of His Excellency the Commissioner-General. The opening meeting of the Conference was held in Kuching on 21st April and the second meeting at Jesselton in North Borneo on the 29th September. The object of the Conference is to encourage closer co-operation between the three Governments in all matters of common concern so that the closest possible harmony of policy can be maintained between them. The Conference has considered the work and policy of all the major Departments of Government and has given directions regarding the holding of meetings and conferences at regular intervals.
The efficiency of the individual Governments and the advancement of the region as a whole can be nourished and promoted by this neighbourly policy of reciprocal aid, and the study of mutual problems and the pooling of resources and experience.
Finally, apart from the discussions of the estimates for 1954, you have a heavy programme of legislation to consider. Bills are being placed before you to amend the law in a number of respects. Of these the most important is perhaps the Road Traffic Bill. It is right and proper that with improved communications by road we should endeavour also to modernise the law in relation to traffic on roads and that in particular the carriage of persons for hire or reward should be more strictly controlled. The Bill is believed to be reasonably comprehensive but it will necessarily be supplemented by numerous regulations, which, how-ever, will also be subjected to the scrutiny of this Council.
The Customs Bill will keep us, so far as possible, in line with our neighbour North Borneo and the other British territories in South East Asia, Though it appears formidable there is not really very much that is new nor anything which need give cause for alarm.
I recommend these Bills for your consideration as I do also the Criminal Procedure Code (Amendment) Bill, which seeks to make a number of amendments in criminal procedure which experience leads us to think are desirable. I will not delay you further. You have a heavy programme before you. May God guide your deliberations.
Notes and Comments
His Excellency the Governor presented insignia and medals to four recipients at an Investiture held in front of the Court House before the opening of the Budget Session of the Council Negri on 1st December.
The citations were read by the Acting Chief Secre-tary, Mr. J. H. Ellis, and the Royal Greetings were read by the Chief Justice, Mr. Justice E. H. Williams.
The four recipients are:
Temonggong Tama Kalang Lawai (Tama Weng Ajang). M.B.E. Queen's Medal for Chiefs;
Datu Abang Abu Talip bin Datu Abang Haji Buassan. M.B.E.;
Haji Zahani bin Haji Musa. M.B.E.;
Mr. Hsu Yaw Tang. M.B.E. (Honorary).
The British Red Cross Society (Sarawak Branch) Headquarters Building at Mosque Road was recently completed and was officially opened by His Excellency the Governor on 11th November.
Speaking before a large gathering of members and guests, the President of the Society, Mrs. L. D. Kennedy, enumerated some of the uses to which the new building would be put. It would, she said, be the nerve centre from which activities of all kinds would be planned and directed, both in normal times and during emergencies; in its office members would be on duty each week-day to attend to every day affairs. to answer questions and to render any assistance that might be needed; it would provide a convenient weekly meting place for members of the work party whose chief function was to keep the clothing cupboard well-stocked to meet all demands; it would provide room for evening entertainment sessions for the handicapped, whilst detachments of the Red Cross could in future hold their meetings and lecture sessions in the building itself.
His Excellency in his address spoke of the doubt he had at first entertained of the necessity and the wisdom of spending a great sum of money on such a spacious Headquarters at the present stage of the development of the Society. He was now, however, fully convinced of the wisdom and foresight which dictated the deci-sion, and felt that the Headquarters by its presence would serve to guarantee that the affairs and objects of this great Society would be pursued with the same energy, sense of urgency and devotion to the cause which had characterized the recent years under Mrs. Kennedy's leadership.
Before his address His Excellency was requested to present a Certificate and a Badge to Mr. William Tan, the architect of the building, making him an Honorary Life Member of the British Red Cross Society, and fifteen certificates to members of the Society and Ran-gers.
The building is the first of its kind to be created in the country and it has been made possible by the tire-less efforts of the members and the generosity and co-operation of the people of Sarawak. It will stand as a permanent monument to what the efforts of a deter-mined group together with the help of the general public can accomplish.
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, DECEMBER 31, 1953
225
The Kuching Art Club, since the revival of its activi-ties recently, has been active in arranging weekly pro-grammes of talks and sketching excursions.
In one of these the members were given permission by His Excellency the Governor to sketch the Astana grounds and in another, at the invitation of the Rt. Rev. the Bishop of Borneo, members had tea at the Bishop’s House and were later shown sketches made by Mrs. McDougall, wife of the first Bishop, which portray scenes of Sarawak life about 100 years ago.
These sketches, we learn, were recently presented to the Bishop during his stay in England on leave by Mrs. Paley, whose recent death we record elsewhere in this issue.
700 copies of The Sarawak Gazette are printed each month and circulated. As far as the editors are con-cerned these vanish, soundless as down, into the unseen air. They cannot believe that this is because every-body is satisfied. Only once has a word of comment been heard, from a reader who lately told one of the editors (not knowing him to be one) that that "the Gazette is a very dull paper.” It is not in keeping with the purpose of this journal, or with its long and honourable tradition, that it should be a Comic Cuts or a News of the World. It is primarily a historical re-cord. But history need not be dull. Certainly the his-tory of Sarawak, both in the past and now in the making, is far from being so. Moreover what seems commonplace to-day may be of entertainment and value to readers and researchers fifty years hence. Even so, we should like occasionally to entertain the present generation as well as its grandchildren, whose plaudits or scorn will not benefit us to-day. Criticism, comments, suggestions, above all contributions, will be welcomed. We do not promise to adopt or accept them, but we shall seriously and gratefully consider them all, and at least be stimulated by knowing that what appears between these covers is not immediately and completely lost in sedative silence. It may per-haps be that the Gazette has now for so long—83 years —dotted our cultural landscape that it has come to be accepted as an established thing, like the morning coffee whose fragrance we do not, as a rule, notice and still less talk about. If this is so, the editors are con-tent, but, being (they like to think) men of sensible taste, they would welcome an occasional tot of rum in their coffee.
Comings and Goings
Two families have been re-united in the past month, and pleasure thereat is certainly not confined to the waiting husbands and fathers: Mrs. J. H. Ellis arrived in the Bidor on 14th December, with her three children and Miss Prosser, their nurse; and Kimanis on the 2nd December brought Mrs. H. B. Rowland and her family.
Dr. F. W. Roe, Director of Geological Survey for the British Territories in Borneo, returned from home leave by air on December 8th. His many friends, including his tennis-partners and opponents, are delighted to see him.
Mr. A. O. Merry, the newly appointed Veterinary Officer, came in Bidor on December 14th. Mr. Merry's appointment dates from 20th September but at the request of the Sarawak Government he did a short period of attachment to the Veterinary Department of the Federation of Malaya, to obtain specialised local experience, before coming to Kuching. We welcome Mr. Merry very warmly, both for himself, and because his coming fills an urgent gap in the very important Agricultural Service.
Mr. E. C. Hennessy, Quartermaster, Sarawak Con-stabulary, and Mrs. Hennessy left by air on home leave on December 5th, and Miss Lilian Harrison sailed in Bidor on the same day. Miss Harrison leaves Sarawak.
to the regret of her many friends, on the completion of her agreement and after a very valuable tour of duty as Lady Education Officer. We wish her all good fortune in the future.
Queen and Commonwealth
Broadcasting from Cape Town to all her father's subjects on her 21st birthday, Queen Elizabeth II, then Princess Elizabeth, declared that, though she was 6,000 miles from the place where she was born, she was certainly not 6,000 miles from home. On the contrary, she went on, it was the peculiar privilege of her birth that she had a home in every realm of the Commonwealth.
In so beginning her first great public utterance, the Princess showed the influence of her upbringing. King George VI, and even more Queen Elizabeth the Queen Mother, who personally controlled her daughters’ education, had seen to it that the elder grew up fully aware of what it meant to be heiress, not to a single Throne, but to the first place in each of the Monarchies of the Commonwealth. Her training, conducted in these matters mainly by the distinguished historian, Sir Henry Marten, was heavily biassed from an early age in the direction of history and especially of the history and contemporary constitution of each member of the Commonwealth. While keeping always before her eyes the great whole of which they were parts, she learned to appreciate the character and ideals of each separately.
King George VI, however, was determined that his daughter’s acquaintance with the Commonwealth should speedily be extended beyond book knowledge. In 1947, when he and his Queen paid a State visit to alterations have been put in hand which will benefit been taking root over the few years. Certain structural about 10,000 miles by road, rail and air through the Union of Southern and Northern Rhodesia and the territories of Basutoland, Swaziland and Bechuanaland.
She sat in the gallery at both Cape Town and Salisbury to watch her father open Parliament with all the solemnities developed through many ages at West-minster. Though she remained modestly in the back-ground at most of the great ceremonies of the tour, she was meeting informally members of all the many races of the land, who would one day be her subjects; and at East London she performed one of her first important aclions on her own responsibility, when she opened the graving dock which was being dedicated in her name.
Princess Elizabeth’s marriage seven months later, and the birth of Prince Charles the following year, post-poned any further Commonwealth travels on the grand scale, though the Duke of Edinburgh’s appointment to serve in the Mediterranean Fleet gave her occasion, of which she eagerly availed herself to make on several visits Ihe acquaintance of the famous island community of Malta.
Meanwhile her father was planning to continue the cycle of State progresses to the realms of which he was King. He had been to Canada just before World War II, and to South Africa in 1947; but Australia and New Zealand he had only visited as Duke of York, in 1927, when he went to inaugurate the new capital at Canberra on behalf of his father. Ceylon he did not know at all. To his bitter disappointment, the proposed visit had to be abandoned on the advice of his doctors, when grave illness, soon necessitating a surgical operation, fell upon him in the very week that his grandson was born.
He was determined, however, not to be defeated, and planned for the northern winter of 1951-52 the most ambitious programme of Royal travel yet under-taken. Princess Elizabeth and the Duke of Edinburgh were to accept an invitation to pay an official visit to Canada in the late autumn; and on their return he
226
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, DECEMBER 31, 1953
himself with the Queen and Princess Margaret, would voyage right round the world, spending substantial periods in Ceylon, Australia and New Zealand, and also visiting some of the dependencies.
But the King's courage and devotion to his peoples were greater than his strength. A still more dangerous illness laid him low, and for a time his life was in hourly danger. He insisted nevertheless that Canada should not be disappointed of the promised visit from the Princess and the Duke; and, when it became apparent that he himself could not face the long journey, he arranged that they should afterwards take his place and fulfil the complete official pro-gramme of the Commonwealth Tour. Meanwhile the South African Prime Minister, Dr. Malan, though himself a republican, invited the King to pass his con-valescence at his own country house in Natal—a fine example of the warmth of human feeling on which the Commonwealth is founded.
Princess Elizabeth, with the Duke of Edinburgh, remained by her father's sickbed till the last moment left possible by the Canadian programme, and then crossed the Atlantic by air while the King was still by no means out of danger. It was her first major tour in her own right, and the Canadian people spon-taneously elevated it, by the uncontrollable enthusiasm of their reception, to the rank of a great imperial occasion. The party travelled right across from ocean to ocean by rail, stopping at every possible station to meet the local people. The Princess made several important speeches, addressing the French Canadians in their own language, which she speaks fluently.
During the tour the Royal couple accepted the invitation to spend a few days with President Truman at Washington, where they were welcomed as warmly as within the Commonwealth; and where the Princess made the Canadian Embassy her headquarters and was treated as primarily Princess of Canada rather than of England. She was back in England in time to spend with her father his last Christmas at Sandringham; and in January began once more to carry out the State ceremonies of the Commonwealth tour. But only the first part of it was completed—the visit to Kenya. It was there that she received the grievous news that her father was dead.
The function of maintaining in their own persons those bonds of Commonwealth unity which have sur-vived political independence belongs primarily to the reigning Sovereign, but is informally shared by all the Royal Family; and each of its members has played an individual part in discharging the responsibility. The Duke of Gloucester, for instance, served at the request of his brother's Australian Ministers as Governor-General of the Commonwealth of Australia; and when Ceylon became an independent realm. it was he, again by invitation, who journeyed to Colombo to open its first sovereign Parliament in February, 1948 with a message from the King.
Within the last year and a half three members of the Royal Family have discharged notable missions. The Duchess of Kent, disregarding a quite appreciable element of danger, paid a visit to the troubled terri-tories of Malaya, bringing to soldiers and civilians at grips with the Communist menace the assurance of their follow-countrymen's remembrance and sympathy, and also to Hong Kong, Sarawak, North Borneo and Brunei. She took with her her young son, Prince Edward, Duke of Kent, who was still a schoolboy but was thus gaining his first introduction to that oversea Commonwealth which he, like all kinsmen, is bound by his station to serve.
The Princess Royal, in the course of a visit originally designed for the presentation of new colours to the Red Cross in Trinidad, included in her tour of the West Indies Tobago, Barbados and British Guiana. When Southern Rhodesia, on the eve of the federal union wirh its Northern sister, celebrated the centenary of the birth of its founder, Cecil Rhodes, Queen Elizabeth the Queen Mother was invited to renew
acquaintance with the country and to be the principal figure in the festivities. Princess Margaret accom-panied her.
Now as the climax of these missions, Her Majesty the Queen and His Royal Highness the Duke of Edinburgh have set forth on their six-month-long journey to the Antipodes, visiting many lands of the Commonwealth. This is the first time a reigning British Sovereign has travelled round the world.
In such ways as these the travels of the Royal Family help to keep open the lines of communication of the Commonwealth. These travels may be expected to become steadily more extensive and frequent, as the means of transport, especially by air, grow speedier and more efficient. The limit is imposed only by the small numbers of the present Royal Family, who will necessarily be heavily burdened by their vast res-ponsibilities until a new generation grows up.
Dermot Morrah
M. V. Heartsease
We learn with deep regret that, on Saturday 12th December, at about 2.30 a.m., M.V. Heurtsease capsized at the mouth of the Rejang River, with heavy loss of life. Heartsease, the Sarawak Government Buoys and lighthouse tender, was bound for Kuala Selalang. She was entering the Rejang at the time of the disaster, and heavy seas were running. Of the passengers and crew on board six are dead or missing. Two bodies have been recovered, those of Juis bin Drahman, a member of the crew, and of Tony Court-ney, ten-year-old son of Mr. and Mrs. T. V. Courtney. The names of the four missing are Man bin Adon, Mazlan bin Sirat, Sulai bin Lau and Tambi Chan. The survivors were taken to Sibu where they were treated in Sibu Hospital for injuries and shock.
His Excellency the Governor who was in Brunei on an official visit, immediately sent messages of sympathy to the relatives of those known to be lost.
In a message to His Excellency, the Secretary of State for the Colonies, the Rt. Hon. Oliver Lyttelton, M.P., expressed his deep regret at hearing the news of the loss of M.V. Heartsease and of the casualties sustained. Mr. Lyttelton asked that a message of sympathy on his behalf should be conveyed to the relatives of those who were lost in the disaster, and to the survivors.
We join with them in extending our sympathy to the bereaved families.
Mildred Hope Paley
“In 1861 we again returned to our Eastern home, Ieaving our three children behind, and taking only our baby girl for companion". So wrote Harriette Mc-Dougall (Sketches of our life at Sarawak. p. 190). This baby-girl, Mildred Hope, daughter of Bishop Francis McDougall and Harriette his wife, died recently in England at the age of 92, the last of the children of that great pioneer couple. Mildred was born in Ireland in March, 1861, during her parents’ long leave; travelling with them in January, 1862 she spent four and a half years in Sarawak, and returned to England finally in December, 1866. Mildred later married a Mr. Paley who died some years ago.
When I visited Mildred Paley at her home near Ton-bridge Wells in July of this year I found a lady strikingly like the pictures we have of her mother. She was able to pour out the tea and move about in such a way as to give no indication of her great age. She talked freshly of Kuching, and delighted to show me a picture of this town which had been painted by her gifted mother—a really beautiful sketch which hung in the sitting room. She always read with the greatest
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, DECEMBER 31, 1953
227
interest every number of the Borneo Mission Chronicle and rejoiced to hear news of her old home, Bishop's House, Kuching. In 1950, at the age of 89, she wrote to me "I sometimes wonder if my dear old ayah is still alive, but fear not for she would be very old. She married our manservant named Affok, a giant of a man. I am not sure how his name is spelt."
Mildred was the youngest of the McDougall children; four died in infancy in Sarawak and one in Singapore; another boy died in England at about 10 years old. The last four children, however, lived the normal span in spite of some years in the tropics; two of them lived to be more than 90 years old.
Nigel, Borneo
What’s in a Name?
"The Colonial Service", said my tutor at Oxford. "now, that's where you get a C.M.G after twenty years and a K.C.M.G after thirty years, isn't it? And what." he added, "do you call yourself when you're in it?" Appointed to what was then—before the first world war the East Africa Protectorate, I found my-self termed an Assistant District Commissioner; a full-blooded, high-sounding title suggesting that you held a commission from somebody, which, in fact, you did not and implying, correctly, a certain vagueness about the scope of your duties. Had an attempt been made to define them, it would have been easicr to set out what they did not include rather than what they did, for they comprised, among other things, the dispensation of justice, the collection of revenue, the construction of roads and bridges, the planning and building of house and offices, the prescription of medicines—indeed, about every service that one can render to mankind. The only drawback to the title was that, being composed of ten syllablesb it was invariably contracted to A.D.C. which led people at home to confuse one with the Governor's Aide-de-Camp. Sometimes, too, the initials went wrong, as when the daughter of a Kenya settler announced me as "the A B.C."
But it was a sight better than the title borne by one's colleagues in a nearby Protectorate, i.e. Collector. This was a blatant admission that one was expected to be a tax gatherer and nothing else. Here, indeed, one could detect the sinister influence of the Treasury, struggling to reduce the annual grant-in-aid from Whitehall, judging the ability of the administrator by the size of his revenue receipts.
Had fortune directed one's steps to the other coast of Africa, one might have found oneself among the “Residents." a title intended to emphasise the self-effacement of an Administration working behind the scenes in the powerful Emirates of Nigeria. In theory, at least, the Resident's function was to advise rather than command. They were cogs in the wheels of indirect rule rather than the driving belt of the machinery. They had one snobbish advantage over us, these Residents. They could head their notepaper "The Residency." which sounded grand to folks at home. It conjured up visions of Eastern palaces with the Union Jack flying over the battlement—a fanciful picture since, as a rule, the flag drooped listlessly in the breathless, shimmering haze before a modest bunga-low of wattle and daub and thatch. But there was the same cachet about "The Residency" as there was about "The Manor" at home so much so that one Provincial Commissioner in East Africa, where Residencies were unknown, adopted the heading on his notepaper to the annoyance of the Secretariat!
Commissioners, Collectors, Residents—these were not the only titles by which the Administration was known. There were, as well, scattered over the Empire. District Officers, Native Commissioners, and even just plain Administrative Officers whose degrees of seniority were denoted by numbers and who were listed, like railway travellers, as Class I, II or III. Whatever they were called, they were all doing the same job and doing it supremely well. At least,
members of what later became the Colonial Adminis-trative Service could not complain that their Govern-ments had fallen victims to the modern craze for uniformity and standardization. In one respect we of the Colonial Service were modest compared with our opposite numbers in the Sudan. Having climbed to the top of the administrative ladder and taken charge of a Province. we were content to be called "Provincial" or "Senior Commissioners." as the case might be, whereas our Sudanese colleagues styled themselves “Governors." This was all right by us, but very confusing to maiden aunts to whom all Governors were "Excellencies" with stars on their breasts and ribbons on their shirt-fronts. Nevertheless, it was embarrass-ing, having modestly answered "Never." to the question "When are you going to be a Governor?" to be told, “Oh, but the Vicar's son is one already"; and Aunt Belinda went on to murmur, "but of course he's a clever young man."
This diversity of titles was not confined to the Administration. In the departmental line, too, there were different names for people doing the same job. In the Public Works Department you might be an Executive Engineer, a Works Superintendent or a Supervisor of Works. In the Police you had a choice between being an Inspector-General or a Commissioner. The general rule seemed to be the smaller the Colony the more resounding the title. The head of the Police, for example, in one of Africa's more insignificant territories was not content to be the Commissioner, but must needs tack a "Chief" on to it.
Colonial railways, almost alone of departments, pre-served some uniformity, mainly because their staff structure was modelled on the home railway system from which their personnel were recruited. Traffic Managers managed traffic, whether on the Great Western or the Kenya-Uganda Railway: Chief Mechanical Engineers had much the same function, whether in Atbara or Crewe. And it goes without saying that the boss had to be the "General Manager" irrespective of the length of line he controlled. This could have surprising results. There used to be a railway in Zanzibar which meandered through the streets of the capital to the suburb of Bububu, half-a-dozen miles away. Nevertheless, it boasted a General Manager who, thanks to the courtesy of our British Railways, invariably enjoyed free travel anywhere in the United Kingdom when he came on leave—a courtesy he promised to reciprocate should, say, Sir Felix Pole or Sir James Milne find occasion to visit Zanzibar!
In those days the "Directorship" complex had yet to manifest itself. This was the child of the first world war when anyone who was anybody was a Director of this or a Deputy Director of that But Colonial Governments soon caught the infeclion and modest men like Game Wardens blossomed out into Directors of Game Preservation.
There were occasional exceptions to this rash of “Directorships." Those charged with the inspiring task of caring for our Colonial forests, have always been content to stick to the title of “Conservator." They, at least, sensed that nature could be preserved, but would jib at being “directed." And there was another department which eschewed grandiloquent titles, namely the Government Press responsible for publish-ing our Gazettes, Hansards and Laws. In Britain the Stationery Office is under a Controller who, by Letters Patent, is "the Queen's Printer." His opposite number in the colonies is content to be known as "The Govern-ment Printer"—and what more sensible and dignified title than that?
So, after studying some of the old Colonial Staff Lists, you may ask. "What's in a name?" Those of us who gave our best to the job, whatever we might be called, would reply. “A rose by any other name would smel as sweet."
G. F. Sayers
[Reprinted from Corona by kind permission of the Controller of H.M. Stationery Office]
228
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, DECEMBER 31, 1953
Japanese Journey
What a pity that the speed of modern air travel is largely nullified by the maddening delays that occur at airports. Leaving Kuching on the way to Tokyo via Singapore we had to wait at Kallang Airport for nearly 1 hours while passengers from two big inter-national airliners just arrived in Singapore were cleared before us through all the formalities of Customs, Im-migration, Exchange Control, Quarantine, etc.
The following morning the same sort of delay occur-red before embarkation. The alarm went at 5 a. m. but after that for one reason and another there was three hours' waste of time before finally taking off by Comet at 8 a.m. for Bangkok, 1000 miles away which was reached at 10 a.m.
Clearance through formalities at Bangkok airport was very expeditious, and there was a cold beer to hand by 10.30. A certain amount of business was got through with the aid of this cold lubrication, and lunch time found us in a restaurant very reminiscent of Princes in Singapore, that is to say, a very elegant air-conditioned eating place with a band. After lunch a motor car drive around Bangkok and its environs ended in time to catch another Comet for Tokyo.
The Comet from Singapore had been the one which was homeward bound to London, and it was amusing to observe the other passengers all dressed up for their home leave. This second Comet was outward bound from London to Tokyo and it was equally amusing to observe a 'plane load of passengers who only the previous day had been in London, and looked it. Our first hop was about 1,500 miles and took us three hours to Manila where we arrived at about 8.30 in the even-ing, and while the aircraft was being fuelled up we also did not neglect the necessity for refuelling at the bar. After take off an excellcnt dinner was served on board the Comet and we touched down at Okinawa at about two o’clock in the morning. The only source of re-freshment on Okinawa was an American Army canteen which was "dry" and we could not even get a milk shake because just as we arrived something went wrong with the electricity supply and the milkshaking machine was not functioning, so we contented our-selves with an ice cream by candlelight and returned to the 'plane.
The next hop from Okinawa to Tokyo was some-thing to be remembered. Down below there was tur-bulent, angry cloud, up above there was the brightest half moon and stars ever seen, and we sped along at 40,000 feet with a temperature of 40 C below zero outside, and a very comfortable warmth inside. Pre-sently the dawn came up and the mountains of Japan appeared poking their heads up through the blanket of cloud. We gradually let down into this cloud and found it to be very thick, but with the help of radar made a perfect landing at Haneda Airport, Tokyo.
The Japanese official at the airport could not have been more polite and accommodating, and in hardly any time at all the hotel was reached. The Japanese system of hotel charges is that a fixed daily price is placed on the room, and everything else is extra. In this case the room cost 4,700 yen a day, and meals and other charges brought the total up to about 7,000 yen a day ($60) which sum was later found to be a very good monthly wage for a white collar worker or technician in Japan. The lowest monthly wage for a labourer is not as much as 2,000 yen, so the cost of living for the labouring classes must be very cheap, but it is a fallacy to suppose that almost anything can be bought in Japan at a fraction of the price payable elsewhere: in fact, a very large proportion of the goods on display was imported from other countrics including England and priced accordingly. For instance, in many shops gentlemen's felt hats were on sale at a price of about £20.
There were a lot of official functions that had to be attended, and the first of them was a very sumptuous cocktail party given by a member of the Cabinet, and it was rather amusing casting one's mind back about 10 years to a Japanese prison camp and then reverting to the present and seeing oneself handed caviare and champagne by a smiling Japanese.
On Sunday we were taken for a sight-seeing tour of Tokyo and spent the evening at the Kabuki-Za which is the ancient traditional drama of Japan. The drama lasts about ten hours, but we saw only the latter half which lasted about five hours including an interval for dinner. Our hosts were afraid that we would be bored with it since, of course, we could not follow the dialo-gue, but not one of us seized an opportunity which we were given to leave before the end, and not a single one either delayed over the free drinks as soon as the bell rang to return to our seats. The play was won-derful, and never to be forgotten.
Towards the end of the stay in Tokyo a visit was made to the nightsoil disposal plant, the water supply for Tokyo, a chemical manufacturing firm and a milk bottling plant. In one place the writer was persuaded to give an interview to the press. He was recorded on a portable tape recorder and understood that the recording was to be broadcast at 9 o'clock that evening on the Tokyo radio. There was also an account of the interview with his photograph in the next morning’s edition of the Mainichi Shimbun, a newspaper publish-ed in the Japanese language.
The sewage disposal arrangements of Tokyo are worse than those of Kuching, but the fresh salads and vegetables available at one’s meals there are pheno-menally good. The Tokyo water supply, on the other hand, is probably amongst the best in the world. The bacteriological and chemical standards they have set themselves are very high indeed, and it looked as though they were reaching those standards. The quan-tity of water they reckon to supply to Tokyo is in the region of 100 gallons per head per day which is very high. In British territories, including London, we usually reckon about 40 gallons per head per day. In Chicago, said to be the highest in the world, they reck-on 300, and Sarawak Oilfields Ltd. calculate on 200, but these figures are abnormal and it is very surprising to find a huge city like Tokyo with a population of 7 millions supplying as much as 100 gallons per head per day.
Another evening a visit was made to the Sumo, or ancient heavy-weight wrestling in traditional Japanese style. Most of the wrestlers were indeed "heavy weights” and two of them were giants about 9 feet tall, but it was interesting to see that these abnormal creatures did not do at all well. The Sumo was ex-ceedingly interesting but a bit cramping sitting cross-legged at the ringside for four hours.
On the way home to Sarawak from Japan a stop of four days was made in Manila, and on the Sunday there was a wonderful traditional Sunday luncheon party at the country house of the Minister for Fisheries. There were artificial fishponds where the fish tilapia was being cultivated. The only expense is the ferti-lisation of the water with superphosphate and other minerals to stimulate the growth of plankton which by natural means convert the energy of the sun's rays into feed for the fish, so that a single pair of tilapia becomes one and a half million fish in the course of one year. We had some of the fish freshly barbecued at lunch, and other items on the menu were oysters, sucking pig, prawns and gigantic yard-long sateh. Several amateur photographers were present, but it was somewhat surprising some ten days later to find one’s portrait opcn-mouthed on thc poinl of devouring one of the fish, published in the Singapore Free Press with an article about the tilapia.
W. Glyn Evans
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, DECEMBER 31, 1953
229
Simanggang Schools Teach One Another
Simanggang school children have been finding out how other children work and play at school.
On December 1st last, Sekolah Abang Aing wel-comed children from the Chung Hua and Mission schools, with their teachers, to an Open Day. Hand-work done by the children was on display: sewing, knitting, wood carving, and models made by the Malay boys and girls were admired and criticised by the young visitors. The school gardens were inspected and found to be run with a common sense balance of private en-terprise and co-operative effort. Individual plots are worked by the bigger boys, who can sell their vege-tables to pay their school fees; while one plot is worked co-operatively to earn money for the School Fund.
While the visitors crowded the door and windows, the school staff were brave enough to give demonstra-tion lessons which included "Buying and Selling". an Arithmetic game; Songs-with-Actions in Malay and English; and a lesson in composition using the Flannel-graph, a simple piece of teaching apparatus.
The following day the children of St. Luke's Mission School were the hosts. The programme began with a P.T. display which included some spectacular "human pyramids", in which excellent teamwork was shown. The school Scout Troop then erected in ten minutes a wood-and-rope suspension bridge over an imaginary stream ten feet wide. Later, parties were conducted round the school gardens, in which many pikuls of vegetables have been grown this year for—and by— the school boarders; round the carpentry shop where school desks and other furniture were being made by the boys; round class rooms where some well-illustrated Science and Nature Study note books, geographical maps, and other classwork books were displayed; and finally, round the exhibition of handwork items of which every boy and girl has to make during the school year: models, embroidery, basketwork, musical (and semi-musical) instruments, and carvings. The patience of the true craftsman was to be seen in several full size topees, each of which had been carved from a solid block of wood. “If the cap fits......", quoted
one visitor.
The interchange of visits will be completed, it is hoped, later in the month, when the Chung Hua school will be "At Home" to the St. Luke's and Abang Aing children, giving a display of basket ball and art work by the girls and boys in their fine new school.
Many of the children and staffs had never been in their counterparts' schools before, and the visits have proved stimulating to all: the children responding well to this chance to show their best work, and the teachers sharing their experience and ideas with a new respect for one another in their common task of educating tomorrow’s citizens of Sarawak.
CORRESPONDENCE
KUCHING, 7th December, 1953
The Editor.
Sarawak Gazette.
Kuching.
SIR,
The meaning of Santubong as explained by both Mr. I. A. N. Urquhart and Mr. C. N. Chong in their correspondence published in a previous Gazette is per-fectly correct. As far as the Sea-Dayak word is concerned, Santubong has no other meaning than coffin.
Lungun is the word for coffin used in the Third Division. In the Second Division it means “cover", and Ngelungun is to cover.
Rarong is an ancient word for coffin. (Kami meda China ngerarong Bangkai Kamari We saw the Chinese putting a corpse into a coffin yesterday).
Another word for coffin is Lumbong. It is a bit different because the Lumbong is not buried under-neath the earth like an ordinary coffin.
The only person who can be buried in the Lumbong is a brave warrior known to have been guarded by the spirit of a tiger, and the Lumbong is usually created under a beautifully decorated hut on the top of a hill.
Cock-fighting was held once or twice a year at the Lumbong in olden times to pray for luck, especially on the eve of an expedition.
I personally know quite a number of Lumbongs which are still being looked after by their descendants, but rather than describe them all here, I am going to mention two famous ones in the Saribas and Kalaka districts.
(1) On the top of Bukit Buli lying between the head-quarters of Julau and Sungai Langit, a branch of Layar River, there is the famous Lumbong of Uyu Apai Ikum, a brave warrior said to have slain thirty enemies. One of his famous fights was when he defended the Bangkong of his war leader Unal Bulan of Ulu Layar, Saribas, about 1840, against the bala under Lang of Banting at Plassan, near the mouth of the Saribas River. It was Uyu Apai Ikum who paid the fine, 40 rusa, imposed by H.H. the Tuan Muda (Sir Charles Brooke) on the Orang Kaya Pemancha Nanang and his brother Luyoh on 26th September, 1861, at the foot of Sadok mountain, as security for their submission to the white Rajah. This fine was refunded to them during the Council meeting at Nanga Skerang three years later.
According to the story related to the writer by a man who is still living today, more than twenty years ago, while searching for rattan around Bukit Buli, a party of Dayaks saw a tiger not far from Uyu's Lumbong. That evening when all of them had returned to their hut, they were struck by a thunderbolt which was followed by a heavy storm. That night their leader dreamt that he saw Uyu who demanded that they should offer piring first before thry did any work on that place.
(2) Another Lumbong is that of Luna who was called Panggau Dara or Panggau Indai Abang. It is situated not far from the late Penghulu Entri's house at Lichok, Sablak. He was known to have been possessed by the spirit of a tiger which made him famous for his bravery. He is an ancestor of the late Penghulu Entri. During Penghulu Entri's life-time he often held the festival of cock-fighting at this Lumbong following the tradition of his ancestors.
Yours etc.,
B. S. A.
Hahn on Brooke
It was with some trepidation that I opened Miss Hanhn's book*; I expected a spectacular book full of spectacular inaccuracies. The first sentence was hardly one to reassure: "Geographers have declared that Borneo is either the largest island, or the smallest continent, in the world". The geographers whom Miss Hahn consulted had, it seems, never heard of Green-land and New Guinea, both larger islands.
However, after having recovered from the natural delight of discovering such an error in the very first sentence, I soon became absorbed in what is a well written biography. Miss Hahn continually quotes large chunks of Spenser St. John,—and very sensibly too—which she enlivens with terse and piquant com-ment. But although largely based on St. John's biography, this book is no mere re-hash. Many original sources have been consulted, and the results presented in an eminently readable yet objective form.
230
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, DECEMBER 31, 1953
Apart from filling an obvious need for a biography to succced St. John's and Jacob's, which are now out of date and long out of print, and forming a useful introduction to Sarawak history, what is there new that this book gives us? Perhaps most important is an intelligible and reasoned account of James Brooke's relations with the home government, with the Colonial Office, and the vociferous anti-Brooke group led by Hume and Cobden. Then there is a side-light on Robert Burns, who, "dishonoured and dead for a century, has at last found a champion in the person of Mr. Tom Harrisson”. Miss Hahn rather inclines to the school of thought which regarded Burns as a "disreputable adventurer" and gives her reasons. How-ever, Mr. Harrisson succeeded in rescuing Burns from obscurity, if not from obloquy, and will be pleased to see Burns's name at last included in a bibliography.
Another excellent aspect of this book is the absence of any forced analysis of character; James Brooke emerges through the story of his life, and the reader is left to make his own conclusions. Nor, praise be, is the subject psycho-analysed across a gap of a hundred-odd years; the word paranoia does not appear once.
Certainly everyone interested in Sarawak will want to read this book. The scholarly may have their own quarrels with Miss Hahn's ideas, and perhaps the meticulous will be irritated by the persistent mis-spell-ing of Linga for Lingga, but then it will be a sad day when we are no longer able to have a choice of spellings for Sarawak place-names.
Sam
*James Brooke of Sarawak, by Emily Hahn (Arthur Barker, 21/-)
Choric Stanzas
Remember, no men are strange, no countries foreign,
Beneath all uniforms, a single body breathes Like ours: the land our brothers walk upon is earth like this, in which we all shall lie.
They, too, aware of sun and air and water.
Are fed by peaceful harvests, by war's long winter starved.
Their hands are ours, and in their lines we read A labour not different from our own.
Remember they have eyes like ours that wake Or sleep, and strength that can be won By love. In every land is common Iife That all can recognise, and understand.
Let us remember, whenever we are told
To hate our brothers, it is ourselves
That we shall dispossess, betray, condemn.
Remember, we who take arms against each other.
It is the human earth that we defile.
Our hells of fire and dust outrage the innocence
Of air that is everywhere our own.
Remember, no men are foreign, and no countries strange.
James Kirkup
[We express our warm thanks to the author, and to the Editor of the The Listener, in which it first appeared earlier this year, for their kind permission to reprint the above poem]
Excerpts from Reports of Administrative Officers for the Third Quarter, 1953
FIRST DIVISION
ACTING DISTRICT OFFICER, KUCHING
(Datu Abang Openg)
The total number of births, deaths and still births during the quarter were as under:—
Births 1132
Deaths
340
Still Births
22
About 100 pilgrims arrived from Singapore by Rajah Brooke on September the 28th. Big crowds of Malays were waiting at the Steamship godowns and on the roadside near Pengkalan Batu and Steamship office to welcome them home.
The Malay Community, under the leadership of the Honourable Datu Bandar, has decided to build a per-manent house in the Mosque compound for the housing of Malay destitute, those who have no place to stay. It is hoped that the building will be constructed as soon as the materials are available.
The longhouse at Kampong Ma'ang, 24th Mile Simanggang Road consisted of 14 doors was completely destroyed by fire on August the 19th. Relief was given by the Social Welfare Council.
The first steam laundry was established in this dis-trict by a Chinese company during the Quarter.
The Department of Agriculture at Muara Tuang has started another padi irrigation scheme at Paya Patong, Tanjong Bundong, in conjunction with the Community Development Scheme.
The survey of swamp padi land in the native area to the east of Simmangang Road between 15th and I7th Mile was completed. The object of this survey was to make more swamp land in this area available to Chinese squatters for the 1953-54 season for cultivation of padi.
Acting District Officer, Bau
(Mr. R. A. Young)
There was an interesting sequel to one case when an old Chinese woman, convicted of distilling arrack illegally, was fined $240.00 and given 12 months to pay in monthly instalments.
When the first instalment was due the lady appeared before the D.O. saying that she had only $10.00. She was astounded when told that this was not enough and she asked to go to prison instead and bring in the whole of her numerous family as well!
The refusal of this request led to about an hour of expostulation, argument and bargaining, the lady offer-ing successively $12., $15., and finally paying up the whole amount.
During the whole time the old lady maintained that the fine was unjust as she had only "made a little arrack for her own use". The amount involved was over 30 quarts.
Clearing of farms for this year’s crop was mostly completed in good time and the hot weather at the end of August and the beginning of September gave the 'early birds' a good burn off. Some villages however were late in holding their ceremonies and a few have
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, DECEMBER 31, 1953
231
still not burned their farms. The early burns were good and the rice planted seems to be doing quite well. The clearing season has brought a crop of land dis-putes. The majority are concerned with persons farm-ing land in another village's territory. There is usually a conflict between customary rights of individuals and the collective rights of the village. In Singghi area the break up of the old hill village has further accentuated the problem and there are now no fewer than 15 cases before the District Native Court which have been appealed from the Chief's Court.
Miss Maxuah binti Johari, daughter of the Tua Kampong of Buso, was married amid great celebrations to Mr. Junaidi bin Sebot of Batu Kawa who is a dis-tant cousin of the bride. The celebrations lasted about three days and a special annexe had to be built to the T.K's house to accommodate all the guests.
A visit to the District by Mr. Kay and Mr. Robertson confirmed that Siniawan is infested with the same disease as caused havoc at Tarat. I have grubbed up a few likely-looking roots elsewhere in the District but without discovering any of the symptoms known to be associated with the disease. Local growers appreciated the interest shown and wait eagerly for more news. Many still stick to their flood hypothesis while others blame manures for dead vines. It would seem that all these things combine to make the pepper gardeners' life very precarious.
A most welcome sight about Bau is the cheerful face of Mr. Peter Goh of S.E.S. Co. who, with his colleagues is doing an excellent job in installing the electricity station. Wiring of premises is virtually finished now; the power plant is installed and the posts have now arrived. Another month should see Bau bazaar be-come a Broadway.
ACTING DISTRICT OFFICER, LUNDU (Abang Indeh)
Tersebut di-bawah ini ia-lah butir2 barang2 yang di-bawa masok dari Sambas, Indonesian Borneo di-dalam Quarter ini di-mana chukai telah di-punggut.
Articles
Coffee Seeds
Unsmoked rubber sheets
Crocodile Skin
Quantity or Weight
4184.34 lbs
40 pls
80 kts
Value $4869.00
2000.00
150.00
$7019.00
Barang2 yang tersebut itu di-bawa masok dengan jalan darat menerusi Kandaie dan Biawak, dari sana barang2 itu di-bawa turun ka-Lundu oleh Sarawak Selako Land Dayak di-kampong Kandaie dan Biawak. Sebelom barang2 itu di-pindah-kan maka Towkay telah memberi tahu kapada Customs Officer.
Wang sebanyak $45.00 pemberian dari Mr. Chong Ah Chiang, Manager Travelling Talkies dengan mak-sud nya untok membaiki bangunan Sekolah Bumipu-tera. Lundu yang sedang menghidapi ka-burok-kan, dengan wang itu saya telah membeli 500 keping attap nipah, dari attap yang tersebut bahwa seblah bangunan itu dapat di-baiki. Saya sangat bersetuju dan menyu-kong dengan kuat atas permohonan Pemangku Guru Besar Sekolah yang tersebut akan mengada-kan Con-cert oleh Murid2 Sekolah untok mengutip wang bagai perbelanja'an membiki bangunan Sekolah itu. Con-cert ini akan di-langsong kan pada malam 25 hari bu-lan December, 1953.
District Officer, Serian (Mr. J. F. Drake-Brockman)
An extraordinary case of theft occurred in Serian Bazaar on the afternoon of 11th September. Three
young men walked into a shop and asked to see some clothes. While the owners back was turned they picked up 10 wrist watches and walked out of the shop, got into a car and drove away. The owner ran out after them, and immediately reported the offence. The police at 24th Mile failed to stop the car and when it was held up at 10th Mile only one of the three persons was still in it. However the watches were all found hidden inside the car and the other two men were arrested soon afterwards.
All three of the offenders were aged about 19 and all had spent two years in the Boys' Home for previous thefts. In order to give them a last chance, on account of their youth, they were each fined $50.- in the District Court and sentenced to 2 years' police supervision.
An inquest was held on Ho Kee Chin aged 17, who committed suicide by shooting himself through the head with a shotgun which he had stolen from a neigh-bour's house. The incident occurred near the river bank not far from Serian Bazaar. It was learnt after-wards that this youth had been prevented by his father from going to China.
The Tebekang Dresser was working with the B.C.G./ Yaws party in Simunjan district during July and August. The Serian Dresser, after his return from 3 months leave, accompanied His Excellency the Govern-or's party on tour up the Sg. Sarawak Kiri and down the Sg. Kayan. Later in July he made a 10-day trip in the Ulu Sadong to visit some more villages. During August he visited Balai Ringin and the Melikin Dayak area. More than 3000 people were vaccinated on these trips and nearly 100 cases of chicken-pox and measles were treated in the vicinity of Balai Ringin.
It is reported with regret than Abang Daud bin Abang Hussain, the headman of Kampong Kelaka, Simunjan, died on September 15th at the age of 73. Abang Daud worked for Government in the Forestry Department from 1921 to 1946, and had been Tua Kampong since 1948. He was also a strong supporter of his village Co-operative Society.
The border trade has decreased considerably during this quarter. Import duties amounted to only $3,093.45 and imports of rubber to 571.57 piculs. The value of coffee imported during the year up to the end of September now amounts to $181,392.- and is rapidly approaching that of rubber, which is $204,710.
1148 piculs of padi and 2267 piculs of rice were sent from Simunjan to Kuching. In each case this was about half the quantity shipped during the second quarter.
225 tons of sawn timber from Simunjan and 79 tons from Gedong were shipped to Kuching.
There was a good spell of dry weather during August and judging by the heat and smoke most people living near Serian took advantage of it to burn off their hill farms. It is belived that most burns in the Ulu Sadong have been successful and that planting of hill-padi has mostly been carried out earlier this year.
The new cinema at 32nd Mile was nearly completed by the end of the quarter and will be ready for opening about the middle of October. It is a more impressive building than the one at Serian and can accommodate 660 persons.
A good site of 7 acres has been surveyed along the roadside about half a mile from Serian Bazaar, for the future expansion of the police force in this area. The police station at Serian has been moved from the kubu to the new barracks, although the VHF set and charging engine are still in the kubu.
232
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, DECEMBER 31, 1953
Two long range patrols were carried out by platoons of the Field Force in traning. These patrols covered a great deal of ground and undoubtedly had a good effect on the morale of the local people. They behaved very well and were impressive to watch.
SECOND DIVISION
Resident (Mr. W. P. N. L. Ditmas)
Mr. M. L. Holliday arrived on the 8th July to discuss internal feeder air services. The site of a possible air strip was inspected, the most suitable one being along the straight portion of the old Sembauh road.
In the first week of September LCT Bubut of the British Mayan Petroleum Company made two trips be-tween Simanggang and Kuala Belait to transport 100 Dayak labourers recruited as follows: from Skrang 25, Engkilili 25, and Lubok Antu 50.
ACTING DISTRICT OFFICER, SIMANGGANG (Abang Abdul Karim)
The District Relief Committee for Simanggang Dis-trict was formed in July and the District Officer is the ex-officio Chairman. The members consisted of re-presentatives of all communities of the district.
The Commissioner for the Commonwealth of Austra-lia in Singapore and Federation, Mr. L R. McIntyre with his wife and two children visited Lingga on 3rd September and were met by the writer who accompanied them to Banting, where they visited an old S.P.G. church and made a short call at Pengarah Angkon's longhouse.
M.V. Kim Soon Huat owned by Mr. Lim Thian Lai capsized at Tanjong Gamang off Sungei Strap on 29th September, 1953 at 6 p.m. having been aground and later washed away by tidal bore and strong current. She carried an excessive number of passengers on board, amounting to forty-five adults and thirteen children. Almost all of the persons on board lost belongings. A survey party of five persons were among the passengers on board and all surveying equipment of the party was also lost.
The Chinese Chung Hua School at Bangkong was re-opened during the quarter. With two teachers to teach, there are now sixty-four children attending the school out of which thirty are Dayak boys. The school is well patronished by local people.
Acting District Officer, Saribas (Mr. D. C. Walker)
The Co-operative Farming Society at Tanjong Sebe-kut whose land has been gazetted under the Wet Padi Rules have planted their land on the dates agreed and have been visited regulary by an Agricultural Field Assisant. A group of Dayaks from above Betong, under the leadership of Budek anak Impin an ex-student of the Rural Improvement School, Kanowit, are farming the 50 acres of land surrendered by the Society. The Malays farming neighbouring land agreed to come under the Wet Padi Rules but the Divi-sional Agriculture Officer advised that he had insuffi-cient staff to supervise a larger area and their land has not been gazetted. The Native Officer Debak reports that 50% of the Malay men at Pusa have gone to work timber at Sarikei, 30% at Lingga. The women are left at home and do most of the work in the padi fields.
During the quarter, 1290 coffee seedlings have been shipped to Spaoh by the Agricultural Department and are to be distributed to the persons who asked for them during my last tour of the Paku. A consignment of 800 had been ordered by the Betong Chinese and was distributed to them on arrival. Word was spread and, in response to requests mostly from Dayaks living near Betong, a further consignment of 650 has arrived and been distributed. Many requests remain unsatisfied.
It is reported that a number of Dayaks in the Padeh have obtained coffee for planting from the Ulu Lema-nak. The interest in coffee is a rare example of pro-paganda producing an immediate and tangible result. It is to be hoped that the coffee does well and a rea-sonable price is maintained.
Some seeds have been planted in the Demonstration Plot at Betong for distribution later as seedlings. Fur-ther requests may shortly be anticipated from the Rim-bas. I was accompanied by an A.F.A. during the Rimbas tour and together we preached the gospel of compost, lcally known as “The Excrement Story” Berita tahi. It is intended to make demonstration compost heaps near the Government Offices at Betong and Debak.
The continued low price of rubber is hitting the Chineset rading community hard throughout the Dis-trict. In Debak, particularly, there is very little trade and many of the Chinese are seriously in debt. Some of them have been foolish enough to allow rent pay-ments to the Dayak owners of their shops to fall into arrears and at least one has been served with an imme-diate notice to quit. It will be practically impossible for them to raise enough cash to pay all the arrears of rent. The owners are not likely to be accommodating; they probably do not yet realise that it will be small benefit to them to force their debtors into bankruptcy at a time of trade recession.
The Red Cross have decided, with the approval of the Resident, to undertake the duties of a District Relief Committee and have formed a sub-committee for the purpose. They intend to use their own funds for relief supplemented by a grant from the Social Welfare Council.
Acting Disctrict Officer, Lubok Antu
(Mr. M. J. Forster)
Although the hardest this year was an average one, more than half the houses reported that their padi would not last them all the year. With very few ex-ceptions the shortage was blamed on the destruction caused by pests which attacked the crops before they could be gathered in. This shortage of padi is not as disastrous as it sems. Other food crops such as corn and tapioca are grown. Fish, wild pig, deer and mon-keys as well as vegetables and fruits are all eaten. But if full bins of rice are not essential to life, they confer a sense of well-being and security. The constant loss of crops is discouraging and appears to be one of the causes which make the people want to migrate.
During September a party of tuui rumah accompanied by the District Officer went to Ulu Limbang to examine a site which was available for settlement. The trip was both successful and enjoyable and the party returned with very pleasant memories of their trip. Those who decided that Limbang will be suitable for their needs are sure of friendly help from Sea Dayaks who moved there some twenty years ago.
The Lubok Antu School was opened at the beginning of September and the first classes held on the 3rd. The school has two joint headmasters, a Malay and Chinese At the end of the quarter there were 58 pupils i.e., 36 Chinese, 15 Dayaks, 2 Malays and 5 children whose parents are Government servants. Instruction is given in Sea Dayak language and English and Mandarin are taught. It is too early to say whether this school will be successful but it seems to have made a very good start.
This school owes very much to the enthusiasm and public spiritedness of the Chinese Committee in collect-ing funds to erect the buildings, buy books and provide one of the teachers. The school was most fortunate that the Divisional Education Officer was able to spend several days at Lubok Antu advising the Committee and supervising the actual arrangements for the school. Dayak support has been more cautious but they have
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, DECEMBER 31, 1953
233
agreed to carry out their obligation of erecting quarters for the staff.
All children pay fees of $2 per month payable in advance. The school also receives a generous grant from the Government but even so there is a substan-tial deficit each month to be made up by private sub-scriptions.
Acting District Officer, Kalaka (Abang Mustapha)
A number of Dayaks from the 38 doors under Peng-hulu Brinau had settled down at Sungai Kersik, Roban, and they had started opening up the area for padi cultivation. I understand more people would come and join them to farm in this area. It is hoped that this area could be improved for future padi schemes.
The new building of Chung Hua School at Kabong was completed during the quarter. Teaching com-menced on 21st July, 1953.
Seven police officers from the Field Force including one N.C.O. arrived here from Kuching on 29th July to assist in the investigation of the Nanga Assam mur-der case. They proceeded to Nanga Melupa on the following day headed by the Assistant Superintendent of Constabulary, Simanggang Sector, Mr. John Nichol.
THIRD DIVISION
Acting Resident (Mr. A. R. Snelus)
The quarter was again notable for the disappoint-ingly early onset of wet weather and high floods. The Royal Engineers’ party above Kapit were only able to start their rock blasting operations in the rapids at the end of June, owing to the Rejang still being too high before then, and high water put an unexpectedly early end to their work at the beginning of September, when they were only left with a couple of rocks to finalise the operation properly.
The weather similarly interfered seriously with the repairs to a portion of the airfield at Sibu which it had been hoped to complete in September. By late October it was unfortunately still impossible to reopen the airfield.
Progress was maintained in getting through the very large programme of public works in the Division, but was not quite as rapid as had been hoped, owing partly to the weather, but mainly to the serious lack of senior and technical staff for supervising the works.
Private enterprise continues to show confidence in the future with the building of 15 new shophouses at Sibu, now nearing completion, and two new blocks of shops at Binatang; while plans for a cinema at Binatang and a second cinema at Sarikei are also in train. The money for these operations comes, however, largely from the pepper industry and the timber trade. Ba-zaars dependent upon rubber and sago for their busi-ness are going through a very lean period, and there is generally far less money about. The standard of living, though not its cost, has dropped noticeably, in particular amongst the primary producers.
With the depressed price of rubber far more people have reverted to padi planting this season and it is anticipated that there will be a considerable increase in the padi produced over last year. Reports from all dis-tricts except Kanowit, where they left their burn too late, are most encouraging in respect of both hill and swamp padi.
Sibu suffered a severe loss when Mr. and Mrs. Pem-berton, local Manager of the Chartered Bank, left on leave on the 29th September. Both played a prominent part in local affairs, Mr. Pemberton being a member of the Sibu Urban District Council and Chairman of the Finance Committee, and Mrs. Pemberton doing a lot of teaching. Their absence will be keenly felt.
District Officer, Lower Rejang (Mr. A. J. N. Richards)
Nineteen persons went from the district on pilgrim-age to Mecca and were royally welcomed by the Malay Community on their return. One died before complet-ing the pilgrimage.
Hari Raya Haji was observed as a holiday and was used by the Colonial Timber Company, most of whose employees are Malays, to hold a very successful sports at the sewmill, and to give a film show with a new portable projector. This now visits Kelepu and Rejang regularly.
Rejang is developing rapidly. The Malays have now received compensation for their demolished houses and are building on the new lots. They have made up the road and invested in carts for carrying heavy timber. Several bicycles are in evidence. Former residents are returning there.
Some Dayaks in Penghulu Lubun's area are becom-ing interested in sago, and there are one or two in-terested in cattle. The majority of hill Dayaks, how-ever, continue to struggle with pepper without the means to purchase or transport adequate quantities of artificial manures.
The few ex-pupils of the Rural Improvement School, Kanowit, are doing very well and in some cases in the face of considerable difficulties.
The ceiling of the Sarikei Dispensary was renewed and now gives better light. Binatang needs the same treatment. The Hospital Assistant at Binatang is to be congratulated on his large attendance there. He finds time to begin a flower garden as well.
Mr. Chen Ko Ming, Cantonese Capitan, and Miss Ling Bee Ing were married at the Methodist Church on 29th August.
Reports indicate that an increased acreage of padi is being planted this season. A quarter of a million dollars’ worth is expected from Bruan alone where near-ly 1,00 acres are cultivated. Planting has been going on along all the strips between forest and estuary north of the main Rejang.
Disputes have been few but it will be necessary soon either to settle the padi areas and grant individual title or to supervise the collection of rents of communal lands. Difficulties arise both from the assumption of individual rights of user over communal lands and from the treatment of those lands as semi-private pro-perty by headmen.
Some Dayaks in the down-river areas are shewing interest in sago and thr Melanaus of Belawai are realising that fishing is not everything.
Mr. Robertson, accompanied by Mr. Song Thian Seng, visited some of the pepper areas in August and confirmed that many of the vines are diseased, having brittle branches. These were Chinese gardens and gene-rally in better condition than Dayak gardens for the Dayaks cannot always afford manures. It may be, howeve, that the Chinese render their plants more vulnerable for forcing growth too fast.
Nearly 22,000 pikuls, almost 1,300 tons, of pepper were exported. This was nearly all black pepper.
There was very little recession of trade when the price of pepper went down because forward purchases had been made at a price to allow for this.
Much of the bazaar trade is in supplying the needs of labour. The export of pepper and timber requires large numbers of labourers who are supplied by, if not also based upon, Sarikei. Binatang is worse off, al-
234
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, DECEMBER 31, 1953
though that bazaar deals with Matu and Daro and the logging areas. Bazaars like Matu and Daro have no business without rubber unless they take an interest in padi. This they do by giving credit at the rate of about $12 for a promised pikul of padi after harvest.
Timber exports were:— 5,547 tons of logs and 2,280 tons sawn. The greater proportion of sawn tim-ber came from the C.T.C. mill and included some samples sent to Italy.
A map shewing the positions of charcoal kilns is being prepared. It is quite possible that there are more concerns and more kilns operating quietly in the mangrove areas than are ever officially noticed.
The Island Trading Company is hoping to import bakau bark for rendering. Some of their employees make their own Malay type boats and these are some-times sold. Two have been ordered for the Forest Department and are believed to be safer than long boats in the rough waters of Daro and Rejang. The cost un-painted is $5/- a pikul capacity.
The launch wharf at Binatang was completed and that at Sarikei extended and repaired. Repairs would be lessened if a stricter control and selection of juragans could be instituted. The Shipping Department has now begun prosecuting unlicensed juragans and those who overload their vessels, together with the owners con-cerned.
A ten-ton launch, the Chin Soon, turncd over and sank in the disturbed water of the Nyelong mouth on 21st September. It cannot now be traced. It must have been unseaworthy, but whether by overloading or other-wise has not yet been decided.
Water. The bungalow water tanks were cleaned in July and were found to need it very badly. In the same month the Customs Godown gutters were repaired and immediately shewed a saving in the rapid filling of the tank.
Repok Road was being filled with earth up to the second mile but rain upon this made the road generally impassable. The work is now being organised for the contractor and better use is being made of the roller that was sent in July.
A decision was reached upon the diversion of the Kelepu Road at Binatang and work should start soon.
The Sarikei and Binatang Municipal Boards held their usual meetings at the end of each month. Dis-posal of rubbish is a difficulty in both places under this year's contracts which has to be solved by extempore methods. Good progress has been made in clearing and improving back lanes and side lanes.
One of the promised 62 k.w. engines for SESCO arrived in September but had not been moved to its site at the end of the month.
There were no labour disputes. A complaint against a taxi driver who attempted to overcharge was referred to the Motor Vehicles Union and settled on 18th September. The Union agreed to print and publish agreed tables of fares.
The Methodist Mission is planning to put up a large English School on their land in the Municipal Area. If this is built in the three or four years allowed it will be an English counterpart to the Chinese Middle School.
The farming community at Sungei Kisa completed a new school building in July.
School fees were imposed upon pupils of Government Malay Schools in August. The Committees came to life to exempt the permitted 10% from payment. Further
investigation has shewn that this was not the case everywhere and the proportion of non-paying pupils is smaller than this even in some of the poorer kam-pongs.
The Sarikei Malays have decided to pay another dollar per taxpayer towards their school and teacher's house.
The Local Authority School in the Ulu Binatang now flourishes and has greater attendance than the others. This progress is the result of the personalities of the teacher and the Penghulu (Tigong) whose only com-plaint now is that he has not yet been able to complete the concrete floors!
On 15th July a Malay disappeared from a boat at night at Tanjong Mani. He was found 36 hours later on the river bank in an exhausted condition. He said he had been taken for a walk by a beautiful girl and had been entertained by her and four others in a tree top house. They spent the time swinging in a rotan and she gave him only raw relik fish to eat. He said he wanted to fetch his mother to this delectable spot and found himself on the ground. Some weeks after his recovery, his house in Sibu was burned down and he alone perished from burns.
One of the clerks at Tembang Buah (C.T.C. saw-mill) was offered a fine red boat by one of these "fairies" at the sawmill one night.
On another night a Malay girl was awakened by her father calling her outside. She opened the door and followed him. She was found a day later hiding speech-less in a clump of bamboo. Half way down the path her "father" had resumed the proper shape of an antu.
It is now supposed that the launch Chin Soon may have been sunk by supernatural means.
Meanwhile some bold spirits set Tanjong Mani in an uproar by choosing night time to go out with lights and re-paint the bearing marks on shore.
The Public Reading Room at Sarikei was organised by Inche Morshidi and opened to the public. It is proving very popular and Binatang now wants one. Binatang has collected money for the initial building and has now to go on and collect more for a play-ground. The Sarikei playground is finished except for provision of grass and equipment.
Haji Murat, the Tuan Khatib of Daro, was pre-sented with a Long Service Medal at Sarikei on 11th September.
Acting District Officer, Kapit (Mr. A. M. Phillips)
In Belaga Sub-District one house alone had fourteen deaths in one month, August, due to malaria which developed into pneumonia, taking the victims off in two to five days from the apparent start of the illness. The Belaga dresser made an emergency visit to the house which is above the Bakun Rapids and in the Linau. After his visit only one more death occurred.
During the slack period after harvest several hun-dred Dayaks left the district against the advice of my-self, the penghulu and often of their own tuai2 rumah This indiscriminate bejalai causes hardship to their families by depriving the bilek of sometimes the only able-bodied man for farming. It also means that pro-duce from the District is reduced, in turn reducing the general prosperity. In addition many of the wandering Dayaks fail to get proper work elsewhere and apart from sending no money back to their families often get into debt and eventually find it impossible to raise the fare home. They then live in some local longhouse in order to work for enough rice etc. to see them home. In the end they marry there and do not return to Kapit at all. If they were married before they occasionally send the divorce fine of $15 to Kapit. $10 goes to the discarded wife to see her through and $5 goes to the Local Authority.
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, DECEMBER 31, 1953
235
There is no way of stopping a Dayak going off to see the world and the answer is either to persuade him to go up river on rotan and damar expeditions often lasting a year or more in the jungle (many of the young Dayaks find this distasteful and too tough these days) or to have them recruited in Kapit by a Company for a definite length of time after which they are returned again to Kapit. During their contract they send a com-pulsory allotment to their bilek.
This scheme has now been started for the first time in Kapit where 45 men were recruited by the B.M.P. Co., Seria. We can do with many more being recruited in this way. When the word gets round, those Kapit Dayaks now said to be milling aimlessly near Miri and Baram and being deported on frequent occasions from Brunei for having no Certificate of Identity would re-turn to Kapit realizing that that was the only way to get a fixed job in Seria.
Their allotments then would come to their families regularly and the District would not be completely de-nuded of their earning power as it has been up to the present.
The object of a Dayak in leaving home is not pri-marily to make his fortune but to make a name for himself. The attainment of wealth is second, though possibly a close second. If by a regular labour recruit-ing programme here each was assured of his turn at a decent rate and fixed terms the vast majority would be prepared to wait their turn and in the meantime would devote their energies to local work, on timber, rotan, damar, farming etc. etc.
So although on paper the numbers of able-bodied men away from Kapit in the Rangers and recruited by Companies would be much larger than at present the actual number of men away would be less.
Under the old system if a man is away for two years probably a year only of that is spent on profitable la-bour. The other year is spent travelling, looking for work, on part time jobs, or working in order to find his passage home. So everybody loses.
Kenyahs from U.S.I. (Batang Kayan) and Dayaks from Kanyau continue to come in in large numbers. In the last week of August 117 Kenyahs arrived in Kapit. A week later I met 60 more on their way down at Belaga. At the end of the quarter 20 more came in.
The Dayaks come into Song, the ulu Ga'at and Sut via the Katibas. Many of the latter are related to Kapit Dayaks or were born in Sarawak so it is difficult to see where to draw the line.
The local penghulu are hoping that the engkabang crop which, if it materialises, will be the biggest for many years, will be saved with the help of these Indo-nesians since the local Dayaks who remain in the dis-trict will be too few for the job.
The locals in general report good burns this year and all above Kapit had almost completed their plant-ing at the end of the quarter.
The Belaga school continues to improve impressively under the new teacher and the change is recognisable at a distance in the well kept garden and area. One is now roused in the kubu with the strains of "God Save the Oueen", sung lustily and even recognisably, drifting across from the school.
The Methodist Mission opened two new schools one in Melinau (Penghulu Sibat) and one in Merirai (Peng-hulu Jugah) during the quarter.
Logging seems to be the mainstay at the moment
thought this is augmented by rotan and other jungle produce.
Only two people as far as is known left Penghulu Sandai's area above Pelagus Rapids for work elsewhere. The rest, if they wanted work, signed contracts for logs with B.C.L.
The people above Pelagus would be in very poor shape, I think, if it were not for logging.
The bazaars at Kapit and Song are still doing fair business, though some shops complain of lack of trade. All are looking forward to the enkabang season and hope that it will fetch a good price.
The Penghulus all request that their uniform be changed. The material to be better and so issued less often and the rules for wearing it to be more strict (at present they are often used while repairing an out-board engine).
The actual form of the new uniform has yet to be decided but will probably come up in the forthcoming District Council.
DISTRICT OFFICER, MUKAH (Mr. A. R. Meikle)
In September a party of Dayaks paddling down to Dalat stopped to cook their midday meal at the edge of a sago garden between Kampong Medong and Kampong Kekan. One of the party who went into the garden to look for worms at the base of sago trees was shot dead. It is thought to be another case of causing death by a negligent act, but to date no arrest has been made. Since none of the Dayak party carried guns, the crime was probably committed by a Melanau out hunting, but the garden owner has estab-lished an alibi.
An 8 door house in the Penipah area was accident-ally destroyed by fire in September. Most of the inhabitants had moved, together with their belongings, to their farming huts. There was no loss of life or injury, and little damage to possessions.
A Dayak house in Sungei Anak, Balingian, was struck by lightning. An old woman, the only occupant at the time, was rendered unconscious, but has recovered. This is considered a bad omen, and the inhabitants propose to rebuild elsewhere after the next harvest, meanwhile living on their farms.
A land dispute of long standing between Dayaks and Melanaus at Balingian, where both partics were claim-ing non-existent rights in the Mixed Zone area which has been under the Land Settlement Ordinance for many years was settled by the Resident in July.
The fishing section of the Melanau community obtained excellent catches throughout the quarter.
The Commissionar, Co-operative Development, held mass meetings of Melanau co-operators at Mukah and Oya in August, while the Assistant Registrar toured all Melanau and Dayak Societies.
Owing to current economic conditions, the Melanaus are showing greater interest in wet padi planting, particularly on the Oya river. Many have planted padi in sago gardens where the young trees are not yet sufficiently large to shade it out. The area between Oya and Kampong Teh is better planted up than last year, while the Medong Melanaus have set to work in the area at Narub allocated to them.
There were reports of enkabang flowering, but this does not necessarily mean that a crop will mature.
Average local prices over the District for raw sago (lemanta), unsmoked rubber, and jelutong were $2.70 per passu, $48.30 per picul and $30.60 per picul res-pectively. These show furthcr decreases compared with the previous quarter of 40 cents a passu in respect of sago, and $2.20 a picul in respect of rubber. The price of jelutong, however, represents an increase of $5.10 a picul.
236
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, DECEMBER 31, 1953
Fish was plantiful and cheap throughout the quarter, and surpluses of both fresh and dried fish were sold to Sibu traders. Otherwise, prices of consumer goods remained high and bazaar trade was quiet.
The Dalat and Balingian sawmills continued to provide employment for Melanaus and Dayaks, but the drift of Melanaus out of the District in search of work elsewhere continued.
Work on the waterworks filtration plant continued as and when materials were delivered.
A further 480 yards of the Sungei Kut were widened and dredged during the quarter and by the end of September the dredger was approaching the very shallow area, which causes so much delay to travellers through the Kut.
The reconstruction of the road between the kubu and the bazaar at Balingian was completed except for final gravelling and rolling. The rehabilitation of this short stretch of road has led to the appearance of bicycles for hire.
Mukah lock-up remained empty during July and August, but received three welcome occupants in September, by which time the compound was badly in need of clearing. One of these prisoners was transferred to Sibu.
The Budget Meeting of the Local Authority took place on 11-8-53, the draft estimates prepared by the Finance and General Purposes Committee being passed. The estimated expenditure of the Local Authority is $10,000 more than for 1953, $5,000 of which re-presents capital expenditure on a Dayak Rest House, and the balance is due to the normal increments in salaries and to expanding edcuational services requiring additional teachers. In view of the trade recession it is satisfactory that the Local Authority can still, if the capital expenditure to be met from the Reserve Fund is excluded, produce a small surplus of estimated revenue over expenditure.
In present local economic conditions, however, the expenditure of the Local Authority would appear to be reaching its maximum, and further expansion of educational and other services will have to be curtailed unless fresh sources of revenue or increased grants from Government are available.
The Finance and General Purposes Committee of the Local Authority met 3 times, being mainly occupied with the preparation of the draft estimates in addition to transaction of routine business.
The first Dayak Local Authority school, at Bukit Ingkerbai was opened with a Melanau teacher on 4-8-53. A party comprising the District Officer, Chairman of the Local Authority, Chairman of the Education Committee, and the Senior Native Officer, Mukah, attended the ceremony. The 23 pupils, drawn from 4 nearby longhouses, were given a stirring address by the Chairman of the Education Committee (Mr. Tan Khi Liong) on the advantages of education in preventing Dayaks being swindled by unscrupulous traders.
At the end of the Quarter the initial enthusiasm of the Bukit Ingkerbai school still continued.
The Dalat Chinese Charitable Trust Board was established in July to administer the temple and cemetery at Dalat. This Board is also negotiating to buy land for a new cemetery.
District Officer, Kanowit
(Mr. R. H. Morris)
There was no major crime in the District during the quarter. The only items calling for comment
were the theft of a young thoroughbred middle white pig from the Rural Improvement School, a case in which no arrest has been made, and the theft of jewellery from a house on the Lian Hap Estate. In the latter case some excellent work on the part of Sub-Inspector Ahmad resulted in the arrest and conviction of the thief.
On the evening of Sunday the 13th September the former Penghulu Empam I passed away at his house in the Kanowit river. The Penghulu, who was the recipient of the Coronation Medal and a decoration awarded by His Holiness the Pope, had been ill for many months. He was first appointed a penghulu in 1936 and retired in 1952 after 16 years' service. He was one of the most progressive penghulus in the area and was largely instrumental in fostering the spread of education. No less than three of the Kanowit Sea Dayak Local Authority schools are in his area.
There appears to have been a minor epidemic of a mild type of fever in the District during the last month. The symptoms include severe headaches, a running nose and in some cases diarrhoea and vomiting. It seems possible that the disease may be an allergy of some kind since it is reported that it frequently occurs at this time of the year that is, when the fruit trees are in flower.
During September efforts were made to vaccinate as many people as possible who have not already been done. The exact figure is not available but is probably in the vicinity of 3,000.
The pepper post trade has continued although at a slightly lower tempo than in June. At the moment there are seven tongkangs engaged in transporting posts from this district to points lower down the Rejang. My estimate is that during the quarter under review no less than a quarter of a million posts have been shipped out of the Kanowit District. The trade is giving concern to penghulus in the District and they are now devoting some effort to propaganda in favour of conservation of belian in their areas.
The probability of an engkabang crop though eagerly anticipated by practically everybody is causing no little concern to penghulus in the District. It is ex-pected that there will be a number of Kampars from the 2nd Division, and possibly some memaloh from Kalimantan Barat coming into the district to collect the crop. Almost inevitably a crop of disputes will develop. Those penghulus who have discussed the matter with me say that the low price for rubber over the last few months is certain to result in a greater number of Kampars arriving than was the case this year, when, according to them, there was considerable friction between local people and those from other rivers.
During the quarter I visited approximately thirty-five longhouses in most of which there was one or possibly more returned Iban trackers. It was interesting to note that in the majority of cases the “doors" of returned trackers were cleaner and better kept. The ex-trackers were generally speaking more interested in discussions on the subject of a mixed local authority and seemed to have at least some compre-hension of what it was all about. I mentioned this apparent difference to two penghulus and asked them whether they had themselves noticed any change in their anak biak after their return from Malaya. One replied that he had not but the other said that he most certainly had and that further, service in Malaya was not the only case of travel broadening the outlook. Those who spent any length of time in the employment of the oil company also seemed to benefit thereby.
Some progress has been made towards the goal of a mixed Local Authority in Kanowit District. On the 28th August the Dayak Local Authority passed a
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, DECEMBER 31, 1953
237
motion to the effect that a mixed Local Authority should be formed in 1954 provided that the Chinese and Malays were prepared to join in. The question of the introduction of pupu pala has been deferred until such time as the Chinese and Malays give their decision.
The present price of rubber has resulted in far less effort being put into tapping and in consequence quite a few Chinese gardeners have planted small areas of padi. No physical census of the areas so planted has been made but from reports which I have received it seems that at least twice the 1952-3 area has been planted. Traders in the Kanowit Bazaar anticipate that their sales of imported rice after March 1954 will not exceed sixty bags per month provided that there is a reasonable harvest. Present sales amount to some 120 bags per month.
Business in the Kanowit Bazaar is still extremely poor. Seven of the fifty-eight shophouses are now empty.
Shipments of rubber from the Kanowit Bazaar during the quarter are said to have averaged less than 300 piculs per mensem. This would bring in a return of $16,500 approximately and should be compared with the figures for cash payments and cash receipts by the District Office Kanowit. In August these were $22,433.03 and S12,230.18 respectively.
There has been an interesting change in the pattern of trade in the Kanowit Bazaar over the past year. Sales of such "luxurics" as "Milo", Ovaltine", biscuits and cloth have fallen enormously both in value and volume, on the other hand sales of salt have increased by approximately 20%. I am informed that the reason for the increase in the sale of salt is that many Chinese farmers are using it in the preservation of fish and vegetables.
Local prices for vegetables has fallen appreciably during the quarter and for the first time for some years are lower than those quoted for Kuching in the Sarawak Gazette. They are also believed to be lower than Sibu prices.
It is rumourcd that certain Sibu exporters are negotiating for short term leases of the empty shop-houses in Kanowit in order to use them as storage godowns for the anticipated engkabang crop.
There is no doubt that a good crop of engkabang would help enormously to lift the Kanowit bazaar out of the doldrums and there are some grounds for believ-ing that a few traders who had considered closing down are now endeavouring to carry on in the expect-ation of being able to cash in on the crop.
Considerable numbers of Dayaks have left the area for the oilfields in search of work. Many others have applied for certificates of identity to enable them to go to Tawau, North Borneo. It appears that various firms in that area are only too keen to get hold of Dayak labour.
A number of local Chinese have also left Kanowit area for Seria in search of work.
Engkabang is reported to be flowering in the Entabai Kanowit, Julau, Ngemah, Poi and Mujok rivers and there seems to be excellent chances of a record crop in 1954, unless heavy rain or excessively hot weather during the next two months should inter-fere with the setting of the fruit. The flowers are reported to be more plentiful than any time since 1935.
Towards the end of Septcmber I discussed with various community leaders the possibility of forming a Kanowit Troop of Boy Scouts. It is hoped to form a troop consisting of all language groups. The
reaction to the suggestion has generally speaking been favourable and the advice of the Scout Commissioner has been sought prior to a further meeting being held.
Heavy rainstorms during the quarter caused con-siderable erosion of the riverside pathway from Fort Emma tothe Bazaar. Technical advice was sought and as a result of this a number of ornamental trees on the river bank were regretfully cut down. It appears that during the period covered by the memory of some local residents land to a width of over seventy feet has been lost in this area, if this is in fact so and if it should continue at the same rate for, say, another forty years it will be necessary by that time to find a new site for Kampong Masjid.
During the quarter tenders were called for and contracts made for the construction of a new dispen-sary, additional clerks' quarters and for the new girls school at the Rural Improvement School.
On the 10th August Kanowit was struck by a severe wind and rain squall, numerous trees were blown over, two houses in Kampong Mali were damaged, the roof of the old customs godown lost two sheets of corru-gated iron, numerous roofing tiles were broken in the market and many drains were clogged up with silt and sand. Work on clearing up had scarcely been completed when a further violent storm struck Kanowit on the 22nd August, more trees were blown over along the river front and considerable damage to paths. drains and the bazaar road caused by the storm water from the torrential rain. The storm water caused a minor landslide on the river bank in the vicinity of the kubu as a result of which it will be necessary to dismantle and rebuild the bridge in the Kubu Jelantong.
FOURTH DIVISION
Acting Resident (Mr. A. F. R. Griffin)
Dr. Zulueta and his WHO Team are now well established and appear to be getting increasing support from the Kayans and Kenyahs upriver.
This experiment seems to have been highly success-ful, and it is intended to extend it to the ulu Tinjar. A suitable candidate has been chosen to undergo training in Kuching early next year; after his training, it is proposed he will open a rural dispensary in the ulu Tinjar.
Agreement has been reached with the Sarawak Oil-fields Limited on the Miri Government Hospital and minor alterations have been put in hand. It is hoped the Hospital will be opened in December as a T.B. Hospital staffed by the Sarawak Oilfields Limited.
On August 25th, the new Cathay Cinema was formally opened. It is a very fine hall and will seat more than 700 persons. It is a building of which the Town can be justly proud.
ACTING DlSTRICT OFFICER, MlRI
(Mr. E. G. White)
The main ailments were ulcers, worms, coughs and colds. Whooping cough was still prevalent in July and August, but in September few cases were treated. All cases and suspected cases were referred to the S.O.L. hospital. Due to its effective treatment there, there is no likelihood of an epidemic.
39 cases of malaria, 37 of which were “subtertian” and 2 cases of "benign tertian" malaria, were recorded during the months of July—September, 1953. Most of these cases were from outside the control areas where most of the people were supplied with paludrine as a preventive measure against attacks of malaria.
7,734 gallons of anti-malarial oil were used for weekly spraying on the water surface on a temporary anti-malarial measure during the 3 months to areas within the Municipal, the S.O.L., the Sungei Krokop
238
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, DECEMBER 31, 1953
and the Loak. 527 gallons of D.D.T. soluton in kerosene were also used for spraying S.O.L. and Gov-ernment buildings which are being sprayed once in every three months as a measure against the adult mos-quitoes.
40,558 paludrine tablets were issued to people living within and outside the control area as a preventive measure against attacks of malaria.
The sudden death of Senior Agricultural Officer, Mr. Ong Ching Ghee was keenly felt by all. He was a very popular and energetic leader in this area.
The work of measuring the exact acreage of paya land at Kampong Sasam has not yet been completed. It is hoped to allocate at least some of this land to the Tusan people, whose own farming land is of extremely poor soil necessitating a large farming area. Even so yield is very poor.
The land is being cleared for both wet and dry padi cultivation and with rice now a cash crop larger areas than usual have been planted.
Collections of birds' nests in the Niah Caves were made between 15th July and 10th September. 4 pikuls 75 katis were collected on the first 30 days and 4 pikuls 45 katis in the second period. The ruling price per pikul is $200/-.
The price of guano has risen and demand fallen off slightly. lllegal pilfering is still suspected but attempts to catch the offenders have not yet been successful.
Mr. N. F. Robertson, the plant pathologist from the School of Botany, Cambridge, visited Miri in July. He inspected the pepper gardens at Riam Road and else-where. No absolute cure for the "sudden death" disease has been found, but preventative measures were worked out and the planters advised accordingly. The incidence of this disease is not fortunately very high in this district.
The Sarawak Oilfields Limited High Tension line, Lutong-Pujut-Miri, is already under construction. Compensation of $15,793 has been made to those occupiers of land (mostly squatters) who were forced to move their houses or gardens to make way for the trace.
On 1st August "Operation Polish”, a Colony wide smarten-up campaign for the police, started. The re-sults have been successful.
The Police have been foremost in donating their blood to patients in the Sarawak Oilfields hospital.
The new Krokop Chinese Public School was opened on the morning of Sunday, 20th September by the Acting District Officer, Miri.
In Niah, the Malay community has built a new rustic type school and schoolmaster's house.
On August 5th a meeting was held of local fishermen (mainly Chinese) to discuss the question of fishing limits—what areas of Sarawak coastal waters should be prohibited to foreign fishermen. It was decided, and a recommendation forwarded to Government accord-ingly, that the seaward limit should be based on depth of water and not distance from the coast.
The first meeting of the Miri Social Welfare Council was held on July 7th. The composition of the com-mittee and procedure was decided. The objects and principles were explained to members.
A meeting of the Miri King George VI Memorial Fund was held on 24th August. The outcome was that the establishment of a playing field in Miri was selected as being the most suitable memorial.
On 3rd September, the Divisional Councillors with the Acting District Officer, Miri, were the guests of the
B.M.P. Co. Ltd. at Seria and were flown to Seria and given a conducted tour of the oilfield. The Boys Trade School was of particular interest. All enjoyed the visit and are grateful to the Oil Company for their hospitality.
As indicated by the Representative Food Basket, the cost of living has risen slightly this quarter compared with the 2nd quarter. The Representative Food Basket came to $129.96 this quarter as compared with $119.93 last quarter. This is an approximate increase of 10%. This increase can be accounted for by the relative in-crease in the price of rice, fish, soap and chillis.
With the price of rice good relative to that of cash crops, rice is itself becoming a cash crop and some native have planted a larger acreage this year than is normal.
Some natives, having finished their padi planting, took labouring jobs building the new Berkenu bazaar.
At Niah, due to the low price of rubber, many tap-pers have stopped work and now work on the pepper gardens at Batu.
Tua Kampong Latip of Kampong Kalulit tendered his resignation. This was accepted. A new Tua Kampong will be elected.
A shallow core drilling party of Sarawak Oilfields Limited operating in the Suai area encountered high pressure gas in one of the bore holes—operations had to be interrupted due to the escape of gas and after several attempts the gas was brought under control and shut off.
DISTRICT OFFICER, BARAM
(Mr. A. R. G. Morrison)
The jealousy case involving the Kelabit girl Ujan, the wife of Guru Jala of Long Lellang, was settled. Ujan herself eventually showed where the beads were hidden and nearly all of them were recovored. Ujan was charged with theft and was bound over for a year and ordered to pay compensation to the owner of the beads and the people of the longhouse. It eventually tran-spired that this sort of bead snatching in jealousy cases is not uncommon among the Kelabits.
Two youngsters from Beluru, a Malay and a Chinese (Malay by adoption) were convicted in two cases of theft in the Police and District Courts and given substantial prison terms. Not only had they stolen large quantities of goods but a substantial pro-portion was never recovered. Another Malay was sen-tenced to 9 months for theft of an outboard engine. Some other outboard engines were stolen, from an S.O.L. party, but were recovered and no arrests were made. These thefts seem to be mainly due to the de-cline in the price of rubber and the disappearance of the easy livings to be picked up by the last year or two.
A Dayak Tuai Rumah was found guilty of removing survey pegs. He was bound over and ordered to pay costs. This was a difficult case since it arises from a bitter land dispute between Foochows and Dayaks over land in the vicinity of the so-called Foochow con-cession. The Chinese won the case but there are cer-tainly grounds for believing that they received more than they should have done. The problems arising from the land case were still under consideration at the end of the quarter.
Health remained good during the quarter. The WHO team were hard at work and Dr. de Zulueta con-tinued to perform a quite remarkabale amount of tra-velling. I doubt whether anyone has ever covered quite so much of Sarawak in so short a time and in-deed he must have seen more of Sarawak than many of the oldest inhabitants. A journey he performed during the quarter was Marudi—Long Tebangan via Long Buroi. Long Tebangan is a considerable dis-
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, DECEMBER 31, 1953
239
tance up the Akah and Long Buroi is the last house in the Ulu Tinjar.
During my visit to the Kelabit country I was much interested to see the rural dispensary at work at Pa Mein. This is a dispensary run by a semi-educated but very keen and conscientious Kelabit called Garawat. He is paid as a Hospital Attendant, can give first aid and deal with quite a number of sicknesses such as yaws, malaria, worm infestations etc. It would be quite impossible to get a fully educated man to do this work and I thought Garawat was doing a very useful job. It is a system which might well be copied in many other rural areas thereby perhaps releasing travelling dressers to man more static posts.
A BCG Team was at work in the quarter in the Marudi: further BCG work was due in the Ulu Baram.
I much regret to report the death of the Penan Wakil-Penghulu Julong of the Apoh who was drowned in the Apoh when his boat capsized on 18th September.
There was very heavy mortality among Marudi chickens during the quarter.
A second trial airstrip rentis at Marudi was cut diagonally to the one mentioned in my last report.
Liddell Brothers have received their specially con-structed ship for transporting timber between Linei. Baram and Labuan. They have also received some of the long awaited winch equipment which is now being set up in the Linei area.
Long Atip is now in wireless communication with Lawas which is often a great convenience for this office.
The Divisional Education Officer was able to attend the Local Authority meeting held in August and a number of useful decisions were taken. It was agreed that teachers should pay more attention to look-ing after their charges out of actual school hours and that they should be paid extra allowances for doing so of $10 per month. The Authority agreed to raise an education cess of $1 per taxpayer to help cover the additional expenses.
District Officer, Bintulu
(Mr. P. Scanlon)
Most Dayak houses are now beginning to run short of food. The harvest last year was poor and very few families reaped enough padi to supply their own food requirements for the whole year. I do not anticipate however that the Dayaks of Bintulu district will starve, but rather that the production of bilian ataps will in-crease. Many Dayaks are now working on making bilian poles in order to earn money for food.
One evening in August I was visited by a Dayak Tuai Rumah from Laban. He told me that he was worried and could not sleep because he had something on his mind. I enquired what was troubling him and he told me he had bought a ticket for the Miri Amateur Athle-tic Association Sweepstake some months previously. He was afraid he might have won it and be a rich man without knowing anything about it. On investigation the next day he was astonished to learn that he had not won it and he sadly threw his ticket away saying that perhaps some other time he would win the main prentah.
At a meeting of the Kemena Local Authority held on 31st July, the District Officer spoke on the subject of forming a mixed local authority for the Kemena. It was agreed that the best way of making a start would be to visit some existing functioning Mixed Local Authority and see on the ground what the relative me-rits and disadvantages of a Mixed Authority would be. The Dayaks on the whole are down to earth and prac-
tically minded. They want to see for themselves and are not very interested in academic discussions. The Chinese with whom the matter has been dicussed are likewise a bit sceptical. If they can be convinced that there is something to gain, they are willing to try.
At the Sungei Senga/Selabak Demonstration Plot, transplanting of all young plants from the demonstra-tion nursery was completed according to schedule. A new coolie line was completed during September. A contract was placed for the construction of a house at the plot for the Agricultural Field Assistant. At pre-sent the Agricultural Field Assistant lives at Sebauh about hour's journey away. When he can live on the spot it will be much easier for him to give closer supervision to the work of the station.
At the end of the quarter a terrifying report of an invasion of ulat bala (spodoptera mauritia) was re-ceived from the upper Kemena. The Agricultural Assistant disappeared up the Kemena with a drum of Agrocide and has not been heard of since.
The Agricultural Assistant finished making a soil sur-vey of the Anap, the results of which have now been embodied in a most comprehensive report. It should now be possible to make intelligent plans for the development of Agriculture in this river.
There was a further decline in log production during the quarter under review. A total of 4777 logs cubing 4,729.3 tons Hoppus were extracted in al, of this total 3,284 logs cubing 3,651.5 tons Hoppus were produced by the Bombay Burmah Trading Corporation, Limited, at Similajau, 930 logs cubing 645.4 tons Hoppus by the sawmills in the Tatau area, and only 563 logs cubing 432.4 tons Hoppus by the mills in the Bintulu area. The Bombay Burmah production was the highest so far recorded since the commencement of operations by the Corporation. The Tatau figures were very en-couraging considering the fact that water especially in the ulu areas has been low, and rafting of logs to the mills has been all but impossible. The Bintulu figures for the period have been the lowest for a number of years, but this has not affected sawmilling much as the mills had large stocks to rely on. The low figures for the quarter are due mainly to a combination of two factors which operate seasonally:—
(a)	native hand-loggers are usually occupied at this time of the year in the clearing and planting of their padi farms and
(b)	the lack of water in the streams which makes extraction more difficult.
Figures for the same quarter in 1952, 4,498 logs cubing
3,829.9 tons Hoppus, show a close parallel.
A decline in the production of ataps is also to be reported. A total of 3,793,450 pieces were pro-duced of which total Bintulu and Sebauh accounted for 3,697,500 pieces, while Tatau produced only 95,800 pieces.
The decline in production of belian timber was very noticeable, only a total of 205.8 tons sawn was produced during the quarter as compared with 270.2 tons for the same period last year. Of the 205.8 tons produced, Tatau dealers accounted for 150.2 tons, with Bintulu and Sebauh accounting for 55.6 tons. The decline was most marked in the Tatau area where the figure for the same period in 1952 was 203 tons approximately. The decline is due mainly to the fact that workers are concentrating on the production of pepper posts for which there is an increased demand. Whether this means that there is vigorous replanting going on somewhere, I do not know. Perhaps someone will tell me.
There has been a slight increase in the price of crude jelutong due to the scarcity of supplies reach-ing dealers. This again is because workers have been busy on their padi farms. Rotans and Damar have
240
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, DECEMBER 31, 1953
however continued steady with a fair demand from Singapore.
Exports the quarter amounted to 3,877.58 tons Hop-pus and 1,533.63 tons sawn. The Bombay Burmah Trading Corporation, Limited accounted for all the round logs shipped. In all nine shipments were made, three to the United Kingdom, two each to Australia and Hong Kong, and one each to Singapore and South Africa. Hong Kong again imported the biggest quantity amounting to 1,661.65 tons Hoppus. The major por-tion of the sawn timber was again supplied to Brunei, but shipments to Australia and the United Kingdom showed improvement.
The Bombay Burmah Trading Corporation, Limited at Similajau have now finally decided to stop further working in their licensed area there, and have served a year's notice to the effect. It is understood that by the end of October they should finish all extraction by tractors and hope to have their heavy equipment away by the end of November. The Corporation will finally close down at the end of March, 1954, after com-pleting shipment of all timber worked.
A number of Chinese in the district have applied for land on which to plant padi, fruit and vegetables. One group are willing to bring in a tractor to help with clearing and preparing land. Two possible areas are under consideration, both of which I have visited. One is close to the Foochow area at Sebauh, the other is in the Bintulu mixed zone area in the Sungei Sebiu. The latter area was examined by the Agricultural Depart-ment about three or four years ago and recommended for a settlement scheme.
Refined jelutong exported to New York by the Chicle Development Company amounted to 2,013.10 piculs valued at $338,103 on which $36,138.77 export duty was paid.
A lot of work has been put in hand during the quarter. Work has started on filling the bomb holes in the Bintulu airfield but is unfortunately progressing considerably more slowly than was hoped at first. The contractor started with one lorry on the job, and dur-ing the month of September succeeded in filling only four holes. It has been taking over 40 loads of earth to fill one hole and work is only possible in dry weather. It looks as though better progress will be made in Octo-ber but after that the landas may well cause opera-tions to be suspended for three or four months.
FIFTH DIVISION
Resident (Mr. J. C. B. Fisher)
The quarter has been noteworthy for its freak weather conditions.
During August there was a continual drought and the Residency reservoir dried up completely. Water had to be brought up in buckets from the main town supply stand pipes, which have never been known to fail.
On August 10th, three gusts of wind were ex-perienced in Limbang. The first of these was a sudden puff on a very quiet evening and hardly had one got over this surprise, when the second gust came with such force that it uprooted large trees, wrecked attap roofs, blew all the Residency "blats" in, and across, the verandah, and generally did widespread damage. The third gust of less force added to the chaos and after this there was unbroken peace once more, with hardly a breath of wind.
Fortunately none of the trees fell on houses and there was no loss of life or injury, but many trees deemed to be unsafe have now had to be felled.
Since the recession in trade buffaloe smuggling and stealing has increased considerably.
The position is being closely watched and additional patrols by the Constabulary have been instituted.
This sort of thing is very difficult to handle, how-ever, unless there be an army of customs officials and police officers, available to stop every exist over the border into Brunei State. This is clearly quite impos-sible and the best that can be done is to rely on information given to the Customs and Police, by the public and then act in known individual cases.
The Limbang to Brunei road is certainly very much more of a success than I had imagined that it would be capable of being, with the sum of money originally expended to rebuild it.
A "jeepable" road was literally reclaimed from 10 feet tall jungle and, in places, 8 feet deep swamp, over a length of 9 miles for the sum of $30,000.
During the quarter, accompanied by the District Officer, Lawas, I proceeded to Brunei and back by this road in comfort and did the trip both ways on an average in just under the hour.
ACTING DISTRICT OFFICER, LAWAS
(Mr. J. Pike)
Padi planting has made good progress during the quarter, and with the exception of Sundar where dry weather had delayed the start of operations, most areas had completed planting by the end of the quarter. While satisfactory reports have been received from most parts of the district, the same cannot be said of farms in the immediate vicinity of Lawas where a plague of army worms (spodoptera mauritia) has been doing considerable damage. DDT spraying has been commenced, but with the limited resources available, progress has not been very rapid.
A water tank of nearly six thousand gallons capacity was in process of erection behind the District Office at the end of the quarter. This will be filled from rain water falling on the roof of the office, and will be used as a reserve tank to supply the hospital and police barracks during dry periods. It is estimated that it should provide three weeks' reserve which should prove adequate for all eventualities.
A gangmower lent by the Agricultural Department, Limbang, has proved of inestimable value in dealing with the very large padang at Lawas and even the expert seythesmen are agreed that they cannot com-pete with it either for speed or closeness of cut.
The Good Old Days
(Extracts from Sarawak Gazette)
March 1, 1920
I Wonder Why
Philosophy is the child of wonder—Plato.
All mystery
I wonder why?
"I wonder why the Ranee's Club's a failure
I wonder why the dances were such fun
I wonder why the men and girls foregathered
I wonder how the Ladies' Club is run?
"I wonder why the ladies aren't admitted
Into the precincts of the Die-hard's den
And why sometimes they can't play bridge toge-ther
Or tennis at the Men's Club with the men?
Harmoniously
I wonder why?
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, DECEMBER 31, 1953
241
"I wonder why the price of rice is rising
And why we can't lake steps to plant out more
And why the cost of living is expensive And why the dollar sticks at two and four?
Unreasonably
I wonder why?
"I wonder why the sun shines in the Heavens I wonder why the moon does funny things I wonder why some crocodiles are tearful I wonder why I’m partial to Gin Slings?
No reply
I wonder why?
—Orang Tua
September 1, 1920
The Vandals.
We thought it was "Necessity", The thing that knows no law, That took away our Bandstand And killed our flowers galore.
The tamils came in hundreds, They piled on earth (and glass), They levelled off the hillocks And finished off with grass.
We often remonstrated,
We hear the answer still— "How can we train a police force If they’ve nowhere they can drill.”
This silenced all our protests,
In pain we looked around,
But now the work’s completed— lt’s only a football ground.
They occupied the girls’ school,
Then the Rajah’s stable went,
Pig Lane has its barracks,
Their eye's on Mosque Road bent.
Their grasping hand’s upon us, Their Vandal’s greed commenced, So take my tip you landlords And keep your acres fenced.
Random Jottings
Nine women from Britain are among the 402 entries for the 2,077 mile (3,325 kilometres) Monte Carlo rally starting on January 18, 1954, from Glasgow, Scotland, and seven other European centres. Altogether 21 different makes of United Kingdom cars will be repre-sented in the record number of 121 entries from Britain.
Speedway, imported from Australia in 1928 as "dirt track racing", now has 264 riders in the United King-dom. They include 36 Australians and 19 New Zealanders.
Woollen fabrics will be prominent among the Spring fashions for women in Britain. Indeed, so popular are they becoming that attempts are even being made to make silk resemble wool, while among the woollens themselves the modern trend in the cinema world is emphasised by a black and white fabric that has an almost three-dimensional effect. And, although many of the new woollens will appear to be thicker than usual, they will actually be lighter in weight.
Colour ranges will show a brightness appropriate to the season—cream, white, off-white and beige, a new
shade known as burnt orange, and what has been des-cribed as a "fierce sort of pink." Blues will be popular to show up the lighter shades, as will be a deep coffee and a plum colour. Sleeveless dresses are expected to retum to favour; other trends indicated are shorter shirts for young women, and a coolie type of jacket with pencil-slim skirts.
A new three-in-one prophylactic for immunising children against diphtheria, whooping cough and tetanus has been introduced to doctors in Britain. It has been developed by research workers of Glaxo Laboratories Ltd., of Greenford, Middlesex, England, the same company which a few years ago introduced the new widely used combined diphtheria and whoop-ing cough injeclion. The new triple prophylactic, is in most cases painless on injection.
Venetian window blinds are coming back into fashion, and an English firm is receiving orders for them from such distant markets as Africa, Pakistan, Malaya and Hong Kong. But these are not the wooden-slatted blinds that were in favour 50 years ago; they consist of curved slats of light aluminium alloy, in a range of 14 colours with matching or contrasting tapes. And the manufacturers claim that not even sharp bending or intense heat will impair the finish.
Possessing insulating properties which keep rooms cool in hot climates and retain warmth in cold climates, the blinds are in popular demand in Britain as well as in tropical countries. Two big orders carried out by the manufacturers in 1953 were to equip 14 new London County Council schools with 700 of these blinds and to equip the new block of London's Natural History Museum. A recent overseas shipment was to the Falkland Islands, off the east coast of Argentina.
A Gourmet's Dream
[Each year, in September, the Law Society of England and Wales has an Annual Conference. This year it was held at Scarborough. The following is an extract from The Law Society’s Gazette report of the Con-ference.]
I must crave leave to mention two matters very close to my heart. First, Stilton cheese, which at Ganton Golf Club is the best ever and is eaten with rich plum cake, a gastronomical novelty to me, but in Yorkshire I am told as commonplace as eating Cheddar with apple tart. I commend it to those who are lucky enough to have both Stilton and plum cake on hand simultaneously. Secondly, Scarborough lobsters served to us straight from the adjacent ocean! Delicious! A certain conferee accepting that adjective whole-heartedly said, “There’s one funny thing about lobsters in the legal aspect." "Have lobsters a legal aspect?” I asked, all agog for a bit more learning. "Yes," he re-plied. "Fresh caught lobsters don’t attract Customs duty.” "I thought everything attracted duty these days?" says I. "No." says he: "There are three in all that don't." "What are the other two?” I asked. "Unmounted diamonds and quadruped animals.”
It was, I imagine, another legpull, but the effect of it was disastrous. When I eat lobsters (which is whenever I can) I dream. That night I was haunted by the in-volved evolutions of a large lobster sporting a huge diamond ring and mounted on a broken-down horse. One would expect a lobster to ride side-saddle, but my dream-lobster was astride and, gentlemen, you would have to see it with your own eyes to appreciate how ridiculous a lobster looks engaged in a performance of that sort.
242
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, DECEMBER 31, 1953
The “Gazette” Crossword No. 2
(New Series)
CLUES
(Some answers are in Malay, some in English)
Across
1. Capital; feline.
7. A lighthouse at this point and a river in another place.
9.	Tree believed to be haunted by hantu.
10.	Sea-port; a Datu.
12. Flag lowered sometimes to half height of this.
14.	Estuary of river.
15.	Not wild.
16.	A length of twine.
17.	Some people prefer ayam to this.
19. Word sometimes used as preface to name of a vessel.
21. A local officer; a nega-tive.
22.	Historical periods.
24. There are many in Greek myths.
26. Scripture.
29.	Chinese mile.
30.	They blasted Sarawak rocks.
31.	Upper waters of a sungei.
32.	Where you make your purchases.
33.	Indispensable to the sick.
34.	Dealing with mountains.
35.	To feel.
Down
1.	Sometimes killed for a marriage feast.
2.	Discussion.
3.	Undesirable system of an Asian Society.
4. In the same book or chapter.
5.	Person of same name as another.
6.	Oxlike antelope.
7.	Original home of the rubber tree.
8.	Human being.
11. From.
13. Possesses.
18. Stone-mason’s chisel 20. Health Inspectors aim for this.
32. To avenge.
25. A sailing vessel in Sarawak waters in 1843: at present a vessel of Marine Department.
27.	This fishing is normally restricted.
28.	Blind.
30. A dig in more than one of these means a quiet bribe.
23. This signifies defeat.
33. An alternative.
SOLUTION
(GAZETTE CROSSWORD No. 1)
1 Santubong, 2. At, 3. Rajang, 4. Asun, 5. Awkward, 6. Ka, 7. Beli, 10. Tukar, 11. Rule, 16. Ad, 19. China, 21. Idar, 23. Rata, 24. Oust, 25. Ism, 27. Otak, 29. Lab, 31. Pat.
Down
Across
1. Sarawak, 8. ATAS, 9. Water, 12. Junk, 13. Ulu, 14. Tuan, 15. Wakil, 17. Pada, 18. BCG, 20. RI, 22. Oh, 23. Rodi, 26. Do, 28. Nilau, 30. Spat, 32. Gnats, 33. Mara, 34. Abate.
BOWLS FOR NOVEMBER, 1953
Ladies
No. of rolls
higest roll
Average
Mrs. F.	A. Clarke-Hunt 14	175	135
Mrs. I.	Morrison	10	136	121
Mrs. J.	Greene	7 146 115
Mrs. S.	Kitto	5 139 106
Mrs. E.	Whyte	5	127	105
Mrs. V.	Holloway	9	143	103
Mrs. F.	D. Becket	6	137	102
Miss J.	Daly	11 121 101
Mrs. N. Marjoribanks	6	118	98
Mrs. P. Courtney	6	140	95
Mrs. E. Milton	5 110 86
Gentlemen
Mr. T. V. Courtney	10	196	172
Mr. M. V. Klooster	7	169	147
Mr. O. F. Wright	9	170	146
Mr. H. Polman	10 160 142
Mr. F. C. Ogden	6	189	136
Mr. C. Baker	5	145	135
Mr. S. Larkin	11	180	129
Mr. M. Steele	5	141	128
Mr. G. Hoffman	7	158	122
Mr. R. Greene	9	145	120
Mr. F. Clarke-Hunt	17	164	120
Mr. C Holloway	7	136	119
Mr. J. Hekking	5	131	113
OWEN. F. WRIGHT.
Convenor
BOWLS COMPETITION FOR NOVEMBER
Ladies
Mrs. P. Courtney	187
Mrs. N. Marjoribanks	182
Mrs. S. Kitto	174
Miss J. Daly	173
Mrs. F. D. Becket	167
Mrs. F. A. Clarke-Hunt	165
Mrs. I. Morrison	149
Gentlemen
Mr. M. Steele	371
Mr. J. Hekking	364
Mr. F. Clarke-Hunt	353
Mr. G. Hoffman 353
Mr. R. Greene 328
Mr. F. Odgen 319
Mr. S. Larkin 310
OWEN. F. WRIGHT. Convenor
Golf
SCOTLAND V. THE REST, 28-29 NOVEMBER 1953
SCOTLAND
E. A. Barron & W. L.
Whyte	0
I. R. Outram & I. S.
Gordon, 1 up 1
B. A. Hepburn & J. D.
Towers, 7 & 5	1
2
The Rest C. O. Adams & H. W.
Harcus, 1 up 1
B. T. Joyce & F. C.
Ogden	0
G. E. Strickland & N.
Thomas	0
1
E. A. Barron. 4 & 2	1
W. L. Whyte	0
J. R. Outram I. S. Gordon, 1 up 1
A. M. R. Currie	0
W. H. Dickie	0
B. A. Hepburn	0
J. D. Towers, walkover 1
A. G. Taylor	0
3 C. O. Adams 0
H. W. Harcus, 4 & 2 1
G. E. Strickland N. Thomas	0
A. I. Edgerley, 3 & 1 1
R. L. Milton, 2 & 1 1
A. N. Outram, 8 & 7 1
H. Henniker-Heaton 0
B. T. Joyce, 2 up 1
5 THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, DECEMBER 31, 1953
243
Result: The Rest won by 6 matches to 5 Condition: Venusian humidity after Andrewsian liquidity
Ladies Foursomes (Stroke) Competition, 8 December 1953
9 Holes
1. Mrs E. Bomphrey 49-16 33 Mrs W. G. Morison 2. Mrs. H. S. Roe Mrs R. E. Chater	54-16	38
2. Mrs G. S. Wilson
Mrs. A. E. H. 55-17	38
Bulford	4. Mrs F. C. Ogden	63-18	45
Mrs. T. V. Courtney	GOLF
December Stableford Competition (Men) 13 December, 1953
Points
W. L. Whyte (6)	36
H.. Henniker-Heaton (16) 36
I. S. Gordon (12) 33
B. A. Hepburn (14) 32
H. W. Harcus (6) 31
N. Thomas (14)	30
B. T. Joyce (18)	29
C. O. Adams (2) 28
H. D. Muir (6) 28
J. R. Outram (7) 28
A. M. R. Currie (14) 28
W. H. Dickie (18) 27
E. Bomphrey (21)	22
R. E. Chater (21)	18
Condition of course and Willie Whyte synchronously satisfactory: 3-star golf,—with apologies to Fords
C . O. ADAMS.
Convenor, Golf Sub-Committee
Kuching Market Price List
20th November to 20th December, 1953.
RICE—(per gantang)
Local, White Milling ...	...	...	$2.77
Govt, Siam ... ... ...	2.52
Rangoon ... ... ... 2.40
Broken ... ... ...	2.04
SUGAR—(per kati)
Java, White (Govt.) Refined ... ...	.34
Brown	...	...	... Nil
Nipah Sugar ...	... ...	.25
SALT—(per kati)
Coarse ... ... ... ... .10
Fine ... ... ... ... .15
FLOUR AND BREAD—
Wheat Flour, per kati	...	...	.35
Bread per loaf ...	...	...	.10
MILK—(per tin)
Milkmaid	...	... ...	.70
Golden Wheel ...	...	...	.65
EGGS—(each)
Duck, fresh	...	...	...	.18
salted	...	...	...	.18
Fowl ... ... ... .20
EDIBLE FATS—(per kati)
Coconut Oil	...	... ...	.70
Pork Fat No. 1	... ... ... 1.80
2	...	...	... 1.40
PORK—(per kati)
Lean No. 1 ...	...	...	3.40
Lean with fat 2 ...	...	...	1.80
BEEF AND OTHER MEATS—(per kati)
Mutton (Australian)	...	...	...	2.80
Beef, steak	... ... ...	3.00
Beef, curry meat	...	...	...	1.60
Buffalo No. 1 ... ... ... 3.00
curry meat	...	...	...	1.60
Kambing (daging)	...	...	...	3.00
POULTRY—(per kati)
Capons	...	...	...	2.80
Duck ... ... ... 2.00
Fowl, Chinese breed ...	...	...	2.60
Fowl, Dayak breed ... ... ... 2.00
FISH—(per kati)
Fresh fish No. 1	...	...	...	2.13
,, 2	... ... ... .83
,, ,, 3	... ... ... .57
Prawns 1	... ... ... 1.82
2	...	...	... 1.22
Crab No. 1 ... ... ... 1.20
,, 2 ... ... ... .80
Salted fish ,, 1 ... ... ... 2.40
,, ,, ,, 2 ... ... ...	1.00
,, ,, ,, 3 ... ... ... .60 ,, ,, roe ... ... ...	2.20
VEGETABLES—(per kati)
Bankuang (yam beans) ... ... ...	.15
Bayam	...	...	...	.30
Bean Sprouts	...	...	...	.30
Cabbage, imported	...	...	...	.70
Changkok Manis ... ... ...	.30
Daun Bawang	...	...	...	1.02
Ensahi Puteh	...	...	...	.60
Bunga ... ... ... .49
French Beans ... ... ... .67
Garlic, fresh ... ... ... .60
Kachang Panjang	...	...	...	.30
Kangkong	... ... ...	.40
Keladi (China) ... ... ... .40
Ketola	... ... ...	.40
Kribang	...	...	...	.15
Kundor	... ... ... .20
Labu	... ... ... .15
Ladies' Fingers	...	...	...	.60
Lettuce (per tie)	...	...	...	.10
Lobak (Chinese radish) ... ...	...	.30
Lobak, salted, imported ... ...	...	.70
Onions, Bombay	...	...	...	.35
Onions, small	...	...	...	.70
Potatoes, Bengal ... ... ... .35 Pria (bitter grourd) ...	...	...	.60
Bamboo shoots, salted ...	...	.40
Trong (binjals)	...	...	...	30
Yams	...	... ...	.20
Cucumber (timun)	...	...	... .30
Ginger ... ... ... 1.00
Chillies (red) ... ... ... 1.92
(green) ... ... ... .80
Sauerkraut, imported ... ... ... .80
local ... ... ... .51
Tamarind	...	... ... .40
Tomatoes, fresh ... ... ...	1.00
TEA—
Tea, Lipton per lb.	...	...	3.70
Chinese per packet	...	...	.80
COFFEE—(per kati) Raw, Java No. 1 ... ...	... 2.49
,, Java No. 2	... ... ... 1.90
FRUIT—
Pisang Umbun	...	per kati ... .14
Pisang Tandok	...	each ... .10 to .20
Pineapples	...	per	kati ... .12
Papayas	... ,, ... .20
SUNDRIES—
Bean Curd	... 6 square pieces	.10
Cake (white) ... per piece ...	.15
(yellow) ...	... .25
Kerosene Oil	...	per tin ... 5.70
...	per bottle ...	.30
Charcoal ...	per pkl.	...	8.17
semi-converted ...	... 5.09
Sauce (kitchup) ... bot. (1)$1.00, (2) .70.(3).50 Blachan	... per kati ...	.70
Dried prawn ... ,, ...	3.20
Coconut, fresh ... each	... .20
Bako Wood	... per panchang ...	28.00
Cigarettes:
Players ... ...	3 sticks for	... .12
Craven “A"	... 3 ,, ... .12
Capstan ...	...	3	,,	...	.11
Rough Rider	...	3	,,	...	.10
State Express	...	1 stick for	...	.05
