 Vol. LXXIX
No. 1146
PRICE
KUCHING, Monday, August 31st, 1953
50 CENTS
Contents
Page
England at Coronation Time ... ... ... 147
Notes and Comments	...	...	... 148
Comings and Goings	...	...	... 150
Visit of H.E. the Governor to some Land Dayak Areas 150
Excerpts from Reports of Administrative Officers for the Second Quarter, 1953 ...	...	... 151
Obituary	...	... ... ...	160
The Good Old Days	... ...	... 161
The Caves at Niah ...	...	...	... 161
Keramian Lomba Perahu Kuching ...	... 162
Kuching Club—Bowling Averages & Bowling Competi-
tion, July, 1953	...	... 162
Kuching Club—Golf—Arden Clarke Rose Bowl (Match
Play) August ...	... ... ... 163
Kuching Club—August Stableford Competition ... 163
Kuching Market Price List ...	...	... 163
The Sarawak Gazette
MONDAY, AUGUST 31st, 1953
England at Coronation Time
by
Datu Abang Openg bin Abang Sapi'ee
Before I begin this note, I should like to express my sincere thanks to His Excellency the Governor of Sarawak for nominating me as one of Sarawak's Re-presentatives to attend the Coronation of Her Majesty the Queen in London.
I left Kuching on 14th May, 1953 by Malayan Air-ways together with the Honourable the Chief Secretary of Sarawak, Mr. R. G. Aikman, C.M.G., Penghulu Jugah and Mr. Chew Geok Lim, M.B.E. We stayed in Singapore for three nights, as the schedule for the Comet to fly on the 16th May, 1953, was amended until 17th May, 1953, owing to some repairs on the wire service of the aeroplane having to be carried out. We put up in His Excellency the Commissioner General's house where a nice room and other good things were provided. We should like to express our sincere thanks to His Excellency for this. We left Changi airport at 8.30 a.m. on 17th May, 1953 in the Comet and flew up 38,000 feet high, at an average
speed of about 480 miles an hour. On our way to London we called at Bangkok, Rangoon and Calcutta. At Calcutta we were delayed for seventeen hours as we were advised from Delhi not to fly owing to dust storms near Delhi. At Calcutta we put up in the Great Eastern Hotel. It was very hot at that time. On the night of the 17th we could not sleep. We took a bath five times and even then we still could not sleep until 3 a.m. On 18th May, 1953, we were asked to go down to Dum Dum airport. At 6.30 a.m. advice was received from Delhi that the weather was good and the Comet then flew to Delhi, Karachi, Bahrain and Rome and we arrived at London Airport at 1 a.m. on 19th May, 1953. There we were met by Sir Gerald Whiteley, who took us to the South Kensing-ton Hotel. At 9 a.m. we went to the Chartered Bank in London to have our travelling cheques changed. There we met Mr. Martine, the former Manager of the Borneo Company Limited in Kuching and had lunch at Veeraswamy's Restaurant in Regent Street. Mr. Aikman then told us to take the opportunity of seeing the country and some interesting places in it, because there might not be a chance later. We should not stay only in London or in our hotel.
In the afternoon Mr. Martine was very kind and took us all three, Penghulu Jugah, Mr. Chew Geok Lim and myself to Whitehall Court, where he intro-duced us to friends of his and we went round the city. Later we had dinner at the Trocadero Restaurant.
On the 20th May, 1953 Mr. Aikman very kindly took us to the Chelsea Flower Show where we watched thousands of people attending the Show. It was really very interesting to see a great many kinds of flowers which we never saw in Sarawak. After this we went to Harrods Restaurant for lunch where we found a very good choice of food. There we also went shopping. The shop is a very fine building and very large.
On May 21st the Chief Secretary took us to the Colonial Office where we met Senior Officers and had a talk with them about our visit to London. One of the Information Office staff took our photograph in front of No. 10, Downing Street and then we had our lunch in a Chinese restaurant.
On 22nd May, Mr. Martine took us to see Pascalls' Sweet Factory where we were introduced to the people working there. We saw about fifteen hundred people working. It was really very interesting to see this and we were told that this factory exports sweets and chocolates to many countries all over the world.
The following day Mr. M. G. Dickson of the Education Department very kindly took us to visit the Tower of London where we had an opportunity of seeing many very old war instruments, and buildings and rooms. We were told that the Tower is a thousand years old. In the afternoon, Penghulu Jugah
148
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, AUGUST 31, 1953
and I went with Mr. Aikman to see the cricket match at Lords cricket ground in which Middlesex played against Sussex. Mr. Aikman went with us on May 24th to Petersfield, about 70 miles from London. There we met Mr. Spurway, the former Conservator of Forests in Sarawak. He took us to Alton village where we had lunch at the Swan hotel, and we went on to Mount Wood to see the Forest Reserve. There we saw many people spending a day's pleasure trip. Mr. Spurway took us on to his cousin, Mr. Wayter who has a thousand acres of grazing land at Lanham. We saw a large number of cattle and poultry on this estate and Mr. Wayter took us round the estate in his car and we saw about twenty people who work with him. We visited the mill in his garden and were taken to his house and had tea in the garden which is really very fine. His wife is a very nice woman and she seemed to be very pleased to meet us men from Sarawak. After tea we returned to Stoner Hill to meet Mr. Aikman at his sister's house, and there we were introduced to his sister and brother-in-law. Here again is a very nice place. We had drinks in the garden until nearly 7 p.m. and then we returned to London by train.
On the next day we had a tour of London in the Underground train.
On May 26th after breakfast we went to John Barker & Company, and in the afternoon we accepted an invitation from the Imperial Institute, where we met Sir George Beresford Stooke who left Sarawak nearly thirty years ago. We were taken round to see the Sarawak Court, etc. In the evening. Mr. Aikman took us to see the Ice Revue which was very interesting to us and something we never saw in our life in Sarawak.
On 27th May we attended the Commonwealth Parliamentary Association lunch in Westminster Hall. We met Members of Parliament and Members of the Legislative Councils of the Commonwealth. Mr. D. C. White, Resident, Third Division was also with us. Her Majesty the Queen was present at the party. In the afternoon we were invited to a tea party at Mr. Daw-son's house—the former Chief Secretary of Sarawak. Later Mr. Dawson took us to see Derry & Toms' Gar-den on the top floor of the building. This was very strange to us because not ony is the garden on the top of the building, but there is also a fish pond and a stream similar to up-river streams in Sarawak, with rocks and sand.
On the following day we went round the town in the morning and in the afternoon attended the Buck-ingham Palace garden party with Mr. Dennis White and Mr. Wee Kheng Chiang and Mr. Ong Kee Hui, and there we met Mr. and Mrs. Cromwell, Mr. and Mrs. Hickling and many other people. We understood about five thousand people were there in all.
On May 29th we went to the Houses of Parliament and in the afternoon to the Secretary of State’s cocktail party at Claridges hotel. At this party we met the Sultans of the Malay States, the Sultans of Bahrain and Lahej and many other representatives from all over the world.
For May 30th the programme for our visit to the country had been fixed, and it was very unfortunate that our friend Mr, Chew Geok Lim was not well and unable to accompany us. He was left behind in the hotel. Penghulu Jugah was taken by Mr. Freeman to Cambridge and I was taken by Mr. Dickson to Oxford. Mr. Dickson and I left Pad-dington Station by train and changed into an upriver launch at Abingdon. It was very strange to me when the launch was about to reach the rapids. I heard the noise of a waterfall and I asked Mr. Dickson: "When we reach the rapids do we have to use other transport?" Mr. Dickson said: “No, there will be a lock." When we reached the bottom of the rapids. I saw there were two gates. As soon as the launch was inside the gate, the water came in from the other gate until it was level and then the launch moved out and went straight upriver. We passed three locks altogether before we reached Oxford. In Oxford, I was taken by Mr. Dickson to the colleges
and he pointed out to me the place where he stayed while he was a student. This was very interesting to me. I was lucky to be with Mr. Dickson and it was very kind of him to take me to this place.
On Sunday, 31st May, Mr. Chew Geok Lim and I went with Mr. Aikman to see the London Zoo. This again was very interesting to us and we were very much impressed, because we saw a large number of living animals of many kinds. In the afternoon we attended a party at Hatfield House where Her Majesty the Queen Mother was present.
On June 1st, Mr. Aikman, Mr. White, Penghulu Jugah, Mr. Chew Geok Lim and I went to see H.H. the Rajah and H.H. the Ranee both of whom are well and seemed very pleased to see us.
June 2nd was Coronation day. At about 5.30 a.m. we got up and after our early breakfast we left the South Kensington hotel and reached Westminster Abbey at 6.40 a.m. We were really very lucky, because our admission card was at Entrance No. 10 and we were able to see Her Majesty the Queen at her Crowning from the beginning to the end. At about 10.30 a.m. the Royal family arrived in the Abbey and at 11.20 a.m. Her Majesty came. She is a very handsome and young Queen and she wore a large number of diamonds. The ceremony went on until 3 p.m. We got out at 3.30 p.m. and had our buffet in Westminster Hall. Then we went out and saw the Procession passing Westminster Hall on the way to Buckingham Palace. We saw a large number of soldiers who took part in the Procession, and some these are able to play as a brass band on horseback, blowing trumpets and beating drums. It also im-pressed us very much that there were so many hundreds of thousands of people and so many thousands of cars and yet the police on duty did not have even a piece of wood in their hands, let alone a pistol or a gun. There were no accidents and no trouble at all. The policemen are really very good and kind to the people. Whenever they saw we were losing our way, they came to us at once to find out from us whether we had lost our way or our friends. If we said that we were lost they pointed out to us the proper road to go. It was also very interesting to see such wonderful fireworks on the night of the Coronation as we never saw in our life.
After the Coronation, we also visited the sea-side at Brighton where we met Mr. Smith, the father of Mr. P. B. Smith, District Officer, Lundu. Mr Smith was very kind and took us to his house near the beach, where there was a very lovely view. We had lunch at the Albion Hotel and after lunch we were taken by Mr. Smith on a tour.
Later on in London we were taken to see the London Time's by Mr. Aikman's brother-in-law. This was most interesting and we were informed that their press can produce 35,000 newspapers in one hour. There are about 2,000 people working there.
We also went to Lambeth Palace and to the Sarawak Association cocktail party where we met old Sarawak officers who seemed very pleased to see us. While in London we met several students notably Sarawak students Mr. Ahmed Zaidi, Mr. Teo Choon Huat, Mr. Lee Hun Hoe son of Mr. Lee Swee Hock, Abang Kiprawi and Mr. Ngui Chong Jin.
We left London Airport on the 7th June at 9.30 a.m. on our return to Kuching and called at Rome, Cairo, Basra, Karachi, Bombay and Colombo. Singapore was reached at 9.20 p.m. on the 9th, and we stayed at His Excellency the Commissioner General's house until the morning of June 11th when we left Kallang Airport at 6.30 a.m. and arrived in Kuching at 9.30 a.m.
Notes and Comments
At a public meeting held recently in Kuala Lumpur, at which some two hundred and fifty people including the High Commissioner and seven of the Rulers were
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, AUGUST 31, 1953
149
present, it was decided to form a Malayan Historical Society with headquarters, for the time being at least, in the National Museum at Kuala Lumpur. The objects of the Society will be to stimulate a wider interest in Malayan history, culture and customs; to encourage the preservation of objects of historical and cultural interst; to assist in recording the history, folk-lore, traditions and customs of Malaya and its peoples; and to issue a journal (in English and Malay) and other publications. The Society's activities will cover the Federation, Singapore, North Borneo, Sarawak and Brunei, and membership will be open to all who are interested in its objects. Full members will pay a sub-scription of $12 a year, due 1st July, and will receive one copy of each published journal. Other societies and institutions are not eligible as such for membership, and it is intended that the Society will not compete in any way with existing bodies. Already there have been more than three hundred applications for member-ship.
Of the Sarawak Annual Report for 1952 the Straits Times writes: "Loyally the Government of Sarawak puts first things first, but, accession ceremonies and visits by royalty apart, there is not much doubt that the further growth of local government in this young Bornean colony has been the outstanding development of the twelve months' progress now officially reviewed. A quarter of a million people, nearly half the Colony's population of 546,000, are within the jurisdiction of the various local authorities. There are seventeen of these district bodies, of which thirteen are racial in composition, and four are mixed. The "mixed local authority" is the pattern of the future.............”
From Mr. K. P. Cleary, Superintendent of Customs, Sibu, who recently returned from furlough in the United Kingdom we have received an interesting account of life in England and, in particular, in London, under present conditions. Mr. Cleary writes,—"A stay of three weeks in London can give one merely a superficial idea of the state of the nation; but certain things do stand out. For me, the thing which stands out most is the very definite air of prosperity in the land. Both things and people have, we hope, shaken off forever that dowdiness which we were learning to accept as the order of things in victorious England. Now, I am ready to admit that full shops may reflect little more than a general lack of money and may even give warning of a serious slump ahead. But the fact remains that after an absence of just over a year I am left with the impression that people are happier, better dressed, less prone to complaining and, above all, better fed. For food is no longer a prime subject for conversation or, for that matter, complaint. But, as the Londoner, at least, is not the complete man unless he has something to complain about, the weather provides a healthy substitute. For it is invariably “too wet”; or much more rarely, "too hot”..........”
The Grand Fancy Bazaar organised by Red Cross workers to raise funds for their local branch was officially opened by His Excellency the Governor on 1st August. Although it lasted only half a day (not counting the Flag Day the day before when workers sold flags) it was an unqualified success. According to Mrs. L. D. Kennedy the net gain after deducting all expenses from both the bazaar and the sale of flags was $4,500. In addition to the drawing of prizes for the holders of lucky flag numbers, and the usual sale of work and of home-made delicacies, there was a special stall selling articles made by handicapped people. A highlight of the occasion was the Treasure Hunt, a new and novel item, which proved an exceedingly popular attraction.
Kuching's representative team, organised by the Kuching Basketball Association to take part in the Malayan Inter-State Baskeball Competition for the Nanyang University Cup, left for Singapore by air on 21st August. The team, of which Mr. Wee Kheng Chiang is patron, was led by Mr. Tan Chui Kiau of the Bian Chiang Bank, with five other officials and ten players (Captain Mr. Tan Han Chew) and was sche-duled to play at the Happy World Stadium as from 23rd August. The season will last into the end of the month, and altogether thirteen men's and eight girls' teams from Malaya, Singapore, Sarawak and North Borneo were expected to participate. It was the first occasion ever that a Kuching team was organised to compete outside the country and this fact has since given a tremendous fillip to the game locally. A similar team was also sent by Sibu to the Competition.
In the later part of August a Secondary School Teachers' Week for Kuching and outstation teachers was being held in Kuching under the joint sponsorship of the British Council and the Education Department. The Teachers' Week began on Monday 24th August and was to end on Friday 28th August. A number of lectures, demonstrations and discussion sessions were to be held including subjects such as Tutorial and Discussion Groups for Senior Classes, the Teaching of Civics and Current Events, Dramatic Groups for Schools and the use of Study Boxes and Demonstra-tions of Visual Aids. There would also be talks by educationists.
The British Council, responsible for the arrangement of the programme, had sent over its Functional Officer, Mr. Keith' Payne, from Singapore to conduct the course.
Here is a glossary of terms with distinctly Chinese flavour which may be of interest to readers—
Satang Island is probably called after three (sa) Chinese families of the surname of Tan or Tang Tanjong Sipang was occupied by four (si) Chinese of the surname of Pang ;
Santubong is suggestive of Sanchubong (Kheh) "King of Wild Boars” or Sant bong "Lord of the Jungle" ( ).
But the current colloquialism for some official designations is expressive and strangely appropriate and not disrespectful—
Tuakau ( ) the "Big Dog", the top watch-dog of peace and security—an Inspector of police. In like manner the Malays refer to the policeman as “Mata-mata”, the “Eyes and Ears of the Law”.
Te-g ( )the "Earth Bull" whose business is concerned with the soil or earth—a Land Officer. And his office is Te-g -pang ( ).
Tai-jin ( the "Big Man” or boss who looks after the affairs of the Chinese community.
As we go to press we learn that the Secretary of Slate for the Colonies has been pleased to approve the appointment of Mr. Thomas Attenborough, m.b.e., as Superintendent of Prisons, Sarawak. This news will, we know, give great pleasure to his many friends both within and without the Sarawak Civil Service. The appointment is especially noteworthy and pleasing because Mr. Attenborough is the first Sarawak-born officer to become a Head of Department. We have perfect confidence that, in his new post, Mr. Atten-borough will prove himself a model Superintendent and a shining example to all other Government officers, for, if not, quis custodiet ipsos custodes?
150
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, AUGUST 31, 1953
Comings and Goings
During the last month the ''comings" have greatly exceeded the "goings" and so we will list them first.
Three officers returned from leave in the persons of Mr. J. H. Ellis, Deputy Chief Sercetary: Mr. R. H. Hickling, Assistant Attorney-General, and N. S. Haile, Geologist. Mr. Hickling was accompanied by his wife and family. All three officers returned to their former appointments in Kuching.
No fewer than seven individuals new to Sarawak arrived to take up their appointments. In order of arrival there was first Miss J. M. Everson, Secretary-Stenographer for the Secretariat; Mr. D. S. Cottrell, Administrative Cadet, who is to go to the Second Division; Mr. A. S. Hendry, a Water Engineer who joins the Public Works Department; Mr. B. I. Smalley, an Assistant Controller of Posts and Telegraphs; Mr. P. J. Mooney, a Crown Counsel who joins the Attorney-General's Department, and Messrs. H. R. Harlow and N. T. Andrews, Administrative Cadets, who are both destined for the Third Division. Mr. Harlow was accompanied by his wife.
To all these new arrivals we offer a sincere welcome to Sarawak and hope that they will settle down happily here.
With regard to the "goings", Miss W. Dixon-Lennet, who has been working in the Special Branch, Sarawak Constabulary, left early in August on furlough; Mr. and Mrs. R. A. Bewsher and family from the Rural Improve-ment School at Kanowit also left on furlough, and Miss J. M. Ross, Nursing Sister, left Sarawak towards the end of the month. We understand that Miss Ross will not be returning to this country.
Visit of His Excellency the Governor to some Land
Dayak areas
On the 10th August at 8.30 a.m. an impressive convoy of Land Rovers left Pangkalan Batu for the 20th Mile, Penrissen Road. In the convoy were His Excellency the Governor, the Resident, First Division (Mr. D. J. Chandler), the District Officer, Kuching (Datu Abang Openg), the Private Secretary, Native Officer Dustine Sirau, a dresser (Mr James Goh) and various other bodies and barang.
At the 20th Mile we disembarked and were met by O.K.P. Mawang and various Tua Kampongs and some refreshing coconut juice. We then walked for three quarters of an hour to the left hand branch of the Sarawak River, crossed it and arrived at Kampong Gian alias Riam (formerly Boyan). The party was given a very happy welcome of guns and refreshments.
After looking over the kampong His Excellency and party got into perahus and were poled up the Sarawak Kiri, a very lovely river with huge trees leaning over it and nearby sheer limestone mountains to add variety to the scene.
After a halt at a kerangan for a bath and lunch, the party carried on upstream. A short stop was made at Kampong Benguh Danau to inspect the Local Authority school and for refreshments. Here also we met O.K.P. Bateh, and at 5.30 p.m. we reached Kampong Benguh Negri where His Excellency and party were welcomed in the traditional manner, being escorted from the boats to the house by bevies of girls, while cannons were let off. The people of Kampong Bengoh had gone to a lot of trouble, having evacuated a whole room for His Excellency the Governor, and having built a large hall with a corrugated zinc roof and leaf attap walls on the outside verandah for the rest of the party.
The trip undertaken by His Excellency to these Land Dayaks appears to have been the first visit of the head of the state within living memory, and it was very much appreciated by the local people. His Excellency and party, who were mostly used to travel-ling in Iban areas, were often struck by the very different atmosphere to be found in the Land Dayak houses, especially in the manner of respect for privacy. Though the Land Dayaks could be just as entertaining after dinner as Ibans are they were far attentive than Ibans ever are during talks and requests.
The programme after dinner consisted firstly of some excellent singing (mostly in English) and, remarkably enough, in tune, by young school children, and then of Malay type dancing to an attractive female band. The band and dancing carried on until 4 a.m., by which time most of His Excellency's party were enjoying a cold night's sleep.
Next morning after a short gawai or traditional ceremony for the spirits and a visit to the village school, His Excellency and party carried on upriver. Kampong Bera-an was visited and the people there gave the usual great welcome including a gawai. Then we sat off for Pangkalan Ampat Bazaar, arriving there in time for refreshment and lunch. The message for porters to be ready had got mislaid en route and so none was wailing for us, but after much coming and going, we were eventually ready to abandon the river and continue our journey on foot.
The local lack of rain (one kampong said they had had no rain for 23 days) which had meant the rivers were crystal clear and as low as could be, made walk-ing easier than usual, especially as the weather was definitely cooler than at Kuching over the same period. Batangs and stones were not too slippery and our feet could get a reasonable grip on the paths. The paths and railings to batangs, and indeed the batangs them-selves were of a much higher standard than is usual in Sarawak ulu travelling. All of this was a great mercy, as His Excellency's right arm was still in plaster of Paris and he could not grip with his right hand.
A short stop was made at the mission aided school at Pedawan, where the pupils greeted His Excellency with a spirited rendering of "You are my sunshine" and other songs, and then we reached Kampong Senah Negri. It might be mentioned that we were all im-pressed with the high standard of English spoken in these Kuching District village schools.
This village gave us a rousing welcome including a 12 gun salute. The last bang was the loudest of all and was made by a Dutch gun dated 1756, though there was also later Malay script on the barrel. Here too we began to see some women wearing their tradi-tional costume and with their hair long, which, to the writer at any rate, is far more attractive than the frizzy hair-dos of the down-river girls. An occasional long haired man in a chawat could also be seen. There was a blessing-of-padi gawai, then His Ex-cellency gave a talk, after which the District Officer gave a talk on what he had seen in England. This was followed by a dancing competition, the prize winner being selected by committee consisting of His Excellency, the Resident and the District Officer.
Next morning (12th August), there was another gawai followed by the most strenuous walk of the trip, for we were to cross the watershed to the Sadong river system. It was not long before we found our-selves climbing steeply up a felled hillside in the full heat of the sun. Many of our thoughts turned to Everests, though I do not think this mountain was any-thing like as high. There was a short rest at the top to admire the view (although even had there been no view we would undoubtedly have stopped) and then we set off again down a gentle incline along a shady path.
We tired travellers were met, at the fool of a hill by village maidens with coconut juice and pipes and were then hauled up the hill by them to Kampong Senah Parun perched on the hillside, where guns were
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, AUGUST 31, 1953
151
set off and we were given more revivifying coconut juice, some excellent honey in the comb and bananas. After lunch there was the usual gawai.
In the cool of the late afternoon we set off once again along a pleasant walk to Serayang, where we found the District Officer, Serian (Mr. J. F. Drake-Brockman) and Native Officer William Nais had just arrived and where once again we were regaled with coconut juice, fruit and honey.
After supper there was a gawai and His Excellency and the Datu gave their talks to an attentive audience and then the villagers made a feeble attempt to do old-fashioned dancing. In most of these houses His Excellency and often many of his entourage were comfortably housed in the Pancha or bachelors' cum-visitors' house.
Next day's walk (the 13th August) showed that the strain of the previous day's effort was beginning to be felt. His Excellency had an unpleasantly swollen big toe and the Resident began to drag behind a bit. We left the District Officer, Kuching and Native Officer Dustine Sirau to return to Kuching and set off on what should have been a 2 hour walk but one which took in fact nearly 4 hours, crossing the District boundary into Serian as we did so, and landed at Sejijuk, where the usual pleasant welcome awaited us.
We had a quiet afternoon and then set off for Temong, where O.K.P. Mapok met us. This journey took us nearly two hours, making close on six hours, walking that day.
Temong gave us one of the most rousing welcomes of all, with a 15 gun salute and plenty of dancing at night.
On the morning of the 14th we did our last walking trip. We left Temong for Tebedu Bazaar with its smart new police station, visiting the Local Authority school en route. Refreshments were offered by the Kapitan China.
Thankfully we all relaxed in sampans and were poled down river. The water was so low that only small sampans could be used and our party must have made a fine sight, as it consisted of 14 boats. We stopped at a kerangan for a bath and lunch, and then went on to Tema.
Here there was the usual hearty welcome, and His Excellency paid a visit to the Local Authority school. Then we embarked into three outboards and were skilfully driven to Krusin where O.K.P. Jaben and and O.K.P. Dukan awaited us.
That evening, after the usual talk and gawai, there was the best entertainment of all with plenty of old-fashioned dancing, at which the Resident excelled, followed by Malay dancing and at daybreak when the band and dancers gave up, small boys started letting off crackers.
Suffering rather from lack of sleep we embarked again and soon arrived at Tebekang where His Ex-cellency made an informal tour of the kubu, bazaar, Chinese school and Land Dayak kampong. At Te-bekang we found the Government outboard waiting for us, got in and set off at speed for Serian. At speed too we hit an underwater obstacle and at speed the driver made for the shore as the boat filled with water. However we reached Serian in time for an excellent lunch given by Mrs. Drake-Brockman and then returned to Kuching, thus completing what was by all accounts a very pleasant and interesting trip.
Excerpts from Reports of Administrative Officers for the Second
Quarter, 1953
FIRST DIVISION
Acting District Officer, Kuching
(Datu Abang Openg)
The total number of births, deaths and still births occurring in the District during the second quarter were
as hereunder: -
Births 1,234
Deaths
465
Still Births
13
Good harvests of padi were reported from the Samarahan and Nonok areas but failure was reported in the area along the left hand branch of the Sarawak River.
Due to the drop in the price of rubber earlier in the year, many tappers have stopped tapping rubber during the quarter and they are employed as labourers by pepper planters.
The harvesting of pepper has been in progress. It was reported that the export of this commodity had improved in the first quarter.
The Paya Paloh/Muara Tuang Agricultural Station was reported in good progress and excellent crops were harvested this season. The coastal Tua Kampongs and the people at Kampong Baru and Empila of Muara Tuang were advised to plant more sago.
An agricultural show was held in the Sekolah Mer-darasah Melayu during the Coronation week and it was a great success.
The Adult schools at Muara Tuang and Kampong Tanjong Bundong have shown very much improve-ment. It is understood that the adult students are now no longer using their thumb prints in signing letters, etc., as they are able to sign their own names. There are 75 students at Tanjong Bundong and 54 at Muara Tuang.
The Committee of the private school at Kampong Landeh was advised to construct a new school building in place of that which was swept away by recent floods. They have been paid a $1,000.00 grant from Govern-ment for the construction of the new school building.
The Council Negri was held in Kuching on 5th and 6th May, 1953. Two State Councillors from Brunei, Pangiran Maharaja Laila and Pehin O.K. Digadong were present at this meeting as observers.
Acting District Officer, Bau
(Mr. R. A. Young)
Public health remained good and, as forecast by my predecessor, the new water supply contributed much to the general cleanliness. There is still room for im-provement in this direction and the Municipal Board is taking a stronger line. This is no substitute for the services of a trained health inspector.
At the beginning of the quarter the change in weather from cool to hot brought on a crop of fevers and two of the government coolies succumbed. Neither of the men called in the Hospital Assistant until virtually in extremis. There was also another tragic death—that of a young and very popular girl who died from a weak heart possibly associated with anaemia. Again the services of the dresser were not sought until too late.
Yaws seem to be much less frequent among Land Dayaks than previously and there is no doubt that "one shot penicillin" is the most effective treatment.
An increase in the incidence of malaria in the town areas led to increased activity in oiling and it is hoped to get a much more regular and frequent programme arranged. The loathsome pool at Buso remains and the inhabitants strongly object to its being drained. The reason given is that there is no other source of water if fire breaks out. The real reason of course is that the pool is a convenient place to wash sheet rubber but if the pool were drained fire would sure to break out the next day.
The harvest was completed in this quarter and has been satisfactory for the most part. The bazaar shops were full of excellent Dayak rice at reasonable prices in the period just before the Begawai but by the end of the quarter supplies had lessened and the price has
152
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, AUGUST 31, 1953
risen again. The lowest buying price offered by shop-keepers was $1.80 per gantang but the price has now risen to $2.40.
The Serambu Dayaks have had no harvest. They attributed this to pests of various kinds but the true reason is that the Dayaks here have planted all their land with rubber and have no time for rice cultivation. As a result they are now in a sorry state and many have taken up work with Messrs. Ewart & Co.
The villages which still plant rice on a large scale have all gathered sufficient for the next year.
The importance of planting swamp padi was stressed to all the villages I visited but I have not yet been to Singgai where the problem is most acute. The small swamps in the other parts of the district are for the most part planted with sago or already farmed by Dayaks planting wet padi.
A 'Hubong' was held in Opar village at the end of June. These festivals are becoming very rare now-adays. Only the wealthiest villages can afford to put on the show and many of these are turning towards Christianity and the old ceremonies are dying out. Although the festival at Opar was very well attended by Dayaks all over the District the opinion of the writer is that it is the general festival which is important now and not the actual rites. At any rate few people seemed to take much interest in what was going on but spent the days visiting, watching plays (Hamlet was performed on one night!!) or playing football.
Bau Municipal Board: This useful body continued to meet and by its representatives managed to gain a concession in the administration of the Controlled Goods Ordinance. It serves as a very useful forum for discussion of problems of local interest and one can be sure of receiving sound advice from the members. It may be a basis for a more ambitious authority in the future.
District Officer, Serian
(Mr. J. F. Drake-Brockman)
The only interesting District Court case was one held at Simunjan in which a Malay of Kampong Jaie was convicted under section 384 for extortion. He had visited a number of houses in the village representing himself as an agent of the Curator of the Sarawak Museum and threatened dire penalties if the occupants did not give him all the old jars, pots, etc. in their possession. He promised payment at a later date, but disappeared with a large basketful of ancient crockery and was not seen again until a report was eventually made to the police. The accused was sentenced to 6 months rigorous imprisonment and the exhibits returned to their owners. The Museum would certainly be bankrupt if they had all been purchased at the prices demanded by their owners during the hearing of the case.
With much regret it is recorded that Penghulu Lidang, chief of the Melikin Dayaks, died on May 16th, after an illness lasting several months, including an operation in Kuching Hospital. Penghulu Lidang was appointed in 1928 and had been Chairman of the Upper Sadong Local Authority since its inception. He was very popular and greatly respected by all races.
A trip through 16 villages in the border area of the Upper Sadong revealed that many thousands of people have never been vaccinated. The commonest com-plaints were malaria, skin disease and sore eyes. In some villages almost everyone seemed to be a afflicted with one or other of these last two complaints. Demands made on the Tebakang Hospital Assistant who accompanied the party were so heavy that his stock of medicines was exhausted before the trip was half completed. This dresser will be working with the B.C.G. team in Simunjan for the next 2 or 3 months. However, arrangements have been made for another dresser to visit this area very soon to vaccinate the people and treat their complaints.
It is said that the Dayaks living on the border near on the Indonesian side never receive medical attention at all. There must therefore be a danger of infection for the Sarawak Dayaks wherever there is contact across the border. It is also reported that a fair amount of the goods imported from Indonesia overland is paid for in kind in the form of drugs.
The 1952 accounts of Co-operative Societies in the district have now been audited and show that the Rural Credit Societies with unlimited liability and the Padi Savings Societies are continuing to make good progress. In this Annual Report the Commissioner for Co-operative Development remarked that "The main strength of the Rural Credit movement lies in the Sadong River”. The Society whose secretary misappropriated its funds last year showed a net loss on the year's working, but it has survived this blow. There have been no liquidations yet in this area and the supervisors responsible are to be congratulated.
The harvest in the Lower Sadong was very good this year, and probably as good in the Upper Sadong as it is ever likely to be until the hill land can be allowed to lie fallow for longer periods.
Some requests have been received for permission to fell jungle for next season's farms and with the co-operation of the Department's staff it has been possible to inspect these areas. In some places there are still patches of swamp jungle which have never been felled and written permission has been given to make use of them. It is reported, however, that in some parts hill jungle has also been felled, and this matter is being investigated.
A plant pathologist from Cambridge has arrived at Tarat to investigate the cause of the pepper disease.
The new cinema at Serian was officially opened on April 19th, and has been doing fairly well. Films shown are mostly Chinese. The seating capacity is 420, Plans have been approved for another cinema at 32nd Mile, which will be slightly bigger than the one at Serian. These two cinemas should do much to provide evening entertainment for the large Chinese population. especially the young people who might otherwise be tempted to indulge in less desirable forms of activity.
From Simunjan 2,807.77 pikuls of padi and 4,497.00 pikuls of rice have been sent to Kuching. About half of the padi was purchased by the Supply Department.
278 tons of sawn timber were exported from Simun-jan Kuching during the quarter. 75 belian piles about 50 feet long were shipped by the contractor from Simunjan to Brunei for use of the P.W.D. The piles consisted of whole trees, from the Gunong Ngili area, and presented a problem in loading owing to their weight. After the Dido had failed to lift them an L.C.T. belonging to the Oil Company was sent down and managed to load them successfully.
Acting District Officer, Lundu
(Abang Indeh)
Satu meshuarat telah di-adakan pada 11 June, 1953, di-ketuaie olih Yang Berhormat Resident bahagian yang pertama Tuan D. J. Chandler, di-mana Tuan Resident telah memberi penejelasan dengan panjang libar nya atas tujuan Local Authority kapada semua ahli2 Local Authority, dan Tuan Resident sangat ber-harap Lundu dalam sedikit masa yang akan datang dapat menjadi Mixed Local Authority.
Pilihan dari Lundu ia-itu Tua Kampong Su'ud, Orang Kaya Pemancha Kalong, Wakil Tua Kampong Kerongkong, Pengiran Haji Deng, Kapitan China Mr. Lau Khiok Choon, Mr. Chin Poh Sen dan Mr. Ang Sze Leng telah ber-tulak dari Lundu ka-Kuching pada 30 June, 1953 bagai melawat Mixed Local Authority di-Sibu dan Mukah untok memperhati kan ka-majuan yang telah di-dapati olih mereka semanjak Mixed Local Authority di-bangun-kan.
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, AUGUST 31, 1953
153
Smugglers yang mempuyaie barang2 itu sudah tentu tidak dapat masok olih sebab tidak ada Pass jalan tetapi barang2 itu mereka bawa hingga ka-Sampadan saja. Dari sampadan barang itu di-bawa turun ka-Lundu olih Dayak2 dari Kampong Kandaie dan Biawak siapa yang dalam berhampiran dengan Sam-padan dengan gaji tiap2 satu pikol 50 cents.
SECOND DIVISION
Resident (Mr. W. P. N. L. Ditmas)
There were several changes of Senior Administrative Officers during the quarter. The District Officer Simanggang, Mr. I. Harper, proceeded to Kuching on 6th April on transfer. Abang Mustapha, B.E.M., was Acting District Officer, Simanggang until 21st May when he proceeded to Saratok to relieve Mr. R. G. Keech who went to Kuching on 24th May.
On 24th June Abang Abdul Karim, Native Officer in charge, Lower Batang Lupar took over as Acting District Officer, Simanggang.
Mr. M. J. Forster took up his duties as District Officer Lubok Antu on 16th May.
It will now be possible to administer the district more closely, as was not possible when this district was included in the Simanggang district, where also were constant changes of District Officers.
Mr. W. P. N. L. Ditmas arrived in Simanggang on 9th June to take over as Resident from Mr. A. F. R. Griffin on 12th June. Mr. Griffin left for Miri on 15th June.
The Resident was away in Kuching to attend Coun-cil Negri from 29th April until 9th May, when he left for Saratok to attend the Regatta. Engkilili and Lubok Antu were visited on 30th and 31st May.
Accompanied by the Superintendent of Lands and Surveys, the Resident visited Kabong, Maludam, Sebu-yau, Triso and Lingga from 28th to 30th June.
The sawmills at Sebuyau, Triso and Lingga were visited, of these the one at Lingga is the biggest and most flourishing. The Triso sawmill is not yet com-plete and is difficult of access from low tide till half tide.
Blasting at the new Quarry at Sebuyau took place for the first time on 29th June.
The death of Dayang Norkiah wife of N. O. Abang Mansor and eldest daughter of Datu Abang Zin, M. B. E., is recorded with very deep regret. She passed away at Simanggang hospital on 27th June during child-birth. The child was born dead.
The death of Mr. Ranti Broke who died suddenly from heart failure at Betong on 24th May, is also recorded with very deep regret. He was a Government clerk who joined the service in 1925.
Rumah Engkamat, a 32 door house at Langkang, Batang Ai, was completely destroyed by fire on the evening of 21st June, when most of the inhabitants were attending the Coronation Regatta at Simanggang. Relief of one pikul of padi per door to be repaid after next harvest was approved by the Controller of Essen-tial Commodities. The Agricultural Department have also supplied seed for planting and the Batang Lupar Local Authority have given out $2/- per door as charity. The cause of the fire is still being investi-gated.
The very serious amok by Chegu Abdullah bin Ibrahim who was Malay Schoolmaster at Tebelu, occured about 8 a.m. on the 20th April, and resulted in the deaths of six Malays and the wounding of four
others. Abdullah himself was shot dead by a Malay of the kampong. There appears to be no motive for this amok. Abdullah had been detained in the mental ward of the General Hospital, Kuching for observation for two months in 1949, but since his discharge, and until the time of the amok, he had apparently behaved normally.
Acting District Officer, Simanggang
(Abang Abdul Karim)
The Dayaks are still anxious to plant pepper. Their intention is that every door should have the privilege of owning pepper gardens. They are mostly Dayaks from Ulu Lingga, Ulu Sebuyau and Melugu.
Major Findlay Shirras of the Malayan Regiment has been recruiting Dayaks for service in Malaya during the quarter. There were 108 Dayaks recruited and a great number of the recruits are Dayaks from Lubok Antu area.
A.S.P. Mr. Edmeades was in this district in May to recruit Dayaks for the Sarawak Constabulary Field Force. 16 persons were recruited.
An election of a new Penghulu for Lower Skrang to replace Penghulu Sait (deceased) was carried out on 23rd and 29th June, 1953, but only 32 Tuai Ru-mahs were present out of 34, and therefore the result of the election will not be known until the beginning of July.
Penghulu Bakar of Upper Skrang has applied for permission to retire due to old age. The election for his replacement will be carried out some time in August.
Lingga dispensary was temporarily closed down at the end of the quarter, due to acute shortage of staff at Simanggang Hospital which necessitated the Hos-pital Assistant at Lingga coming up for duty at Sim-angggang. This therefore left Lingga dispensary to be staffed by the Dispensary Attendant.
Pantu and Sebuyau were visited by the Lingga Hospital Assistant regularly in the months of April and May. In June Pantu alone was visited by the Hospital Assistant at Lingga.
The health of the district in general was good dur-ing the quarter.
Datu Abang Zin, m.b.e. accompanied by his wife, his only son and one adopted daughter, left Simang-gang on 4th June, 1953, on his way to Mecca on pil-grimage. In spite of the pouring rain in the morning, a large crowd of Malays came to the wharf to see them off. Eleven persons in all of this district went on pilgrimage during the quarter.
The total padi purchased at Simanggang was 10104.64 pikuls, out of this amount 4140.70 pikuls have been shipped to the Controller of Essential Com-modities, Kuching, during the quarter.
The price of local rice at the end of the quarter was $2.40 per gantang.
The export of the following materials was recorded during the quarter:—
Rubber	...	...	1671.00 pikuls
White Pepper	...	...	553.00	,,
Black Pepper	...	326.00	,,
Timber	372.00 tons
The Chinese community around the Bangkong area of 13 bouses applied for permission to reopen their school which had been closed down since the Occupa-tion. The Director of Education will register the
154
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, AUGUST 31, 1953
school when the title to the land on which the school was built has been issued to the Committee who expect to reopen the school when the title has been approved.
The Malay private School at Lingga is functioning well.
Three Local Authority Dayak Schools were closed down during the quarter due to four teachers having resigned of their own accord.
Abang Aing School reopened after Bulan Puasa ho-lidays on 23rd June, 1953.
Acting District Officer, Saribas
(Mr. D. C. Walker)
Some fifty prosecutions were heard at Debak against persons who had unlawfully occupied crown land by planting pepper thereon. Most of the accused were Dayaks who had planted on land over which they held customary rights but which did not form part of a reserve. The court had some difficulty in finding that the licence given by customary tenure did not ex-tend to planting pepper and was guided in its decision to convict by the part of the Land Ordinance which deals with customary tenure in communal reserves (Section 91). In every case the amount of pepper planted was very small. Fines were imposed and re-commendations made that Temporary Occupation Licences be issued where customary tenure was shown.
The report for the last quarter of 1952 mentioned that the year had closed without the yearly murder which had been a regular feature of the District. This good record has not been maintained in 1953. During the Regatta the body of a Chinese boat-hawker sa-vagely hacked about the face was brought down from a remote part of the Ulu Spak. He had been found dying in his boat in the early morning by Dayaks from a nearby long-house. An arrest has been made. All boat-hawkers have now been withdrawn from the Up-per Layer, the Spak and the Padeh and are likely to remain withdrawn for a long time.
Apart from the murder there has been virtually no crime.
The Native Officer, Debak and Pusa, reports that as many as 60% of the Malay inhabitants of Pusa have gone to Sarikei to seek work with timber firms and that the rest have been busy catching fish or working sago. The local timber mill has had difficulty in finding labour. There was a drastic fall in local prices after the prohibited export of a quantity of low quality sago from Kuching. There are no indications of major hardships, however, possibly because of the alternative occupations available. In the coastal areas, sago is an important competitor to padi planting. A drop in price at the time when people are beginning to start work on the next year's padi planting is not altogether disadvantageous.
Another cause of local dissatisfaction has been re-moved by the signing of a contract for the building of a small Brooke Memorial Hall. The funds for this were collected many years ago, mostly from Betong Chinese, to supplement the share of the Brooke Cen-tenary Fund. Building plans were then postponed indefinitely owing to the tremendous increase of prices during the boom years and there has been strong pres-sure to return the subscriptions or lend them to the Chinese school building fund. Although prices have
not declined to any great extent it has been decided to proceed with the construction of a smaller building than originally contemplated. A site has been chosen in the bazaar adjacent to the existing basket ball court and concrete badminton court. Land has been applied for sufficiently large to take in and extend the existing recreational facilities. The building has been designed to open, by means of folding doors along the whole of one side so that it can be used as a sort of grand-stand for open air cinema shows and other functions where large crowds are expected. It is planned to furnish the hall, equip it with reading matter and a radio and to invite tenders for a bar.
The "Rentis Committee" an exploratory committee of all races, has prepared an outline scheme for the formation of a Mixed Local Authority. The scheme included a proposed basis of representation, a formula for grant-aiding Chinese schools proportionately to population, the proposed imposition of an "equalisation cess", certain organisational proposals and a most important proposal for raising revenue by a flexible cess on outgoing local products.
The Rentis Committee have accepted a kind invita-tion to be present at the Budget Meeting of the Mukah Local Authority in August.
A recent survey made by the Divisional Education Officer has shown that at those centres where District Schools (now Government Malay Schools) are to be constituted an average of only one out of five of the children of school age actually attend school. The proportions vary widely in different centres. At har-vest time more than half the children are absent. This is not because they are required to help their parents but because at that time families move out of their kampong houses into temporary huts and the children cannot be left at home. The villagers concerned have undertaken to attempt to solve this problem collective-ly. Generally, the rate of attendance is lower than in Local Authority Schools.
Acting District Officer, Kalaka
(Abang Mustapha)
Clearing For hill padi planting for the 1953-1954 sea-son had already been started, and following the usual practice, the clearing of land for wet padi is to take place later. Quite a number of Dayaks from Penghu-lu Goyang's area were moving down to the Lower Krian to open up new land for agricultural purposes.
The building of a new Malay school house at Kam-pong Kupang had been completed, and one Malay teacher was engaged to teach there at the end of June. This house was built by the Kupang people themselves and is under the control of the Malay Local Authority, Kalaka.
Acting District Oficer, Lubok Antu
(Mr. M. J. Forster)
The Sea-Dayaks are self-subsisting peasants with rights over the land almost amounting to ownership. In most areas the land is sufficient for their require-ments and they are able to enjoy a high standard of living. Reports of this year's rice harvest indicate that it is an average one. Although there is not much rice being offered for sale most of the houses appear to have enough for their own consumption. The
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, AUGUST 31, 1953
155
prosperity and happiness of these people depends on their being able to obtain a good harvest of rice. If their harvest is poor they have to fall back on less liked foods. They cannot make rice wine and give feasts.
In addition to producing foodstuffs for their own consumption they cultivate cash crops of rubber and latterly of pepper. The usual small holding of rubber is about 300 trees per door. Pepper gardens are small and the usual size for a door is about 50 plants. Some doors have much larger holdings and at Engkilili there has been a brisk trade in tawaks (brass gongs), out-boards and even motor cycles.
The Dayaks are generally prosperous and not much interested in progress. They have a good way of life and rightly do not want it changed. Two of the Peng-hulus belong to the Local Authority at Simanggang but the people in the other areas are apparently an-xious to remain outside the Local Authority which they regard as a means of increasing their taxes. They are not much interested in trade and where Dayak-owned shops have been licenced they are unpopular. The people feel they get a better bargain from the Chinese and are not ashamed to haggle with them.
There is a strong demand for work with large Euro-pean firms in other territories but very little enthusiasm for work within the Colony. Apart from a few men enlisted for the Field Force of the Sarawak Constabu-lary there has been no recruiting during the quarter.
This time of the year is usually a merry one. The harvest is gathered and the feasts begin. This year it has been a particularly happy season. The visit of His Excellency the Governor in April gave pleasure to thousands. During his tour His Excellency was entertained by Pengara Jimbun and Penghulus Ningkan and Ngali in their own homes. Hundreds of Dayaks took part in the Coronation celebrations at Engkilili and Lubok Antu and enjoyed the occasion.
Door tax is being paid rather slowly. 25% of the tax has yet to be paid, 1296 taxes having been collect-ed while 415 are still outstanding.
There is a very small Malay community at Engkilili, fewer than 30 families. Most of these have farms down river and come to Engkilili as seasonal labour for the pepper harvest. Some of them are hoping to acquire their own pepper gardens. Plans to build a small mosque for them are still under consideration.
Most of the Chinese in this district live in and around Engkilili which the first Chinese settlers reach-ed just over 100 years ago. There is a very small Chinese/Dayak community at Lubok Antu and a handful of Chinese are scattered throughout the district as boat-hawkers or village shop keepers. Most Chinese are Khehs.
The principal occupations of the Chinese are trading and pepper planting. They live differently from the Dayaks. They depend for their livelihood on their cash earnings, only supplementing these with a little food production for their own consumption. They are prosperous and will probably make good profits on the sale of the pepper crop which is much larger than that of last year.
Neither the Chinese nor the Dayaks are willing to combine together to form a mixed local authority. In this district they would find it difficult to work toge-ther to pursue a common course of action. The two communities are quite distinct and harmonious relat-ions exist between them on a basis of these differences being recognised and respected. The Engkilili Chinese
are a compact and prosperous community which ap-pears to offer an excellent field for experiment in local government. The people are public spirited. Since the war they have built a school at a cost of $50,000, and as the fees do not cover the cost of run-ning it, it is maintained by private subscriptions. Re-cently over $3000 was raised and spent on the im-provement of the Marop road. When the results of the pepper sales are known, it is proposed to consider rebuilding the bazaar which is badly in need of recon-struction. It is hoped to start rebuilding before the end of the year.
The Kapitan China, Engkilili, Mr. Bong Nam Siong, will shortly retire after completing five years service. It is learnt with regret that he does not wish to stand for a second term.
There are two schools at Engkilili. The Chinese school has been in existence for over 20 years and was moved into a good modern building during 1951. There are over 200 pupils of whom 60 are girls. There are no boarders. Basketball and badminton are played at the school and a large number of pupils competed in the Coronation sports. The children are clean and neatly dressed. There is a stall of six, four men and two ladies. This school is adequate for the needs of the community.
Dayaks receive a very good education in their long houses which does not, however, include literacy. A Dayak school was started at Engkilili in January and officially opened by His Excellent the Governor in April. There are 52 pupils including 8 girls. 12 boys are weekly boarders, only going home at week-ends. There are two classes and the course is intended to last two years. The principal subjects taught are reading and writing and English, also arithmetic. There is a staff of two men teachers. The boys wear black shorts and not very white shirts (the shirts do not seem necessary). The girls wear not very becom-ing European style dresses and have their faces and hair smeared with chemicals. This has the unfortunate effect of making the girls look as though they are waiting to be sent to a home for juvenile delinquents.
Lubok Antu has two school buildings but no school. The buildings are evidence of the desire of the people for schools which is creditable in an area where there has never been a school before As has been noted in the last paragraph, the Dayaks receive a good educa-tion in their homes, but this cannot be said of other people who have to earn their living outside. The ba-zaar and Government servants children at Lubok Antu need a school. There are over a dozen Government servants, children of school age and more than 30 in the bazaar. It is probable that a number of Dayak children would attend a school if there were one. It would assist the Lubok Antu school if the Government could provide a teacher until the school is well estab-lished. All potential pupils can afford to pay fees.
THIRD DIVISION
Acting Resident (Mr. A. R. Snelus)
Mr. Chew Geok Lim and Penghulu Jugah, repre-sentatives from this Division who were selected to attend the Coronation Celebrations in London, returned from the United Kingdom on the 12th of June. Mr. Chew Geok Lim unfortunately felt the cold weather of Britain inordinately—though not so the Penghulu Jugah, who seemed to have revelled in the climate but both came back full of stories about the wonderful time they had in England and the magnificient show they had attended in Wesminster Abbey. Both were clearly most tremendously impressed with all that they saw during their brief visit to the United Kingdom.
156
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, AUGUST 31, 1953
The Public Works Department has again been very heavily engaged on the large number of public works now being carried out not only in Sibu but elsewhere in the Division. Work proceeds apace, but in some instances has unfortunately been held up by atrocious weather which we have experienced during this quarter. As a corollary to this, the Rejang River was so high during most of May and June that almost no work could be done by the party of Royal Engineers who are endeavouring to blast rocks in the Pelagus and other rapids further upriver.
The sad and sudden death of Abang Ahad, which occurred so soon after his admission to Sibu hospital, has caused considerable comment in Sibu and Kanowit. It is clear, however, that he was brought down to Sibu in too sick a condition and too late for medical treat-ment to be effective. But it is interesting to note that several members of the Royal Engineers party had earlier also been brought down to Sibu suffering from some peculiar fever which could not be properly identified, and although treatment in the early stages was in their cases always effective, it would be interest-ing to know what form of virus is responsible for this dangerous fever.
Officer-in-Charge, Kapit
(Mr. A. M. Phillips)
A fairly serious epidemic which seemed to laymen to be pneumonia but was diagnosed by the D.M.O. as “part of the influenza pandemic" was evident in the District and especially so in the Ulu Rejang and Balui beginning in April, being worse in May and tailing off in June. Most of the houses above the Bakun Rapids lost two or three people, some more. The travelling dresser was able to administer to many of the cases on his way back from Long Itam and undoubtedly saved some lives.
No one has reported complete disaster with the harvest though some houses in the Belaga river had their crops, and some of the house, washed away by high water. (Padi is never exported from there, even though there is usually a surplus, due to the difficulty of carrying it out. The river is unnavigable to any boat.)
The Kenyahs at Long Itam (99 doors and 650 souls) will be moving from their hideout, it is hoped, after next harvest on the first stage of their Journey to Long Bahau.
Numbers of Kenyahs, Kayans, Peninghings and others continue to come over from Indonesia for work. They usually accept lower rates of pay or contract than the local labour, but by being more hardworking and thrifty on the whole than their Sarawak counter-parts they have just as much or more to show for their labour over the same period.
The Government boar remains at Belaga potent but thwarted. The local prejudice seems to be “if we had pigs that size what on earth would we do with them. They would eat too much and would take too much looking after, and if we wanted to sell them nobody here ever buys a pig so big and anyway can afford it at the present price of pork”.
We report with regret the death of P.W.D. technical assistant Abang Ahad who was taken ill while assisting the Royal Engineers in the work on Pelagus Rapids and who died later in Sibu Hospital.
District Officer, Mukah
(Mr. A. R. Meikle)
The usual influx of Dayaks visiting the Government station after the completion of the harvest increased to a flood during the week of Coronation Celebrations when they combined settling their business with Government with enjoying the various attractions.
Having thus disposed of their surplus cash they returned home, and very few have been down since the end of the first week of June. Reports from upriver indicate, however, that they still had enough energy left to indulge in a round of gawai.
In June an imposing load of equipment for the road surfacing scheme was towed up from Kuching on one of the water barges normally used between Sibu and Sarikei. Two tip trucks, a concrete mixer and a Diesel road roller were unloaded without difficulty at the Government Wharf, which had been temporarily strengthened for the occasion. The youth of Mukah will have to be patient, however, as the road roller (not as impressive as the old brass-bound steam variety) will not provide free entertainment until surfacing material arrives. Meanwhile, preliminary work has started to replace small wooden bridges with concrete culverts.
The Mukah Mixed Local Authority met twice during the quarter, on 28/4/53 and 30/6/53, and passed Bye-laws to regulate lodging houses and hotels and also to bring two upriver bazaar areas within the scope of the General Bye-Laws. These have since received the approval of the Governor in Council.
In educational matters, advised by the Education Committee, which also met twice during the quarter, it was decided to accept 3 Batu Lintang students who completed their teacher training course this year for employment with the Local Authority.
Approval was also given for the first Local Authority school for Dayaks to be opened at Lubok Mulong in August. In default of a Dayak, a Melanau has been engaged as a teacher.
The Finance and General Purposes Committe of the Local Authority met 3 times, transacted routine business in exercise of its delegated powers and made numerous recommendations to the Local Authority on matters falling within its sphere.
At the request of Government, the Local Authority also considered and made recommendations in respect of Penghulus' salaries, the nomination of a Council Negri member for the Coast, the appointment of members to a Divisional Committe of ATAS, and the formation of a District Relief Committee.
The award of the M.B.E, to Tua Kampong Haji Zahwi bin Haji Musa, Chairman of the Mukah Mixed Local Authority gave much pleasure to all communi-ties in Mukah.
District Officer, Lower Rejang
(Mr. A. J. N. Richards)
Captain Hargrave of the Euryades, Blue Funnel Line, loading timber at Tanjong Mani, disappeared without trace in the night of the 10th June. An inquest was held on board but was adjourned without con-clusion. Rumours that the Captain had been found alive in a Dayak house, spread by Malays, were quite baseless. The Malays are now busy resurrecting ancient ghost stories about Tanjong Mani.
For the Malays and Melanaus the greatest event was Hari Raya on 13th June, celebrated in style with small lights throughout the kampongs and a protracted holiday of visits. Sarikei and Binatang each put up a bangsawan, the former having the advantage of the Information Office amplifier system. Customary visits were paid without number.
Soon afterwards twenty-seven persons from Matu and Daro and a few from Sarikei and Binatang made up a party under the leadership of the Tuan Imam of Sarikei to go on the Pilgrimage. They left by the Bruas on the 10th July.
Compensation to a total of nearly $8000 was paid to people of Rejang on 29th June for the expense and inconvenience of moving their houses to make way for the New Colonial Timber Company sawmill. New house lots had already been laid out and allocated by ballot.
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, AUGUST 31, 1953
157
It is worthy of report that the lack of other use for money got from pepper is at least making a visible improvement in housing. Not only near towns but in the gardens substantial dwellings are being erected and often handsomely whitewashed or painted.
The Bulat road area is being planted with pepper of very poor quality. There seems to be little disease, except something that eats holes in the leaves, but the growth is thin in the later stages. This probably results from too efficient drainage, clean weeding and insufficient manuring. Imports of prawn refuse and the burning of earth are relied upon. There is little or no sign of a mixed economy, except at Binatang which still exports a deal of rubber and oranges, as well as pepper.
Rejang is likely to come to life again by the end of the year and Daro is shewing signs of life already. The new Daro bazaar is being rapidly erected; the place is within fairly easy reach of Kelepu and Pangin where there are hundreds of log-workers and there are large areas of padi land nearby. Paloh is also con-structing a new bazaar. Matu on the other hand is is very quiet, depending as it does upon rubber for spending money, though there is no shortage of padi.
Belawai people have already suddenly shewn an interest in sago. Their padi farms have recently been small and poor since they rely so much upon fishing. They grow water melon for which they get $10 per
pikul.
Water was very short in June. The most popular supply during shortage is three miles up the Repok Road and this entails, for many, a bicycle ride along that length of very dusty road whether for, a bath or to fetch eight gallons.
District Officer, Kanowit
(Mr. R. H. Morris)
Dayaks in the Kanowit, Julau and Entabai area have been particularly busy during May and June cutting pepper posts and this has resulted in shipments reaching a record figure, during June five tongkangs have been constantly employed in moving them from Julau and a fair estimate of shipments during that month would be in the vicinity of 100,000 posts. Prices per post have ranged from seventy cents to $1/-.
Theft of pepper plants is beginning to assume major proportions and might almost be classed as an in-dustry. Unfortunately victims are not at all prompt in reporting their losses to the police and in many cases make no report at all.
The condition of some of the small creeks in the immediate vicinity of the Kanowit bazaar is deplorable. All attempts to secure labour to alleviate the situation have so far been unsuccessful and even if a contractor can be found to undertake this work it is doubtful whether available funds will be sufficient.
The harvest which was completed towards the middle of April was extremely good and some estimates place the total yield as high as twice that of 1952. A con-siderable amount of padi has been purchased by Chinese traders at prices ranging from $26/- to $28/-per pikul. It is not possible to estimate with any ac-curacy the total quantity purchased but one trader of Julau said that he was of the opinion that not less than 50,000 pikuls had been sold by Dayaks throughout the District.
There has been the usual exodus to Seria and Miri by Dayaks from this district and applications for jobs as mowers and P.W.D labourers have been received from a few applicants. Generally however the standard of labour offering has been extremely poor.
District Officer, Sibu
(Mr. G. Lloyd Thomas)
Complete tours of Penghulu Pilang's and Penghulu Jarrau's areas were made during the quarter and reports thereon confirmed the impression that the last harvest was well above average in quantity. In addition, a spot of pepper-planting (mostly unautho-rised) was observed as well as illegal planting of rubber. Action has already concerned and this will be continued.
One of the prime purposes of the tours mentioned was to discuss with the people “on the spot" pro-posals for constituting Communal Forests for the Dayaks in these areas (in particular in Pilang's area, as there is already some Communal Forest in Jar-rau's). The usual difficulty was encountered in that each house wants its own area and considerable persuasion is required to induce the people to see the value of and agree to communal areas for several houses. Definite progress is thought to have been made, however.
The remarks made above about the padi-harvest in two areas are clearly applicable also to the rest of the District and the harvests reaped by most of the Chinese who planted padi last year have led to an increased demand by Chinese for padi-land on which to plant this season. Schemes for meeting this demand have occupied much attention in the District, Land and Agriculture Offices, in particular, but suitable land is extremely scarce here and many of the Chinese have not been favourably disposed to moving to other Districts where land is, or could be made, available. Every attempt is being made to accommodate these potential planters, but it seems that some will have to be induced to take up land in areas outside Sibu, at least for the coming season.
It is with regret that I have to record the death, at his home at Sungei Antu on May 16th, of Mr. Kan Ah Fook, who was, until a few years ago, a clerk of long standing in Government service. He had served for some years in Dalat and, latterly, at Kanowit, but left the service in about April 1950. At the time of his death he and his large family were, regrettably, in somewhat straitened circumstances.
Another death during the quarter was that of Mr. Wong Kai Sng, Chinese Headman of Area No. 9. who died on June 7th at Tanjong Kunyit after having spent some time in Sibu Hospital. Mr. Wong had not been a Headman for a long period but since being appointed in this capacity had been of great assistance to Government. He was appointed a member of Sibu Rural District Council on its foundation and will be very much missed from that body as well as in the general sphere of administration of this District.
Zubaidah binti Hassan, who died at Sibu on 18th April, was reported to be the oldest inhabitant here just before her demise and to be 120 years of age. It is claimed that she was born in Kampong Pulau when that was no more than a very small village from which the present Sibu gradually grew up. This grand old lady left a total of 104 direct descendants (27 of them great-great-grandchildren), who include Tuan Imam Wan Junaidi (a grandson) and Native Officer Mohd. Pauzi (a great grandchild). The Datu Abang Yan adds that "at the time of her death she still had a full set of teeth and could chew betel-nut as well as young people could"; truly a most remarkable personage!
FOURTH DIVISION
Acting Resident (Mr. A. F. R. Griffin)
The Miri Town Water Supply is inadequate even with severe rationing.
There seems no possibility of the water supply improving until new pumps and main have been in-stalled, which, I am told, will be a matter of many months.
158
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, AUGUST 31,1953
Recently a Health Officer visited Miri and was far from satisfied about the health conditions in the Town Area—undoubtedly the lack of water is one reason why the Town Area is not all it might be.
The shortage of water is a problem that must be tackled without delay. The Divisional Engineer has recently submitted estimated requirements to make a start on laying the water mains in the Town Area, but until the Sarawak Oilfields Limited have installed new pumps and filtration plant, the actual water supply will continue to be inadequate.
The new Miri Malay School building, which is near-ing completion, will be a fine building and, like the new Malay School at Bintulu, is a sign of the pro-gressive attitude of the Malays.
Acting District Officer, Miri
(Mr. E. G. White)
Beri-Beri was almost unknown among the natives but a number of cases have occurred in Penghulu Barat's house. This may be due to the fact that this longhouse has now its own rice mill and white polished rice is eaten exclusively and practically nothing else.
Arrangements are being made for the Government hospital at Brighton to be taken over by the S.O.L. as a T.B. hospital. Other cases requiring hospitalization will be sent to the S.O.L. hospital as at present. Minor cases only are treated in the Government dispensary.
All admissions are Government sponsored, the Go-vernment paying the S.O.L. charges and the patients paying the Government charges.
The amount paid by Government to S.O.L. for hospital charges is now over $20,000 per month. Government receives from the patients just $2,000 per month as fees.
Symptoms of what might be "sudden death" disease are now evident among pepper vines in the Riam Road area of Miri. The owners have been advised to cut down the vines and burn the affected plants.
A meeting was held on the 18th May, to discuss the application of the Matrimonial Causes Ordinance. The Committee were prepared to accept this Ordinance and agreed it should be made applicable to Chinese divorces.
Two objections were made to this Ordinance. One, that the definition of marriage under this Ordinance as that of one man with one woman should not be accepted, and second, that a local Court be empowered to make interim orders since the High Court sits only quarterly.
District Officer. Bintulu
(Mr. P. Scanlon)
Rumah Tandang, the Dayak house which moved across without permission from Oyan (Kapit district) to Belawit has at last moved back to Pelagus. After several warnings Tandang was prosecuted under section 108 of the Land Ordinance and was sentenced to a fine of $200 or 6 months imprisonment. He served his sentence and must have realised at last that Govern-ment meant business. The Native Officer-in-Charge, Tatau, visited Belawit in the middle of June and reported that the house had departed. Investigation by the District Officer, Kapit, revealed that Rumah Tandang had re-established itself in the Kapit District. Their pledges which were held in the fort at Kapit have now been returned to them.
A meeting of the Tatau Local Authority was held at the end of June at which ways and means were discussed of improving attendance at the Tatau Local Authority School. Out of 53 pupils who entered
school when it opened in January, 1952, only four now remain. Although these four have attended re-gularly and have made good progress they represent a deplorably low percentage of the original scholars. A further 30 or so joined at the beginning of 1953 and of these there are about 15 survivors.
After discussion the Committee passed the following resolutions:—
(i)	that school fees of 50 cents per child per month be introduced with effect from 1st January, 1954;
(ii)	that parents of all children in the school on 1st January, 1954, be required to deposit a pledge of $10.00 per child as a guarantee that children shall attend school for four years regularly. If attendance of any child drops below 70% without good reason the pledge is forfeited.
(iii)	that Penghulus and Local Authority committee members should emphasise to parents the need for children to attend school regularly for four years if they are to benefit. This propaganda would also be supported by the District Officer and the Native Officer-in-Charge, Tatau, when travelling.
Logs extracted during the quarter amounted to 6,530 tons, compared with 13,980 tons during the first quarter of 1953, and 12,200 tons during the last quarter of 1952. The reason for this appears to be that at the end of last year and the beginning of this year, when timber prices were high, large stocks of logs were ac-cumulated in various log ponds throughout the district. In the main these stocks have now been cleared. As a result of the general slump in the timber market there has been a general decrease in the price paid for logs by sawmillers, hence they are not now getting their pools fully restocked. Corresponding to the decrease in log production there has been an increase in the production of attaps, the quality of which has continued to improve.
A total of 2,748.16 tons (Hoppus) of round logs and 1,018.20 tons of sawn timber were exported during the quarter. The Bombay Burmah Trading Corporation, Limited, again accounted for all round logs shipped, doing two shipments each to Hoag Kong and Australia and one to the United Kingdom, South Africa and Singapore. The major portion of the sawn timber again went to Brunei with the United Kingdom taking about 300 tons mainly of Ramin. These are largest figures for export to be recorded to date for this division.
Refined jelutong exported to New York by the Chicle Development Company during the quarter amounted to 2,057 pikuls valued at $340,514.00.
A new Malay school was completed in the kampong early in June. The labour and materials for this building have all been provided by Bintulu people. The building is large and airy, has room for at least four classes, is equipped with a stage and has a con-crete floor. It is probably one of the best Malay schools in Sarawak. Much of the credit for getting this school built should go to Abang Zainudin, Senior Native Officer, Bintulu, and Acting District Officer from February to June. It was largely owing to his personal influence and exertions that the people of Bintulu were prevailed upon to subscribe and assist so generously.
District Officer, Baram
(Mr. A. R. G. Morrison)
None of the Civil cases call for special mention except that of a land transaction. This concerned a Chinese who claimed that a Kayan had agreed to sell him land for a rubber garden near Long Lama. When the rubber trees had matured the Kayan claimed the land as his
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, AUGUST 31, 1953
159
own. Both the Petty Court and the District Court held that the transaction had been invalid as the area was not in the Mixed Zone. The High Court upheld this decision. Since the relevant Gazette volume had been sent for binding I had been unable to check on this but it transpired a few days later that the land was in the Mixed Zone all along. An appeal to the Supreme Court was thereupon lodged.
Some cases of loss from swamped prahus were dealt with and brought but little satisfaction to the plaintiffs. One of the fascinating things about Sarawak is the way no native of the country ever ventures into an outboard or canoe, especially if it is thoroughly unseaworthy, without bringing at least $500 in what the Police reports call wang note perentah which are always kept in a small but heavy steel box in the bottom of the canoe and which invariably sinks whenever such a prahu is swamped by the wash of a Chinese launch. I once saw an outboard sink itself opposite the Kanowit bungalow through rash navigation when there was not a even Chinese launch in sight. This boat not only had a large sum of wang note perentah lost but also several valuable gongs and the occupants were much hurt when their heart-rending complaint against a Chinese launch was dealt with rather brusquely.
Some young Dayaks accused of theft in the District Court were discharged when it was found that the com-plainant had only brought the charge because the accused had refused to pay him more than a certain sum to settle the case. The complainant was ordered to pay $15 to each of the 5 accused under section 187 (i) of the Criminal Procedure Code. There were a few other minor criminal cases and the District Native Court heard a curious Appeal case by a man who had been fined for brangkat. It turned out that the husband of the woman involved had staled himself to be a bachelor when applying for a post with SOL. The woman then married another man. After a good deal of discussion the Court decided to uphold the appeal.
Health during the quarter was generally good. The work initiated by Dr. de Zulueta was continued and the second bungalow in Marudi was prepared for permanent residence by him and his family. Now that I have visited all the ulu areas in the District except for the middle Tutoh beyond Long Panai I am almost staggered by the magnitude of the task which WHO and the Medical Department have set themselves. There can be few areas in the world where such a scattered popu-lation in so much need of help exists in association with such bad means of communication.
Considerable progress was made with the Tin System enumeration. According to the returns the Dayak population of the District is now 5,600 compared with a total of 4,617 in the 1947 census. It should be noted that the figure of 5,600 is definitely an understatement as it only gives the numbers of accepted long-house dwellers and does not include the floating population of SOL coolies which amounts to at least 300 more. The position revealed is not a disastrous one but there can be no doubt that there is a considerable rate of movement from other Districts to Baram. This is not easy to control and although there is some measure of control we lack the powers to remove Dayaks from the District when necessary. The District Officer can tell a Dayak kampar to return to his own home but if the Dayak refuses there is nothing to be done about it. I have proposed measures for strengthening control but nothing more has been heard of the proposals. It is hoped that the entire Tin System for the District will be completed shortly.
I visited a cave at a place called Bukit Kudi not far from Beluru on a stream called the Trus which was formerly a Penan burial place. The cave was a small one in a low limestone cliff reached by a hole from above and with an opening looking out over the stream like a sort of window. In the cave were large numbers of bones and a good deal of broken crockery. Break-age of the latter seemed due to rockfalls and not to human agency. Many of the bits and pieces lying about on the surface were taken, with the consent of Wakil Tua Kampong Samat of Beluru whose followers are descended from the Penans, and sent to the Sarawak Museum. These remains included various types of Chinese plates and jars, including the remains of what must have been, when complete a very valuable nguchi, and also some remains of jars which do not appear to be of Chinese workmanship. This cave would repay further study.
I have been struck by the fact that although Baram District has 4 ulu airstrips there are no such facilities in Marudi itself and as a result the ulu airstrips are all focussed on Lawas to the detriment of Baram. During the quarter a trial rentis was cut on the vacant land between the Limbang Road and the Chinese cemetery. It appears that a strip 450 yards long could be fitted in here which would have quite good appro-aches. The ground is hard but covered by a layer of peat which would have to be removed first. The site was inspected by the Divisional Engineer and Mr. Van Waard, an SOL surveyor, and was inspected from the air as well. It is certain that a large airstrip could be built in the Marudi area but it would have to be hacked out of the Forest Reserve which would be very costly. There is, however, no point in building a large airstrip since any aircraft which cannot land on a 400 yard strip will not be able to land on the ulu airstrips.
In April Mr. Bruce Morton made a successful landing on the airstrip at Lio Matu which is on the high ground opposite the kubu. This is an excellent airstrip, rather short (340 yards) but with very good approaches. On 2nd July Mr. Morton made a successful landing at Bareo on what is now generally known, I understand, as Harrisson Field. The latter seemed to be a very good job and if the grass is cut regularly and the drains kept cleared it should be capable of all weather use.
The most important event was, of course, the Coro-nation. This was celebrated in Marudi with a short ceremony outside the kubu followed by Land Sports. The latter went off very well and took place in the Bazaar without mishap. The only trouble arose over the Tug-of-War a sport which, in my view, should be banned in Sarawak. The trouble is that local people will not stand up to pull. They insist on digging pits to haul from and then adopt a recumbent position which makes the event a pure test of endurance. The local Malays pulling against a Kayan team had a hard and prolonged struggle and due to a mistake in refereeing were awarded the pull incorrectly as the marking tags on the rope had become so muddy as to be unrecognis-able. I am very happy to be able to report that the Malay team very sportingly agreed to pull again when they were beaten by the Kayans. This is the sort of gritty incident which seems always to be associated with Tugs-of-War. Baram was lucky in that the Malays were good sportsmen but with many teams this little incident could have led to a most unpleasant row.
The best moment of the quarter was when I asked a middle aged Chinese suspected of running an illegal
160
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, AUGUST 31, 1953
shop for his Trade Licence and the honest fellow immediately handed me his Prison Discharge Certificate!
FIFTH DIVISION
Resident (Mr. J. C. B. Fisher)
Good progress has been made with the rebuilding and resiting of Limbang Town. The matter of Govern-ment loans to those qualified to receive them was finally thrashed out to every one's satisfaction.
Tenders for the first 18 new shophouses in two blocks closed on June 1st, the successful tenderer be-ing Teo Kok Sek & Co. of Sibu at $14,500 per shop house. The contract has been signed and work is now in progress. It was with very much regret that the news was re-ceived of the death of the Datu Pengiran Haji Moha-med Hussein of Kuala Lawas. The Datu was reputed to be 84 years of age and died on May 9th. I was most unfortunately prevented from attending the Datu's funeral, as I was at sea at the time returning from Council Negri. The Datu will be sadly missed both by his people and by Government. All flags through-out the Division were half-masted for two days as a mark of respect.
District Officer, Limbang
(Abang Haji Abdulrahim)
After a spell of rest after a rich harvest, the various tribes in the Ulu Limbang were commencing to clear the undergrowth in preparation for the 1953/1954 planting season towards the end of the quarter. The swamp padi farmers have started the cleaning of beds in readiness for the nurseries.
The following padi demonstration plots are to be planted this year: a Bangkita;
b Batu Danau; and c Ukong.
The Agricultural Show was held on June 6th being the Birthday of Her Majesty Queen Elizabeth II. It was a successful show and well patronised by the in-habitants of this district. It took place at the Chung Hwa School and after the judges had placed the win-ning cards on the exhibits the show was declared open for public inspection at 10 a.m. Numerous entries were received and some were of excellent quality. The most important and popular exhibits were rice and padi, which could be described as the pride of the Fifth Division. In the livestock section fine poultry was exhibited and the buffaloes were so good that they were difficult to judge.
The Ibans in the interior welcomed the reconnais-sance carried out in the ulu by the Sarawak Oilfield geological party headed by Dr. A. H. Jordi. Although the work started late in May a number of gawais have already been given by the tribes in certain long houses who expect blessing from on High for a second Seria.
Two male and one female candidates, all Bisayahs, left by the Lucile on May 26th for the Rural Improve-ment School, Kanowit.
The Wasi reservoir was not functioning during the drought and the supply of water was mainly from Sungai Poyan reservoir which is situated at the foot of the Sungai Poyan hill. Once again a sample of water was collected and despatched to the Brunei hos-pital for analysis.
The draft Bisayah code has been passed during the recent meeting of the Lmbang District Council.
The last person to plant the ornamental tree at the new bazaar site during the opening ceremony on Coro-nation Day was the representative of the Sarawak Government Asian Officers' Union, Mr. Kong Tshun Sang. Incidentally, being the Chief Clerk as well, he is the one lo keep the account for the new bazaar loans and interests to the last cent for the next ten years!
Acting District Officer, Lawas
(Mr. J. Pike)
There was one serious crime in the form of the suspected murder of a Javanese and a Sino-Murut in the Upper Trusan. Two men were arrested and charged, but one subsequently escaped from police custody and the other was recharged for a lesser offence in view of the lack of evidence and committed for trial before the High Court. The Muruts in the Upper Trusan had done their best to prevent news of this crime reaching the ears of Government, so that by the time it did there was little concrete evidence to go on. The Police have not yet succeeded in recapturing the escaped prisoner, though it is felt by the writer that he is in all probability to be found in the vicinity of his own village. Friends of the other prisoner have sent a rather pathetic telegram to the Curator of the Sarawak Museum in the apparent belief that “Tuan Major" has only to give the word for the man to be discharged however conclusive the evidence of his guilt!
The improvement in the provision of elementary schools in this district in the past three years has been most satisfactory, and though in some areas the Muruts feel that the Mission schools are inadequate, the other races are now well provided for and the only Malay or Kedayan villages without access to schools are Awat-Awat and Merapok. The former has been given a building by Government, but the village suffers from lack of energetic leadership and nothing has been done. The latter had a very flourishing little school, brought into being through the enthusiasm of an energetic Tua Kampong and financed by a voluntary rubber cess, but when the price of rubber fell the bulk of the parents felt unable to contribute further and the school unfortunately had to close.
Harvest was completed during the quarter and is widely reported as being well above average. Padi purchase has been proceeding at a good pace and by the end of June over 6,000 pikuls had been bought. This is well above the figure for the previous three years, and it is hoped that Government stocks will be sufficient to provide for the needs of those who have foolishly sold all their padi to the Chinese in order to maintain the higher standard of living to which they had become accustomed during the rubber boom.
Clearing for both hill and swamp padi for the new season had started by the end of the quarter.
The arrival of the new Divisional Agricultural Officer during the third quarter is awaited with keen antici-pation as there is very great scope for Agricultural Department activity in this district, not least in the Upper Trusan.
Obituary
The death of the Rev. Mother Clare occurred on the evening of the 10th August at St. Teresa's Convent. The funeral took place at 5 p.m. the next day at St. Joseph's Church and was attended by a large gathering of priests, nuns and friends, among whom were Mr. R. G. Aikman, Mr. W. S. B. Buck, and Mr. and Mrs.
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, AUGUST 31, 1953
161
L. D. Kennedy. The burial service was conducted by the Rt. Rev. Monsignor J. Vos, Vicar Apostolic of Kuching, assisted by Rev. Fr. H. van Erp and Rev. Fr. J. Paang.
Mother Clare was indisputably the oldest European resident in Sarawak, for she came to this country in 1889 and, except for a year's leave in Ireland in 1929, was in Sarawak till the time of her death. Thus with her passing was ended an association with the country of her choice which remained unbroken for well-nigh seven decades.
Mother Clare was born at Rhode, King's (now Offaly) County, Ireland on 16th September, 1861, and entered the Congregation of the Franciscan Missionaries of St. Joseph in 1886. She sailed for Borneo in 1889, being among the second band of Sisters to come to Sarawak.
Her first appointment was to Kuching where she remained two and a half years. She then left for Singhi Mission in 1891. During her twenty-two years' work in Singhi she became well-known and much loved by the Dayak community.
After the removal of the Sisters from this mission, Mother Clare was appointed to Dalat, where she spent the next twenty-four years as the superior of the Con-vent, endearing herself to the Melanaus as she had pre-viously done to the Land Dayaks. This period was followed by a further two years in Mukah where she became seriously ill and was recalled to Kuching. She remained here for the last fourteen years, enjoying a well-deserved rest after her long years of service.
Mother Clare was by nature happy, contented with little, and very practical in her outlook. To the very end she took a great interest in all the details of the affairs of the Mission. These qualities shone out during her last illness which began on 8th July, with a slight stroke followed by pneumonia. And at 7 p.m., 10th August, in her own quiet way she passed peace-fully from the midst of her Community. Mother Clare was in her ninety-second year. May she rest in peace.
(Contributed)
The Good Old Days
Wireless Telephony
(From The Sarawak Gazette, March 3, 1924)
Apparently Sarawak deserves credit for being first in the field as regards wireless telephony in this part of the world. Successful experiments were made here two years ago, and since then broadcasting has been considerably developed.
The first radiophone was installed in Kuching on May 10, 1922, with a companion set in an outstation for experimental purposes. Results were so good as to warrant testing with Singapore on August 24, 1922, speech being heard and reported quite clear when free from atmospherics and no stations nearby jamming.
Broadcasting music was instituted for half hour each morning from August 25, 1922, being clearly received in Singapore and elsewhere. On August 29, 1922, His Excellency the General Officer in Command, Straits Settlements, was entertained at Paya Lebar by the Sarawak Rangers Band which played in Kuching Wireless Station.
Since the above seven more radiophone sets have been installed in Sarawak, being built up and fully fitted out here. These have now practically ousted all the sparks sets, two stations now being shut down.
Each morning for twenty minutes at 8.45 and 9.45 a.m., all the radiophone stations are in conversation for testing and the results are most encouraging. How-
ever, since they are often jammed out by old-fashioned sparks stations in Singapore, Java and elsewhere con-versation is often interrupted; atmospherics are also an eternal nuisance in this part of the globe but generally conversation is commercially possible in the mornings some six days out of the seven. Speech between Kuch-ing and Miri, a distance of 320 miles, mostly overland, is often quite good but the average distance for conversation on masts sixty feet in height is 150 miles. The longer distance is possible by high aerials. All commercial telegrams are taken on Morse—speech being for the use of Government officials and testing.
Sarawak Malays and Chinese have been trained into running the stations, the smaller consisting of an engine, generator, battery and the operating table, all sets being standardised. The cost of running one of the smaller stations is that of 1 tins of kerosene oil, half a tin of cylinder oil and an operator drawing some $20 to $50 per mensem, and depreciation and breakages are not large items.
The Caves at Niah
There may be men and women of Sarawak who come from their first visit to the Niah caves unmoved to talk or write of what they have seen, but they must be few.
I approached the expedition without enthusiasm. We had left Miri in Lorna Doone at six-thirty on a mud-coloured Sunday morning, after a night of storm. At the bar we ran into gelombang besar, and long before the voyage to Sibuti was over what I wanted was not caves but a still grave. But an hour's journey up the sweet-natured Niah River re-awakened a glimmer of interest, and I began to think of what I had heard of the walk from the pangkalan to the caves.
Four men who knew the walk told me how to be shod for it. “Bare feet," one said, ''is the only way." Another said: "thick wool socks and no shoes." A third: "thin rubber sneakers," and the fourth: "you must have thick leather soles." For a walk of three miles, though it seemed to my sick imagination more like thirty, I could hardly obey all these. I settled for sneakers because, after searching in vain in Singapore, Kuching and Sibu. I had found them, size 12, two pairs, in the bright new bazaar of Kuala Belait, the Regent Street of Borneo.
Of the three miles, about three quarters is a plank walk, loosely laid on trestles four or five feet above a soggy swamp, with no hand rail, through close jungle. The planks, about eight feet long, vary in texture. Some are planed smooth and to-day were dry; some, rough-cut and ribbed, still held water from the storm; some are thick and rigid, many are loose and thin and split and bouncing, and all demand respect.
But the walk is not made for clumsy-footed tourists. It is built by and for the Dayaks who carry, in long slim baskets fitted to their backs, the guano that is one of the two riches of the caves. We met several boys on the way. They can make two journeys a day from the river to the caves and they earn $3.00 for every pikul they carry. But they are limited not only by their journeys, but also because the monopoly of taking the guano is kept to a haul of a thousand pikuls a month. And they must be both nimble and strong, for the long plank path is broken by sudden steep outcrops of rock, fifteen or twenty feet high, wet and slippery, and up and down these they must scramble with their loads.
The first sign that you are approaching something new is at a turn in the path. You are beneath a fan-tastic variation of the High Tor at Matlock Bath. The board-walk is the high road; to the right is the river—but here it is a slow stream running darkly
162
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, AUGUST 31, 1953
beneath an over-arching shelf of rock—and when you forget your feet and look up you find, starting almost at your right car among the trees, a vertical cliff of limestone just the colour of High Tor and running up two hundred feet to a jutting lip.
You climb a little, the trees clear, and before you, as though hanging from the cliff edge, is a row of derelict wood houses, tenanted now only by four or five smiling Ibans resting from their work. You greet them and go on and you are underneath the beginning of the caves. A great arching curve of rock springs from the ground on your left hand, flies over your head like a fan and opens to the sky on your right, a hundred feet high and thrice as long. You walk on and out and climb again and you come to the entrance to the main cave.
The first thing you notice here is not the roof but the floor. It is of long smooth billows of guano, chocolate-brown, astringent, fallen from the myriad swallows' nests above. You look up to the grey stone roof. Few birds move. It is day and they are afield. But the roof is closely spread with dark flecks. These flicker a little. They are the bats that will fly out when the birds return.
You climb the billows, comfortingly solid after those of the morning, but here and there so steep that you make a chain and haul each other up. In the wider spaces of the cave before you there rise from floor to roof long pale-coloured rods no thicker than threads they look until you come close. These are the road (more fragile than the planks) to the other riches of the caves. They are rods of bamboo set up from the ground with astonishing skill in articulated sections. Each section is fastened with locking pegs to the one below until they mount, a hundred feet and even more, to the top of the cave. There the rod is intricately wedged and horizontal bamboo galleries, looking like bad knitting, spread from it and the young men climb—almost seem to run—up the rods to gather the birds' nests, the crisp casings of feather and saliva that, the feathers gone. Chinese skill turns to the most delicate of soups.
We slithered and stumbled, seven of us, up and down in growing darkness by the light of three torches. On we went for an hour, never retracing our path, now below a roof so high that the beam of the torch could not reach it, now on hands and knees through a black and acrid tunnel three feet high. Men are apt, according to their bias or their mood, to compare caves with cathedrals or railway termini. At Niah one is more likely to think of a House of God than of the loveless temple of St. Pancras. The long perpendicular lines of the rock and the high slim arches do hold a Gothic grace and (in spite of the pungent air) the silence and the light do calm the unquiet spirit.
The light is the strangest thing of all, and the most beautiful. As you move through the dark turns of the cave it comes from above at altering angles and with changing strength. Sometimes you see its source, a small round opening in the roof where the sun shines through a filter of leaves glittering with golden-green brilliance against the surrounding dark, but more often the opening is hidden in a narrow cleft, and all you see is the light itself sliding down the graven walls, first pale green, then ashen grey, the colour of death, and at last a warm blue, quickly lost in total blackness.
A friendly middle-aged Dayak had guided us all the way and a packet of American cigarettes at the end seemed to delight him: the Senior Native Officer said we must not give him more. We came back fast, almost careless, over the planks. In the only shophouse at the pangkalan the smiling towkay was waiting for us with hot beer. As we drank, the Chinese music from his loud-speaker stopped and a voice began: "This is the General Overseas Service of the BBC... Here is the News... The Prime Minister of Nepal has been dismissed .." I pictured, all linked in a airy jumble, the summit of Everest, the newsreader at mid-morning in London, and the place we had left. We stripped and jumped into the river and as I scraped
away the caked guano I thought with gratitude of the officer in Kuching who—unsurpassed in knowledge of Sarawak and affection for her—had ordered that on my tour I should see the caves of Niah.
(Contributed)
Keramian Lomba Perahu Kuching
Lomba Perahu pada tahun ini telah di-adakan pada 30 June dan 1 July, 1953. Semanjak berpuloh2 tahun lomba perahu yang telah di-adakan di-dalam Kuching maka nampak-nya tidak-lah semua-nya itu dapat di-bandingkan dengan perlomba'an yang telah di-adakan baru2 ini. Ini di-sebabkan pertama-nya oleh banyak penonton2 yang bukan sehaja dari pendudok2 dalam Kuching bahkan mereka yang telah datang dari kam-pong2 rantau laut, di-pasisir2 dan mereka yang datang dari Bahagian Yang Kedua.
Bermacham2 perlomba'an telah juga di-langsongkan, ia-itu, Lomba Perahu Naga yang telah bertambah pada kali ini dari dua menjadi empat buah. Kaum perem-puan pun juga telah mengambil bahagian dan ini memang-lah di-ketahui belum pernah di-adakan di-Kuching dahulu. Banyak bangsa telah juga mengam-bil bahagian di-dalam perlomba'an pada tahun ini yang menyebab-kan kejaya'an yang besar bagi kera-mian tersebut.
Lomba Perahu pada kali ini ada-lah di-langsongkan berbetulan dengan lepas masa petani2 memotong padi mereka dan dengan kerana itu-lah nampak-nya bahwa perlomba'an itu telah mendapat sambutan yang lebeh baik dan ramai dari pada tahun2 yang sudah.
Hadiah No. 1 sebanyak $50 kerana bagus perhiasan perahu telah juga di-beri dan ini telah di menangi oleh perahu Inche Suhaili bin Abdul Rahman.
D.B.O.
Kuching Club
Bowling Averages for July, 1953
Name
No. of rolls
Highest roll
Average
Ladies
Mrs. F. Clarke-Hunt	14	157	134
Mrs. F. D. Becket	5	140	121
Mrs. S.	Kitto	7	146	113
Mrs. N.	Marjoribanks	10	132	102
Mrs. L.	Chater	6	130	102
Mrs. P.	Courtney	15	139	101
Mrs. J.	Ogden	6	127	100
Mrs. J.	Greene	15	124	100
Gentlemen
Mr. T.	V. Courtney	7	180	162
Mr. G.	Becket	12	179	144
Mr. F.	Clarke-Hunt	13	174	137
Mr. O.	F. Wright	12	178	132
Mr. F.	Ogden	5	160	132
Mr. S.	Larkin	13	178	122
Mr. R.	Greene	14	162	120
Bowling Competition for July, 1953
Ladies
Mrs. P.	Courtenay	185
Mrs. S.	Kitto	183
Mrs. N.	Marjoribanks	172
Mrs. F.	A. Clarke-Hunt	171
Mrs. J.	Ogden	161
Mrs. J. Greene	143
Mrs. L. Chater	126
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, AUGUST 31, 1953
163
Gentlemen
Mr. R.	Greene	405
Mr. F.	Ogden	383
Mr. T.	Courtney	368
Mr. O.	F. Wright	361
Mr. F.	Clarke-Hunt	329
Mr. G.	Becket	320
Mr. S. Larkin	311
GOLF
Arden Clarke Rose Bowl (Match Play)
August
First Round
Thomas beat Ogden 8 & 6
Strickland beat Joyce 7 & 6
Adams beat A. N. Outram 4 & 3
Second Round
Whyte beat Pamment at 19th J. R. Outram beat Thomas 1 up
Strickland beat Adams 2 up Harcus beat Barron 2 & 1
Third Round
Outram beat Whyte 4 & 2
Harcus beat Strickland at 21st
Final
Outram beat Harcus 3 & 1
Conditions for Final: PARCHED
August Stableford Competition
Pts.
H'cap.
Total
1.	N. Thomas	16	18	34
2.	B. T. Joyce	12	18	30
3.	C. O. Adams	26	3	29
4.	J. R. Outram	20	8	28
5.	G. Strickland	15	13	28
6.	W. L. Whyte	22	5	27
7.	H. W. Harcus	21	6	27
Conditions: MORE PARCHED (Course & Players)
Kuching Market Price List
20th July to 20th August, 1953
RICE—(per gantang)
Local, White milling ... ...	...	$2.70
Govt. Siam	...	... ... 2.52
Rangoon	... ...	...	2.52
Broken	...	...	...	2.16
SUGAR—(per kati)
Java, White (Govt.) Refined ... ...	.34
Brown	...	...	...	Nil
Nipah Sugar	...	...	...	.30
SALT—(per kati)
Coarse ...	...	...	...	.10
Fine ... ... ... ... .15
FLOUR AND BREAD—
Wheat Flour, per kati ...	...	.35
Bread per loaf ...	...	...	.10
MILK—(per tin)
Milkmaid	...	...	...	.70
Golden Wheel	...	...	...	.65
EGGS—(each)
Duck, fresh	...	...	...	.18
salted	...	...	...	.15
Fowl	...	...	...	.19
EDIBLE FATS—(per kati)
Coconut Oil	...	...	...	.80
Pork Fat No. 1	...	...	...	2.00
2 ... ... ... 1.62
PORK—(per kati)
Lean	No. 1 ...	...	...	3.49
Lean with fat 2 ...	...	...	1.80
BEEF AND OTHER MEATS—(per kati)
Mutton (Australian) ...	... ...	2.80
Beef, steak	...	...	...	3.00
Beef, curry meat	...	...	...	1.60
Buffalo No. 1	...	...	...	3.00
curry meat ...	...	...	$ 1.60
Kambing (daging) ...	...	...	3.00
POULTRY—(per kati)
Capons	...	...	...	2.88
Duck	...	...	...	2.02
Fowl, Chinese breed	...	...	...	2.75
Fowl, Dayak breed	...	...	...	2.27
FISH—(per kati)
Fresh fish No. 1	...	...	... 1.68
2	...	...	...	.97
3 ... ... ... .40
Prawns 1	...	...	1.74
2	...	...	...	1.15
Crab	No.	1	...	...	...	1.20
2 ... ... ... .80 Salted fish 1	... ...	...	2.40
2	...	...	... .99
3 ... ... ... .59
roe ...	...	...	2.20
VEGETABLES—(per kati)
Bangkuang (Yam beans) ... ...	...	.20
Bayam	...	.30
Bean Sprouts	...	...	.30
Cabbage Imported	...	.81
Changkok Manis ...	...	.30
Daun Bawang ...	...	1.20
Ensahi Puteh	...	.60
Bunga	... ...	.50
French beans ... ...	.70
Garlic, fresh	...	.60
Kachang panjang	...	...	...	.30
Kangkong ... ... ...	.40
Keladi (China)	...	...	.40
Ketola ... ... ...	.30
Kribang ... .15
Kundor	...	...	.20
Labu	...	...	...	.10
Ladies Fingers ... ...	...	.60
Lettuce (per tie) ...	.10
Lobak (Chinese radish) ...	.41
Lobak, salted, imported ...	.70
Onions, Bombay	...	...	.35
Onions, small ... ... ... .70
Potatoes. Bengal ...	... ...	.40
Pria (Bitter Gourd) ... ... ... .70
Bamboo shoots, salted	... ...	.40
Trong (Brinjals) ...	...	.30
Yams ...	...	.20
Cucumber (timun)	...	...	.30
Ginger	... .69
Chillies (red)	...	...	1.85
(green) ... ... ... .93
Sauerkraut, imported	... ...	.80
local ...	.56
Tamarind	...	.40
Tomatoes, fresh ...	... 1.15
TEA—
Tea, Lipton per lb.	3.70
Chinese per packet	...	.80
COFFEE—(per kati)
Raw, Java No. 1	...	2.60
Java No. 2	...	...	2.20
FRUIT—
Pisang Umbun ... per kati ...	.15
Pisang Tandok ...	each ...	.10 to .20
Pineapples ...	per kati ...	.09
Papayas	...	.25
SUNDRIES—
Bean Curd	... per 6 square piece .10
Cake (white) ... per piece ...	.15
(yellow) ...	.25
Kerosene Oil	...	per tin	...	5.90
”	...	per bottle	...	.30
Charcoal	...	per pkl.	...	8.58
semi-converted ...	...	5.29
Sauce (kitchup)	...	bot. $1.00, .70, .50
Blachan	...	per kati ...	.70
Dried prawn	...	2.40
Coconut, fresh	...	each	...	.20
Bako Wood	...	per panchang ...	28.00
Cigarettes:
Players ...	...	3 sticks for ...	.12
Craven "A"	3 ... .12
Capstan ...	... 3 ... .11
Rough Rider	... 3 .10
State Express	... 1 stick for ...	.05
iii
ADVERTISEMENTS.
[Aug. 31, 1953.]
[4—5]
[12—12]