 Vol. LXXIX.
No. 1141.
PRICE
KUCHING, Tuesday, 31st March, 1953.
50 CENTS
Contents.
Page.
Birth—Abang Yusuf	...	...	...	41
Engagement—E. A. (Sonny) Barron ... ... ... 41
Death of Queen Mary	...	...	...	41
Comings and Goings	...	...	...	42
Notes and Comments	...	...	...	42
Sibu Letter	...	...	46
Problems of Parliamentary Government in Colonies 47
Visit of His Excellency the Governor to Simunjan ... 47
Visit of His Excellency the Governor to the Lower
Rejang Delta	...	...	...	48
Upon Reflection	...	...	...	49
Sarawak Museum	Notes	...	...	...	50
Excerpts from the Annual Report, 1952, of the
Secretariat for Chinese Affairs	...	...	51
Report from the Lower Court ...	53
Correspondence ...	...	54
Jubilee Recreation Ground Fund	...	...	55
Sarawak Club	...	...	...	56
Island Club, Sibu	...	...	...	56
Australian Federal Senate Elections	...	...	56
Kuching Market Price List ...	... 57
The Sarawak Gazette.
TUESDAY, MARCH 31st, 1953.
Birth.
At Kampong Dato Sibu on the 5th of March, 1958, to the wife of Abang Yusuf, Native Officer-in-Charge of Matu & Daro, a son, Abang Abdul Rahim.
Engagement.
The engagement was announced in Kuching on 21st March between E. A. (Sonny) Barron, only son of Angus Barron and the late Ellen Barron of Prestwick, Scotland, and Angela Dawn Clifton, only daughter of the late Major E. H. Clifton and Mrs. W. L. Whyte of Kuching, Sarawak.
Queen Mary.
It is with the greatest distress that we bear, as we go to press, of the death of Her Most Gracious Majesty, Queen Mary.
Never, perhaps, in history has there been a woman more perfectly fitted for the role she had to play. Her dignity and regal qualities were a bye-word and she has probably done more than any other person during the last half century to uphold the prestige of the British throne. She was every inch a queen.
We hope, and we do not doubt, that Her Majesty's life brought her much happiness. But few women could have lived through a more devastating series of personal tragedies. For during her long life she lost, not only her husband, one of the greatest and most lovable of men, but also no less than three of her five sons. The renunciation of his kingly duties by her eldest and, we are often told, favourite son could have been hardly less sorrowful for her. How tragic it is that she so narrowly missed an event which would have gone such a long way towards compensating her for all these tragedies. For the coronation of our beautiful young queen will, we believe, be the greatest royal event in British history and nobody can have any doubt that the supreme qualities exhibited by her are very largely due to the training and example, both direct and indirect, of her august grandmother.
It is our belief that the British monarchy has never stood higher in the public esteem than it does to-day. The charming personality of the Queen is one good reason for this but there are others.
Queen Victoria was held in higher esteem than anybody else of her time but she would have been out of date to-day. Indeed, such are the changes that have taken place that a Victorian, if he had been able to foresee the way of life of 1953, might well have thought that royalty would have no place in such a world. But nothing could have been further from the truth. To all the momentous changes that have taken place in the last 50 years the Royal Family have brilliantly adapted them-selves and for this the credit must go, above all, to King George V and Queen Mary. Both were Victorians and neither lost anything of the dignity of the Victorian age. But they also created a sense of warm personal friendship between sovereign, and subjects such as had never been known before. They combined the best of two ages and passed on the rich fruits of their genius and experience to their granddaughter. It would have been Queen Mary's crowning triumph to have witnessed the manifestation of the great love and respect of the people for her granddaughter which we shall see at the Coronation celebrations.
Let us hope that the old Queen's wishes will be respected and that we shall do all we can to make the Coronation of the young Queen the happiest and most joyous occasion in our history.
42
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, MARCH 31, 1953.
Comings and Goings.
Every month now seems to see a brisk trade in comings and goings, and March was no exception.
Government Officers going on leave included Mr. and Mrs. T. P. Cromwell, bound for England in the "Johan van Oldenbarnevelt"; Mr. M. G. Dickson, Deputy Director of Education, early in the month; Mr. and Mrs. M. J. G. Saul and Mr. and Mrs. E. Bomphrey, in the middle of the month both these families are travelling to England in the same vessel, the Blue Funnel cargo liner "Belle-rophon". Towards the end of the month two grass widowers departed by air; they were Mr. B. A. St. J. Hepburn, the Development Secretary, and Mr. C. E. Sandbach, the Municipal Secretary. And then by the "Bidor" on March 28th Mr. Justice M. R. F. Rogers went on leave and he will travel on from Singapore in the "Antilochus". To all these departing officers we wish a very happy furlough in the Coronation year.
Also going on leave by the "Bidor" was Mr. H. Alexander, the local manager of Boustead and Company, who during his short time here has taken an active part in community affairs. We understand that, though he may not be returning to Kuching, there is a possibility of his going to Jesselton, where no doubt he will continue his Rotary Club work. We extend a hearty greeting to Mr. R. N. Harrison, who succeeds Mr. Alexander in Kuching.
Of officers who have been on furlough only one has arrived back and he is Mr. F. C. Ogden, who arrived on the 9th accompanied by Mrs. Ogden and their children.
There have been a substantial number of new arrivals during the month who included Mr. and Mrs. G. S. Wilson from Hong Kong. Mr. Wilson, who was an Assistant Commissioner of the Hong Kong Police Force, has come here to take up the post of Commissioner, Sarawak Constabulary. Mr. T. W. W. Wood, a graduate of the University of Aberdeen, joins the service as an Assistant Con-servator of Forests, and arrived early in the month. By the same vessel were Mr. and Mrs. P. D. J. Daly and Mr. Hamish MacGregor. Mr. Daly is the Programme Organiser for the Sarawak Broad-casting Service who has been seconded to us from the British Broadcasting Corporation, and Mr. MacGregor is the new Superintendent of the Leper Camp. Another Nursing Sister has arrived to join the Medical Department in the person of Miss A. M. Breakey and, finally, there have been a number of new arrivals for the Constabulary. Messrs. R. D. P. Robertson and B. N. Lewis are officers of the Federation of Malaya Police Force and are here on loan from the Federation to replace temporarily Messrs. Baker, Rewcastle and Edgerley who have all gone to Malaya to undertake a four months course of training in that territory. Both Messrs. Robertson and Lewis are employed in Kuching. Mr. J. D. Pobgee was a Police Lieutenant in the Federation of Malaya Police Force and has come to Sarawak on transfer as an Assistant Superin-tendent of Constabulary. For the time being he also is stationed in Kuching.
Notes and Comments.
We congratulate the Kuching Amateur Dramatic Society on its re-awakening early this month, after a long dormant period, with a very bright and cheerful show, half variety and half burlesque pantomime. It gave great pleasure to a great many people but, as our readers will have observed, it did not escape comment. Nor did the producer and performers ever expect it to. They were better aware than any that the show would not reach pro-fessional standards or even the highest amateur class but they did their best with such material as they had and scored a success. There were inevit-able errors of judgment due to lack of experience and evidently some offence was caused. But at least it is certain that no such offence was deliberate or maliciously intended. No doubt the same can be said of the principal critic.
Two notable events have occurred this month which, it is hoped, will prove milestones on the road towards better health in Sarawak. One was the opening of the new ATAS clinic in Mosque Road, to be called "The Wee Kheng Chiang Clinic”, and the other the laying of the foundation stone of the new Red Cross Headquarters near "Rowland Hill" bungalow, the latter ceremony being performed by the Countess of Limerick who is now making a tour of Red Cross institutions in the Far East. The importance to the community of both institutions is obvious and their organizers are heartily to be congratulated on their achievements. The generous manner in which members of the public of all classes have contributed towards these worthy causes is a most encouraging sign for the future and we wish both institutions all possible success.
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, MARCH 31, 1953.
43
Allas and Son Photo.
Mr. D. C. White, the President of ATAS (Anti-Tuberculosis Association of Sarawak) speaking at the official opening of the ATAS Wee Kheng Chiang Clinic at Mosque Road, Kuching. Right His Excellency the Governor. Left Mr. Wee Kheng Chiang, without whose very generous support the clinic could not have been built with such speed.
Allas and Son Photo.
A view of the new ATAS Wee Kheng Chiang Clinic.
44
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, MARCH 31, 1953.
Allas and Son Photo.
X-Ray equipment in the Wee Kheng Chiang Clinic.
Allas and Son Photo.
Reconstruction and realignment work in progress on the Kuching-Bau Road. Ewart and Coy, are the contractors.
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, MARCH 31, 1953.
45
The arrival at Kuching Airport of the Countess of Limerick, Vice-Chairman of the Executive Committee of the British Red Cross, accompanied by Miss J. Whittington, Director of Overseas Branches of the Society.
The Countess of Limerick speaking before laying the foundation stone of the new Red Cross Headquarters, near "Rowland Hill", Kuching. To right Mrs.
L. D. Kennedy, Colony President, Sarawak Branch Red Cross, and His Excellency the Governor.
46
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, MARCH 31, 1953.
Sibu Letter.
It is always better to write about a Sibu Chinese New Year some time after the event. Seen in retrospect it assumes some sort of perspective; viewed at the time, or even shortly after, the thunder of crackers, the dizzy round of visits and the general atmosphere of festivity tend to cripple historical accuracy and stultify dispassionate ana-lysis.
This year proceedings were augmented by a Fun Fair staged in the grounds of the Sibu Recreation Club under the able chairmanship of Mr. Lee Swee Ling.
The showmanship was provided by various well known characters but pride of place must surely be given to Bill Dickie who, clad in a sartorial night-mare of tails and a ratcatcher, rendered vocal effects ranging from a ringing tenor on the first night through a frenzied falsetto on the second, to end up with an almost sub-sonic basso profoundo on the last night. But he was molto pianissimo for several nights afterwards!
The first prize in the Raffle—a refrigerator—was won by that expert Raffleer Tim Dix. It is not so long since he won a "Gentleman Sports Road-ster"—you know the sort of thing, frightfully low handlebars and a frightfully high saddle so that you can get by incognito except for such of your friends as happen to be able to recoginse you by the seat of your pants—and proceeded to ride it in joyous if somewhat wobbly triumph round the premises of the Foochow Association. You can't do that sort of thing with a refrigerator of course but Tim's friends had plenty of equally impracticable sugges-tions in lieu! The interesting point is that nobody seems to know what he really did do with it.
Considering that it rained hard on 2 out of the 3 nights the organizers did well to realise a clear profit of over $7,000.00 to hand over to the Boys Club Fund! Staging as many as 6 and 7 shows daily the cinemas did a tremendous trade over the New Year while at nightfall in the streets outside a seemingly tireless dragon wreathed and wound its way through an inferno of ear shattering crackers.
At the end of February an absolute galaxy of dis-tinguished visitors descended on Sibu. Mr. R. E. Hales, the Manager of the British Malayan Petro-Ieum Company, and Mrs. Hales came over with Dr. C. E. Thiebaud from Seria by "Percival Prince" and on the same day there arrived by Malayan Air-ways Mr. C. R. Akers, the Chairman of the Board of Directors of the Borneo Company, together with Mrs. Akers, Mr. K. H. Simpson the Managing Director, Mr. I. L. MacEwen the Eastern General Manager, and the Sarawak Manager Mr. C. B. Horn and Mrs. Horn. There followed a week of really first class hospitality. It started with a cock-tail party by candle light in the Residency and never looked back from that moment. The Borneo Com-pany's compound sprang into its romantic night life of exotic scents and coloured lights—the last of course "by arrangement" with SESCO, who, para-doxical though it may appear, were also responsible for the candles at the Resident's cocktail party.
The open air bar—which readers of an earlier letter will remember was so designed that it collapsed when the patrons were removed—was re-installed to amended specifications so that there was now
every chance that the patrons would collapse when it was removed. But—and this is the commendable feature—throughout all the junketing and jollifica-tion not one patron nor one bar so much as stum-bled: to borrow a well known military phrase "The conduct and bearing of our troops was magnificent!"
What is the appropriate collective noun to apply to a number of directors? Those who work for the "directed" firm might quite politely and understand-ably speak of a ''probe'' of directors; but in regard to these particular visitors and speaking on behalf of all Sibu personalities who had the privilege of meeting them and including members of the Com-pany we feel that nothing less than a "Charm" of directors would be appropriate. We wish them God speed in their various journeys and activities and look forward to seeing them on their next visit.
Apart from the directors we have also been very pleased to welcome the Borneo Company's Timber Adviser Mr. N. J. Davies and Mrs. Davies who are paying more than a visit since they have under-taken to brave the rigours of the Sibu climate for 3 months and are now well installed amongst us.
During the second week of March Mr. and Mrs. R. E. Darnton and Miss S. Darnton spent 3 days at Sibu. The Darntons are well known for their ex-tensive tours and archaeological researches in the Far East and in Ceylon. Mrs. Darnton who is also an ornithologist is a regular contributor of articles and photographs to the Illustrated London News. The weather was not very kind to them during their brief stay but they managed to put in a number of visits in the neighbourhood and take a lot of photographs.
Another visitor who lost no time in seeking out the Dayaks was Monsieur F. Chatelain, the Swiss Consul, who spent two days up at Kapit; and on the same day we welcomed the United States Consul-General, Mr. C. F. Baldwin, and Mrs. Baldwin who flew in by special Dakota and were able to stay with us for 24 hours.
During this same week Mr. Justice Rogers paid his third visit to Sibu to try a number of criminal cases and we were very pleased to see Miss B. K. Searle, a barrister-at-law of Lincolns Inn now doing duty with Lands and Surveys in Kuching, who appeared as defending counsel in a homicide case from Binatang.
At the time of writing we have with us two very distinguished personages in Mr. Alan Moorehead, the internationally famous war correspondent and author, and Mr. Sidney Bernstein, who is well known in the film world. They are planning a most energetic programme and hope to see a great deal of the more interesting parts of Sarawak in the relatively short time at their disposal.
March has indeed provided us with some interest-ing and charming guests.
Returning to more domestic matters March the 7th saw the first of the so-called "mass birthday celebrations". This innovation is designed to reduce the expenses of running a series of celebra-tions by combining a number of them together into one mass party; and—what is more important donating the expenses thus saved to charitable and educational purposes. That this scheme works was most convincingly demonstrated by the March the 7th festivity. There were 6 "celebrants" and a very large number of guests, and a most enjoyable
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, MARCH 31, 1953.
47
evening resulted. To mention but two of the donations which resulted : Mrs. Wong Sing Kheng (nee Lim Bee Eng) presented $4,000 towards the building of a Kindergarten wing to the Yuk Tek School, which will very appropriately be named the Lim Bee Eng Kindergarten on its completion ; and Mr. Ting Chew Hin donated $800 to be shared equally amongst three local schools.
The world of drama has been going through rather a lean time in Sibu of late—not for lack of talent however, but simply for lack of financial support. The Chinese Teochew Wayang troupe "Sar Chia Soon Hieng" commenced a short season at the Rex Theatre on March the 11th but box office returns have not been stimulating. There is very little doubt that the low price of rubber and the high cost of living—an unhealthy combination if there ever was one!-is largely responsible, but research shows that not since the visit of the "Eng Yen Wayang Trope" in 1950 has a Chinese troupe had a really successful season financially in Sibu. We feel however that this can surely only be a tem-porary phase. The art of the Chinese wayang is one of the most ancient and fascinating of the dramatic arts. It is indeed unique, and quite irreplaceable by any of the modern forms of enter-tainment. We earnestly hope that theatre managers will not be discouraged by recent results but will continue to bring us Chinese wayang troupes when-ever they can.
To end on a nautical note : there is absolutely no truth in the rumour that the Third Division South China Sea Fleet have been carrying out a spring cruise accompanied by manoeuvres off Tan-jong Sirik recently—or at least it is grossly exag-gerated !
J.R.B.
Problems of Parliamentary Government in Colonies.
A REPORT PREPARED AND PUBLISHED BY THE HANSARD SOCIETY.
154 pp. Price 12/-
To deal with the "problems involved in develop-ing parliamentary constitutions in colonial terri-tories" in 106 pages is a feat in itself; and it is not the fault of the distinguished body of persons who form the advisory committee that the results of a short sketch of an enormous subject are necessarily somewhat gloomy.
The book sets out to cover an ambitious field: it starts by summarising the conflicting ideologies which beset colonial administration at the present day: deals (in two pages) with the problem of race relations, and gives a short history of the policies of the several colonial powers. A fair amount of space is devoted to a valuable examination (which might well have been longer) of the special problem of the plural society. There is an extremely interesting chapter on local government, which throws considerable doubt on the value of local government experience as a preparation for parliamentary responsibility in colonies: the difficulty of introducing a fully fledged system on the English model with the attendant necessity for distinguishing between direct and delegated res-ponsibility is not over-emphasised.
The book only purports to survey the problem, not to provide the solution : and indeed there can be no short answer to the question of how to create simultaneously, in the shortest possible time and in the most unfruitful soil, parliamentary demo-cracy and a Welfare State. It is truly observed that not one of the least of the difficulties is that new adherents of "democracy" tend to judge it largely by the material benefits which may or may not follow in its train. The conclusion is inescap-able that the political evolution of colonial territories is only just beginning and will take its time. It is impossible to believe that, even with the wisest guidance, multi-racial societies will reach in a night what Canada and Belgium took centuries to evolve—a stable political system.
The appendices, although interesting, could well have been omitted from so short a book. The bibliography which follows each chapter is excellent.
B.K.S.
Visit of His Excellency the Governor to Simunjan.
At 8.30 a.m. on 9th March, His Excellency the Governor, accompanied by the Honourable the Chief Secretary, the Honourable the Resident, First Division, and the Private Secretary, embarked in the "La Follette" at Pending.
On arrival at Kuala Sadong, it was estimated that there were three quarters of an hour to spare, so the "La Follette" proceeded a short way up the Sebangan River to the Bazaar of that name. Although the visit was totally unexpected, the Bazaar people delighted to see the Govenor's launch and in a very short time had let off nearly as many crackers as did the people of Kuching at Chinese New Year. When the noise had died down the Resident and the Private Secretary adventured
ashore to buy crabs and prawns. In this they failed, though their arrival on land was the signal for an assault on them by the populace with crackers. With great bravery they overcame these obstacles, looked round the pleasant little Bazaar and returned to the "La Follette" which sailed away from Sebangan with the Bazaar people gaily waving handkerchiefs through a haze of cracker smoke.
Once in the Sadong the tide turned out to be stronger than expected and so the "La Follette" arrived half an hour late and in a tropical down-pour which had sent most people to the cover of the Kubu. The District Officer, Mr. J. F. Drake-Brockman, came alongside the "La Folette" and
it was decided to order tea, as it was felt this would undoubtedly stop the rain. The prognostication proved correct. No sooner did the tea appear than the rain desisted and the whole party was able to go ashore.
This was the first time a Governor had visited Simunjan, indeed it was the first time any ruler of Sarawak had visited Simunjan for over twenty years except for the Officer Administering the Government's visit in 1950, so the township had made a special effort. It might also be mentioned here that last December His Excellency set out for Simunjan and was very disappointed indeed to find the elements were against him and,
48
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, MARCH 31, 1953.
though everyone in Simunjan was awaiting him and had made the place look very attractive, yet the risk involved in continuing the journey over such rough seas was unjustified.
On landing His Excellency inspected a smart Guard of Honour, was introduced to the local head-men and dignitaries and inspected the lines of Malay and Chinese School children. The former looked especially smart in their home-made sea-scout-like uniforms, a recent innovation largely due to their new Batu Lintang teacher.
His Excellency then went into the Kubu and listened to requests from all races, including the inevitable one from an Iban Penghulu to be given a gun.
After this His Excellency and party got on to two trucks and were propelled along the railway line through Kampong Nanas and on to Gunong Ngili, the site of the now disused coal mines. There was unfortunately insufficient time to go over the mines, but it was interesting to note how pepper or vegetable gardens, apparently manured with coal, were now growing where the old mine's offices and outbuildings and playing grounds had been. This mine used to be a source of much prosperity to Simunjan.
That evening the Native Officer, Abang Ismawi, gave an excellent curry in the Malay School to the accompaniment of a band hidden behind curtains in a corner of the room. After dinner, the party stepped through the curtains and found itself on a stage facing the open air and a very large crowd. After His Excellency and party had descended from the stage and taken up position amongst the audience, mixed entertainment was provided largely by the Malay School pupils but also by children from the Chinese School. The audience thoroughly enjoyed itself and the Malay school-masters sire to be congratulated on their show, which was very well organised with amusing and attractive episodes and no time wasted between scenes.
Next day, 10th March, His Excellency and party visited the Police Barracks, Chinese School, and then went round the Bazaar and sawmill and
visited Kampong Kalaka. At this last place His Excellency inspected the books of the two Malay Co-operative Societies and congratulated the members on their achievement and pointed out that they were pioneers who were showing the rest of the Malays of Sarawak the way to progress.
At this stage, mention should be made of the beautiful welcoming arches and decorations in the area of the Kubu, Kampong Nanas, the Bazaar and Kampong Kalaka. It was obvious a great deal of trouble had been taken over them, and despite the often rainy weather, they gave a festive appearance to Simunjan both by day and night as many of the arches had lights in them.
After this the party left Simunjan by outboards and proceeded up the Simunjan River to Bukit Punda, where another terrific welcome of gay decorations, local dignitaries and crackers awaited His Excellency.
The party's host was Mr. Yap Leong Chuan, who has a delightful house on the side of the mountain overlooking a small lake. It was very comfortable with electric light and cool clear water piped from the mountain. Prewar the late Mr. Yap Ah Bok, father of His Excellency's present host, had enter-tained His Highness the Rajah and many other Government officers at Bukit Punda.
In the afternoon His Excellency and party net out for a nearby large lake of great beauty to look at the fauna and flora. Not much of the former was to be seen however. On returning to Bukit Punda His Excellency and the Chief Secretary decided to have one more try and set off down river and this time were lucky enough Io see a whole family of proboscis monkeys (rasong).
That evening, after an excellent Chinese dinner, His Excellency and party went downstairs to the padi drying platform where a large crowd, mostly Iban, had gathered and listened to the band and watched the dancing, the weather remaining kind throughout.
Next morning, the 11th, after an excellent breakfast of boiled eggs, Dundee cake, and sweet biscuits, the whole party very regretfully got into its outboards and returned to the "La Follette" at Simunjan and set sail for Kuching, arriving there at 6 p.m. in our usual rainy weather.
The District Officer, Serian, is to be congratulated on his arrangements, which went off perfectly, not even a single outboard breaking down!
(Contributed.)
Visit of His Excellency the Governor to the Lower Rejang Delta.
At about 10 p.m. on 17th March, His Excellency the Governor, accompanied by the Resident, Third Division, and the Private Secretary embarked in the "La Follette" at Pending. By daybreak next day, after a blowy night, she was anchored off Kampong Rejang and the "Alice Lorraine", with the "Marina" in tow and the District Officer, Lower Rejang, and Native Officer Mohammad Aton on board, came and tied up alongside.
After breakfast we went ashore. This consisted of being met at the launch by a small fishing boat which had been made very top-heavy due to a platform and chairs having been put on it. Careful thought had to be given to our seating arrangements in view of the differing weights of the different members of the party. Near the mudline we were met by a large party of staunch Melanau Islam men carrying a huge medieval type of gaily decorated palanquin, into which we all stepped, and set out on an unsteady journey across the mud to terra firma. Here His Excellency met the dignitaries and inspected the school children of Rejang, after which he went to visit the fine old Kubu, which is to be pulled down. From here, accompanied by Messrs. Bartie and Smith of the Colonial Timber Company, His Excellency looked at the site of the company's future sawmill and wharf. The Rejang people were glad to know that once again there will be local employment for them. After this His Excellency toured the kampong and was then invited by the local people to a tent and given refreshments while the school children enter-tained his party with singing and dancing. The whole kampong had been gaily decorated and appeared very cheerful.
After lunch, His Excellency and party embarked in the "Marina" (the new 24 knot speedboat, built at Luoe, Cornwall and recently purchased by Government for the use of the Resident, Third Division) and had an exhilarating journey of less than three quarters of an hour from
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, MARCH 31, 1953.
49
Rejang to Belawai. This place too was beautifully decorated, and here too His Excellency was intro-duced to the Dignitaries, went along the line of children and visited the kampong and bazaar. We then all adjourned to watch land and water sports and His Excellency gave away the prizes. That night the Belawai Chinese gave a dinner party for His Excellency.
On the 19th March, after an early morning bathe at Kuala Belawai (where some of the party were bitten by particularly vicious sandflies), we set off in the "La Follette" then, as we were behind schedule, switched to the "Marina" and arrived at Paloh where His Excellency was met by Native Officer Abang Yusuf and the local notabilities. His Excellency toured this most attractive kampong, being given a great welcome wherever he went, and at 11 a.m. we had a delightful curry with the Tua Kampong. Time passed all too quickly and once again we were on the move, arriving at Daro during the afternoon, where His Excellency inspected the police contingent and the school children and met the dignitaries. He then went to the Kubu to hear requests, after which he visited the bazaar and kampong. At the best of times no one could call Daro attractive, and at the present time when the swamp is littered with timber and temporary shops and the new bazaar has only just started to be built, Daro despite the decorations looked really dismal. However when the bazaar is finished it should look better, and the unattractiveness of the place was amply made up for by the pleasantness of its people. After refreshments at the Chinese School, His Excellency and party hurried back to the boat to avoid a very threatening thunderstorm We spent the night anchored near Tanjong Jol.
Next day early we transferred to the "Alice Lorraine'' and set off for Kuala Matu, where His Excellency met the Tua Kampong and toured the area. We then proceeded up the very attractive river, visiting the now deserted District Officer's bungalow en route, and reached Matu (Ska'an) which gave His Excellency a great welcome. After His Excellency had inspected the Constabulary and the school children and met the local notabilities, he heard requests in the Kubu, and, avoid-ing the floods and mud as much as possible, went to visit the bazaar. That afternoon Matu had a spirited regatta watched by a huge audience in perfect weather. The whole scene was most attractive and colourful and only one of the many impending accidents in the narrow river actually occurred. After presenting the prizes, His Excel-lency inspected Kampong Ska'an and had refresh-ments with the Tua Kampong and then looked at the Chinese residential area. That evening we all had an excellent dinner at the Chinese Chamber of Commerce.
Next day, the 21st March, we regretfully left Matu and on the way downriver visited a thirteen door longhouse. Is this the last remaining Melanau longhouse in the country? We rejoined the "La Follette" off Bruit and then getting into the ubi-quitous "Marina" shot off at great speed to Sungei Kelepuh where we were met by Messrs. Bartle and Wyatt and were taken a good distance into the jungle by rail. We were shown two Ramin trees being felled and saw Melanau workmen sliding trees through the jungle on sledges and rolling to the entrucking point. His Excellency and party had tea with a gang of workmen, after which we returned by rail to Mr. Wyatt's house for an excellent lunch. During lunch we were all excited to see a 216 truck
train go by! Incidentally the writer was very impressed with how attractive the jungle is when seen comfortably from the seat of a truck, how much more attractive that is than when forcing one's way through it walking on "batangs" and watching one's feet the whole time.
We returned to "La Follette*' and then embark-ed in a bandong for Kampong Bruit. His Excellen-cy toured the kampong which aIso was gaily decorated and had refreshments with the Tua Kampong, after which we returned to our ship.
Next day the Resident left us in the "Alice Lor-raine" and we set sail for Sirik. Unfortunately the wind had blown all night and it would have been most difficult to get a small boat through the surf to the shore, so regretfully this part of the trip had to be abandoned and the District Officer, Lower Rejang, returned home, and His Excellency reached Kuching twelve hours earlier than expected.
To end this report it must be mentioned that the film unit accompanied us throughout and work-ed hard showing films at nearly all the stops. The unit was especially welcome at the smaller places where I doubt if a film unit had been before. It should also be mentioned that the Lower Rejang failed badly to provide us with the fresh fish to which we had been looking forward and only just provided us with enough prawns. But these are only small inconveniences to what we all felt was a thoroughly delightful trip amongst charming and cheery people, who appeared to enjoy it as much as we did.
(Contributed.)
Upon Reflection.
To wander in pensive mood along the wind. ing paths of a quiet English churchyard is, perhaps, one of life's less tangible pleasures, yet few would
scoff at its reality. Do we, I wonder, derive our pleasure solely from a deep sense of peace; from the
evidence of tender care lavished upon soil, which is gently asked to yield nothing but the beauty of flowers and grass, or is it simply a question of dates?
Consider the fate of James. E. Brown,
He never would be sat on, His death we sadly here recount By an elephant was he squat on.
(1910-1952)
How pregnant and full of promise do those cold, hard numbers become. What conjecture floods the mind concerning the life of such a one who, far from dying in bed with his boots on, perished fully clothed 'neath an elephant. We yearn to learn more but those few short lines are the only substance.
It is with thoughts such as these in my mind that, to satisfy in some small measure the curiosity of nameless beings in future years, I bracket off a part of my life and here relate some of the feelings, and experiences enclosed therein.
Summer 1952 :— July in fact and in the short space of three weeks 9,000 odd miles of kindly land
50
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, MARCH 31, 1953.
and sea spread themselves between me and my debts in England; which is, perhaps, hardly the light in which to view this green and (sometimes) pleasant land but at least it has point.
If it lay with us to ordain these things how should we plan our first few months in a new land? For-tunately the choice lies with our betters and that is why I soon found myself sitting in a wet and wobbly prahu a long, long way from my fellows, with only my splendid ignorance of language and customs as insulation from the newness and change surrounding me. It took little effort and time however to transform myself into the complete, intrepid explorer, (already concocting fishy stories) and what a glorious apprenticeship to the study of the language it proved to be. In November I was back home again, a slave of that lovely river and the life it offered.
For a little time I was able to live in the com-munity and to learn something of its ways and how painless was the operation of inserting a new member (plus healthy family) into it. You know it really is a remarkable thought that a similar group of people living in a hamlet in England would, by mutual consent, elect someone to fill the posts of village gossip, village idiot, organiser of social events, collector for charities etc. etc. but here we all gossip and are seemingly composed of equal parts of all the other characters. Which of course is just as it should be and is to me one of the brighter stars in Sarawak skies.
Leaving society behind me I led a wandering existence for a few months and was able, in that time, to learn what real walking was. It also gave me the opportunity of living with the Sea Dayaks. That they are a charming people is immediately evident, even to him who scarcely understands a word of their language and the early loss, to one of their number, of a treasured old green (in it's youth) hat could not dim this impression. If only the ladies would remain true to their loves my praise would be unqualified, but the tender song of love that she sang one night did not stop her marriage to another one short month later. It was pleasant too to meet the District Officers and those courteous gentlemen the Native Officers on their own stamping grounds. They were all very tolerant of my bad penny habits and what havens of refuge they became when the body demanded rest and the mind exercise. This latter need, like the poor, is always with us and we don't appear to cater for it here: of small talk there is abundance but relatively few can be found who will listen to my profundities and tell me that I'm an ass and, what is more im-portant, why. Perhaps the warmth, the stickiness and the curry are to blame.
Upon returning to Kuching it was impossible to escape the impression that she was and is bursting her seams. Foundation stones appear with remark-able frequency and are buried at even greater speed to give birth to such glories as the new bank, cinema, clinic, etc. etc. and (this had to come) the Happy World; though one suspects that the founda-tion stone of this last took the form of a dollar note set in concrete. The world is indeed coming to Sarawak and with it an ever increasing flow of new people, all heartily cursing the lack of homes. You see, already I can view the latest arrivals with the air of one of the locals appraising "them foreigners."
L. E. M.
Sarawak Museum Notes.
Kelabit Country.
In the December Gazette it was expected that no copy would be provided in January, owing to an expedition to the interior. This expedition actually turned out to be much more protracted than was expected and included quite a chronicle of major accidents and minor adventures. As some of these may be of general interest, particularly in connect-ion with the development of communications far inland, it is intended to write about them in this column next month—when we have had time to sort out our notes.
Apart from this, the expedition to the Kelabit country was successful in its main objectives. These were, firstly to bring up-to-date the long-term study of changes in one of the remotest com-munities, with special reference to the impacts of post-war education, mission activities and other influences which have only came in recent years. The basis of this study was established in 1945-6 and regular visits since should eventually provide a well-documented picture of social and economic changes. This will tie up with the socio-economic surveys made by Dr. R. Freeman, Dr. W. R. Geddes and Dr. S. Morris in more accessible parts of the country and with the work of Mr. R. Needham among the Punans, Penans, etc.
The second objective was to fill in the gaps in the mammal and bird collections from the uplands, with special reference to owls, frogmouths, civet cats, and other nocturnally active forms which are very difficult to observe or obtain. Concentration on this has produced a number of valuable speci-mens although it cannot be said that the gaps have all yet been filled.
Thirdly, carved stones and megalithic memorials newly discovered by the Kelabits and Kayans living in the Akar were visited. These are of much interest, specially since the discovery of many curved stones at almost the opposite end of Sarawak, Fourthly, tea, coffee and hemp plants were taken up and planted at 3,500 feet.
Santubong.
Santubong.
During the monsoon, outdoor excavation is impracticable at Santubong. Attention has been concentrated on analysing the bulk of material already obtained. Mr. Chen Boon Kong has been engaged continuously on this. With the assistance of Mr. J. Bangga he has also succeeded in putting together from fragments a considerable number of whole pieces which supplement those already excavated undamaged.
It is hoped to resume work at Santubong shortly. Much assistance was obtained from voluntary helpers last year. This year we should again wel-come offers of assistance either from individuals or from groups such as schools or scout patrols. It is intended to open up digging in a new section, taking up from what we already know and focus-ing attention on the many still unsolved problems —particularly the purpose and origin of the stone carvings, which remain a complete mystery.
A number of distinguished visitors have been shown round the excavation site during recent months; it is always a pleasure to do this. Among these visitors we have welcomed Mr. R. E. Hales,
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, MARCH 31, 1953.
51
Managing Director of the B.M.P. Co. Ltd. with Mrs. Hales, and the chief of the Geological Section Dr. C. K. Thiebaud with Mr. W. Milroy and Mr. W. M. Moore. Geological interpretations are very necessary on an excavation site of this sort. And another of Santubong's mysteries is still the origin of the quantities of iron slag which cover many acres between the Sungei Ja'ong and Santubong Village, behind Buntal, and again under Gunong Sejinjang on the opposite side of the river.
Mr. Fortunatus Manis.
A severe setback to archaeological research was the death of Mr. F. Manis on 9th January, 1953. The late Research Assistant was a native of Celebes who took an active part in helping S.R.D. guerilla forces in northern Sarawak during the latter part of the Japanese Occupation. He had previously served as a teacher and then as a Native Officer in the interior of Indonesian Borneo, of which he had an exceptional knowledge. He was a fluent speaker of the Murut, Mil u and Kelabit dialects and on behalf of the missionaries (he was himself a Christian) translated some of the first hymns which have since become the morning and evening pleasure of thousands of converted natives. He was responsible for the initiation of the first of the bamboo-pipe bands which have been widely copied by Government and mission schools in the Fourth and Fifth Divisions. An accomplished musician, he prepared (and nearly completed before his death) a very full monograph on native music of the interior. He joined the musuem staff in 1947 and spent much of his time travelling in almost all the main districts of Sarawak, collecting native folklore on a systematic basis. Of particular interest is his well-arranged material on the vanished Serus of the Kalaka District,—once a great people, but over-run by the Ibans and by their own (Seru) vicious customs.
It is hoped that much of this material can eventually be published. But it is going to be hard to replace the painstaking attention to detail which Manis devoted to collecting and indexing this work during the past four years. But more than this, the death of Manis will be felt as a personal loss to thousands of native people. Wherever he went, his cheerful patient character, his interest in and encouragement of native interests, and his ability to mix,—rapidly to make friends and to learn the ways of any group he was with,—made him one of the best-known and liked of travellers of the more familiar routes. When news of his death was dropped in a note from a Borneo Evangelical Mission Auster into the Kelabit country on January 16th, there was a sense of distress and sadness which would also have been felt elsewhere.
In these days, Government officers at all levels generally have little time to sit and listen; they have many administrative duties which hasten them along. It was Manis's good fortune to have the job of listening, of being expert at it and loving to do it. It is a real misfortune that he should have died at the age of only 37, when the full results of his good work were just beginning to emerge.
Gifts.
Among gifts received recently are a considerable consignment of books and periodicals for the Reference Library from Mr. A. R. Morrison, which are most acceptable. Mr. W. Allen (who has
left the British Aluminium Company) sent in interesting pottery from North Borneo. Mr. I. H. N. Evans a specially made collection of Bajau pottery from Kota Belud which he has generously presented. Mr. I. A. N. Urquhart sent us a picture of an earthenware figure which, judging from the photograph, is almost certainly one of the figures made at Sawankolok in Central Siam and of type not previously recorded in Borneo. Fortunately we now have a specimen collected in Central Siam last year and when Mr. Urquhart has a chance to see it it should be possible to check on this point—the original of the photograph is in Dayak hands.
Mr. J. D. Boles of the North Borneo Government has kindly sent a specimen of Swinhoe's Petrel. This is the first positive record from Sarawak and the first skin in the Museum. The bird flew into a telephone wire halfway up the hill above Jesselton Town, about 300-400 yards from the sea, at about 6.00 a.m. on January 17th. It was taken to the house of Mr. R. H. Hansen who did what he could for if, and tried to feed it on various things includ-ing minute pieces of raw fish. It had an injury to scalp, and kept its head turned half round. (It is, in fact, practically impossible to keep these ocean-going birds alive, as they feed on most delicate sea-food, minute and often microscopic surface organisms which they skim up with their beak.) Mr. Boles kindly put the bird on a plane in time for us to preserve it.
Mr. J. A. Gawecki sent some cobra's eggs and Mr. W. S. Buck a snake (Ular Ledi) removed from his house. Mr. H. T. Rigden live caterpillars; Mr. R. W. Hartline an ugly and unusual form of stick insect. Mr. B. S. Smythies has been good enough to collect for us a specimen of the rare, bald-headed, Bristled Shrike Starling (Pityriasis gymnocephala) which was obtained in Brunei at our request; one is urgently wanted for dissection study in the American Museum of Natural History. This is one of the few birds exclusively confined to Borneo.
(Contributed.)
Excerpts from the Annual Report, 1952, of the Secretariat for Chinese Affairs.
It is rather pleasant to recollect some of the out-standing activities of some of the societies during the year under review. Those that are worthy of mention are as follows:—
The dragon boats in their traditional splendour, for the first time in the history of Sarawak, made their appearance in Sarawak River and were witnessed by thousands of people. These boats were built by a society known as the Dragon Boat Society. This society also organised a series of races of the dragon boats in the Sarawak River to the amusement of many people.
When H.M.S. ”Opossum" visited Kuching some months ago the Chinese community associat-ions and the Sarawak Union Club entertained the frigate's company.
During Their Royal Highnesses' recent visit to Sarawak, the societies, particularly the Royal Visitors' Reception Committee, contributed not a little towards the decoration of the Kuching Town.
52
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, MARCH 31, 1953.
Apart from decorating the streets, the various societies in town were themselves beautifully decorated. These societies will again contribute generously no doubt towards the Coronation Cele-bration next June. Already a few of them have commenced practice on some kinds of shows for participation on the occasion.
The formation of the Miri Amateur Athletic Association is the beginning of what we hope may be a Colony wide movement. It will be noted that it is, affiliated with the North Borneo Amateur Athletic Association.
Another notable departure is the formation of an amateur dramatic troupe to perform "classical” Chinese drama in Kuching.
First and Second Divisions. During the year 1952, 5792 immigrants arrived in Kuching and 5329 emigrants left for Singapore and foreign ports.
Third Division. During the year 1952, 1488 immigrants arrived in the Third Division and 1637 emigrants left for Singapore and foreign ports.
Fourth and Fifth Divisions. During the year 1123 immigrants arrived in Miri and 1121 emi-grants left for Singapore and foreign ports.
546 British Passports were issued during the year
1952.
During the year the Malayan Airways commenced operating their air services between Singapore, Sarawak and North Borneo through Sibu. As air-craft from Norh Borneo to Singapore had, there-fore, to be checked at Sibu, an additional Passport Examination Officer was engaged and is now stationed at Sibu.
Alien children coining to Sarawak to join parents who are Sarawak residents now have to be under 12 years of age clinical reckoning before they are permitted to enter under the approved categories. The age limit up to October, 1952, was under 14 years of age in clinical reckoning. This age was reduced to bring our practice into conformity with neighbouring British territories.
Disputes. A total of 57 cases of dispute between employers and employees were dealt with under Section 6 (1) of the Labour Protection Ordinance and settled generally to the satisfaction of both parties concerned.
Strikes. No strikes occurred during the year.
Temporary stoppage of work. In March, 1952, a temporary stoppage of work not amounting to strike over the condition of employment and rate of wages was curried out by 25 female workers employed by the Wee Kheng Chiang Rubber Factory at 3rd Mile, Pending Road, for work in the smoke-house. The Deputy Protector of Labour interviewed both parties concerned and offered advice. As a result, the employer acceded to the demand of the employees with certain conditions. The new arrangement satisfied the workers who returned to work.
The demand for skilled labour in the timber and oil industrial undertakings in the 3rd and 4th Divisions remains comparatively high throughout the year.
The recent decline in prices of rubber and pepper brought no apparent changes. There are no signs of shortage of labour in both industries in the 1st,
2nd and 5th Divisions since they are characterized by a large number of small concerns, often based on the family as a unit.
It is important to note that the Public Works Department has contracted work on the Bau and Serian Roads to Messrs. Ewart & Co. and other contractors. These in turn have engaged sub-contractors to such an extent that many claims for wages have been received which have caused great difficulty to investigate and settle. The effect has been a certain amount of unrest and dissatisfaction. This matter is being taken up and arrangements have already been made for principal contractors to employ labour direct. Claims for wages amount-ing to over $4,000.00 have been settled by the Deputy Protector of Labour already.
Women and Girls Protection.
Cases under the Ordinance.
The procedure of interrogation of immigrant women and girls disembarking in Kuching was continued throughout the year. 219 women and 86 girls were interogated. No cases of trafficking were brought to light.
During the year a total of 42 visits were paid to various houses and lodging houses suspected of being used as brothels. Regular visits to girls on bond in institutions were also made by the Lady Assistant Protector of Women and Girls.
58 cases under the Ordinance were investigated in connection with girls who were suspected of being used as mui tsai, girls who were in need of pro-tection or girls who were suspected to be in moral danger.
During the year 36 women, girls and children were admitted to the Salvation Army Girls' Home at Haji Taha Road Kuching.
It is Government's policy in general not to use the place of safety as a place of detention or punish-ment for recalcitrant Daughters or young prosti-tutes, but as a place to which girls may be removed from moral danger and receive a good up-bringing.
A Girls' Home which is run under the Manage-ment of the Salvation Anny was established at Haji Taha Road, Kuching, as from 16th October, 1950, for use as a place of safety under the provisions of the Women and Girls' Protection Ordinance, 1948.
Capt. Joan Sharman, who acted for Capt. Willis whilst she was on furlough, was matron in charge of the Home until 12th July, 1952, when she left the Salvation Army for missionary work with the S.P.G. Mission at St. Mary's Boarding House. She was doing "field work" among Chinese women and young people, Brownies, Guides, Sunday School, etc.
Capt. E. C. Willis (now Major) returned from home leave and resumed matronship of the Home on 9th July, 1952.
The Secretary for Chinese Affairs and the Lady Assistant Protector of Women and Girls visit the Home frequently and give all possible assistance to the staff from time to time.
The public has shown signs of appreciation of the work carried out by the Home during the year under review. The admission of young girls who are in moral danger to the place of safety at the request of their parents tends to increase.
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, MARCH 31, 1953.
53
During the year 13 general and 7 extraordinary meetings were held by the Kuching Chinese Advisory Board.
The Board throughout the year continued to interest itself in various subjects such as, Public Service Corps, Youth Organisation, Traffic Control, Vagrancy, etc.
A "Youth Week" for boys and girls was organised under the auspices of the Rotary Club, Kuching, in May, 1952. It was the first time that the Rotary Club had tried to do anything on this scale. An appeal was made to the whole community of Kuching to show the youth of the town something of the part which youth will later play in community life-religious, governmental, civic and technical public services, and to stimulate the interest of youth and their elders in vigorous, progressive and constructive Youth Movements. 83 Boy and 74, girl students from various schools in Kuching were invited to attend lectures given by Government departments. Officers concerned of this department spoke on the nature of the work and function of Immigration, Protection of Women and Girls, Labour Protection, Registration of Societies and Registration of Trade Unions. It was gratifying to note that the students showed keen interest during their visit. Prizes to the value of $150 were given for the best essays written on a topic arising out of the Youth Week.
Drives for subscriptions in aid of the Public Service Corps were carried out by the Secretary for Chinese Affairs and Committee Members of the Public Service Corps from time to time during the year. It may be noted that approximately $10,000 has been promised by the public in general. No financial assistance has been given by Government.
Report from the Lower Court.
Mr. John Jones of the Sarawak Company Inc. was again the central figure in a prosecution brought by the Kuching Municipal Council before the Lower Court recently.
The case arose from an alleged contravention of By-law No. 31 (1) of Chapter 8 dealing with Bake-houses.
The by-law reads as follows: "The bakehouse shall consist of a ground-floor only, situated at such level with relation to neigh-bouring land, drains or streams as not to be able to be invaded by storm or flood-water. No roof shall be covered with belian attaps and no walls shall be constructed of timber unless protected by some non-inflammable material. The bakehouse shall be provided with a jack-roof."
It was the contention of the prosecution that the bakery operated by the defendant's company had a roof covered with belian attaps which was not pro-tected by some non-inflammable material.
It was at this stage in the proceedings that Mr. Jones, now fully recovered from his recent collapse and sojourn in the mental block, asked the Magis-trate for an opinion on the meaning of the second sentence in this by-law He wished it to be quite dear, he said, but really couldn't care less what the decision was, that the words "unless protected by some non-inflammable material'' could be read in conjunction with the words relating to roof. The Magistrate after deliberation decided that,
inasmuch as there was no comma after the word ''attaps”, the sentence could be read in its applic-ation to roofs, “No roof shall be covered with belian attaps unless protected by some non-inflammable material." The prosecution showed signs of accepting this decision and proceeded.
Evidence was given by several members of the Inspectorial staff that, the roof of the bakehouse in question was of belian attap and that there was neither internal ceiling nor any other signs of pro-tection against fire. The Chief Inspector was questioned by the defendant. "Did you", he asked, "climb onto the roof and inspect the attaps closely?".
"No" was the reply. "Then how can you be certain the attaps are belian? Have you studied forestry or carpentry?"
‘'No'', replied the witness, “but anyone can see the attaps are of belian wood”.
"Were you present", asked Jones, "when two senior officers of the Public Works and Forests Departments removed several of the attaps from the roof? And did you see these gentlemen seal the said attaps in a box, and did you yourself with taper and sealing wax affix the common seal of the
Municipality to the box in such a way that it cannot be opened without detection?".
To all these questions the witness agreed, then like a conjurer producing a rabbit from an old lady's reticule, Jones bent down and produced a small wooden box which was handed to the defendant.
"Will you", he asked, "identify this as that self same box." This the witness did, and turning to the Magistrate Jones said, “Will your Worship please open the box''.
"Give me the tools and I will endeavour to do so", said the Magistrate.
"Indeed yes”, replied Jones, feeling in his inside pocket, “here is the very thing, the Universelle box opener, all steel and weighing only one ounce, retailed by my company as sole agents in the Borneo territories.”
"No advertising," said the Magistrate, "let's get on with it".
In no time at all he had the box opened and removed from it two pieces of wood.
"So these are the belian attaps you saw removed from the bakehouse roof"?, he asked.
"Yes Your Worship" replied the witness.
“Ah" said Jones. "If your worship will examine them closely you will observe thereon certain letters".
"That is so”, agreed the bench, "underneath the brown paint or whatever it is, I can clearly see the letters E.S.T.L.E.S.M.I.L. and on the other P.E.A.R.S."
Jones sighed, took a deep breath and went on. "These attaps, your worship, are made from pack-ing cases. When my son was deprived of his most innocent amusement of making toys and other articles from leaking petrol cans, a further outlet for his activities had to be found. Being of an artistic mind as well as mechanical he turned to art, but not as one might expect, to the extent of painting the sampan man's daughter at her bath off Pengkalan Sapi or view of the Kubu at dawn. No, he scorned such prosaic approaches, and after considerable trial and error, produced a viscous liquid or varnish capable of rendering soft woods waterproof. With his saw and plane he rendered
54
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, MARCH 31, 1953.
otherwise useless boxes into attaps, which when treated with his new varnish, I used on the bake-house roof.
I therefore submit that the prosecution has failed to make a case, inasmuch as the attaps are clearly not belian. If I read the by-law correctly, the roof shall not be of belian unless protected, well this isn't. As I see it, providing there's a jack roof, I can have my bakehouse roof of leaf attap, or any-thing else I like. Fireproofing appears only to be required when the roof is belian".
At this the Chief Inspector for the Municipality rose in indignation. "It doesn't mean that at all, your Worship", he said, “It means there should be a ceiling of asbestos or something like that, that can readily be cleansed."
"Doesn't say so”, replied that worthy, "it merely says the roof shouldn't be of belian attaps and this roof isn't. I will shorten the proceedings by not calling witnesses. I agree with the defendant that there is no case to answer and award him costs".
It has since been learned that notice of appeal has been given.
The result will be awaited with interest.
Josh.
CORRESPONDENCE.
The Residency,
Limbang,
Fifth Division,
Sarawak.
Via Singapore and Labuan.
2nd March, 1953.
The Editor, Sarawak Gazette, Kuching.
Dear Sir,
As a keen philatelist in so far as the stamps of Sarawak are concerned, I am aware of the reasons for changing the design of the 10 cent value from the "Scaly Ant Eater" to that of a "Map of the Co-lony." It was understood at the time that the eater could not stand up in the posture that is depicted on the of the original! stamp. Because of this it was deemed necessary to alter the design.
This morning Mr. R. Montgomery of Limbang Estate called at the Residency, and during the course of conversation casually remarked that he had captured one of these ant eaters.
Mr. Montgomery remarked that he was much amused by the antics of his ant eater, and in reply to mv question, said that the animal could certainly stand on its hind legs and did so pawing the air on several occasions. I showed Mr. Montgomery a copy of the old stamp and he said not only could it stand like the design, but it could stand with a very much straighter back into the bargain.
Whilst on this subject there is also nothing really wrong with the shape of the butterfly on the one cent issue. It is true that it does not fly or live like the design, but it is also true that, when setting butterflies of this sort in collections, the wings are often drawn out in this manner in order that its markings and colour are the more easily examined. My informant on this subject is one of the foremost authorities in Great Britain, Dr. E. Barton White, of Braunton, North Devon.
Yours faithfully, J. C. B. Fisher.
Astana, Kuching, Sarawak. 14th March, 1953.
The Editor, Sarawak Gazette, Kuching.
Sir,
With reference to Mr. Needham's letter dated 8th February, I wish to say I agree that the people who are normally called "Punan Gang" call themselves "Penan Gang or Geng", the pronoun-ciation seemed to me to be between the normal English 'A' and 'E'. I also agree that the Punan Gang are practically the name people as the Punan Lusong in language and social structure and differ from the Punan Bali, Punan Busang and Punan Batu. I do not agree that the Punan Lusong call themselves "Penan Lusong", as when I asked them if they knew the words "Penan" or "Pennan" they answered clearly that this conveyed nothing to them and they distinctly called themselves "Punan Lusong.”
Your obedient servant, I. A. N. Urquhart.
Chicle Development Company,
Bintulu.
24th March, 1953.
The Editor,
The Sarawak Gazette, Kuching.
Sir,
Reference the Sarawak Gazette of February, 27th, 1953 issue, "Notes on the Bintulu Valley and the Tubau-Belaga Route to the Upper Rajang Valley" by Mr. F. W. Roe, the following notes on the Tubau-Belaga overland route may be of interest to Mr. Roe and I use his paragraph letters for his convenience.
(a) This is correct.
(b) The usual routine trip is: 1	. Tubau Town—Rumah Mereng Batok. 7 a.m. to 12 p.m. Outboard.
2. Rumah Mereng Batok—Jelutong sulap (half way house) paddling and poling. 7 a.m. to 4 p.m.
3.	Jelutong sulap—Long unan paddling and poling. 7 a.m. to 4 p.m.
Stops on the way for lunch and the occassion-al dip to discourage the sandflies.
(c) The time for this overland walk is correct. without loads and I have timed myself twice prewar.
(d) Mr. Roe only mentions the overland route which is correct and only two European women have ever done it—ask Mrs. H. P. K. Jacks of Sarikei.
The river route in picturesque and interest ing, taking two days if boats are available and preparations made a few months ahead.
Shooting the Tibong Rapids is a short and pleasant thrill and boats can be dragged over Urek Rapids where one usually has lunch.
Padeng Rapids are reached by boat by the evening.
Camping at the foot of Padeng Rapids where there is a beautiful broad soft white sand beach is really pleasant.
From Padeng Rapids it is about an hour's walk to Hait Rapids where you board outboards and within a few hours Belaga is reached.
Fishing by spoon and dry fly in this stretch of river is the most exciting I have ever had in
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, MARCH 31, 1953.
55
Sarawak. Maybe I was lucky, but it is'nt another fish story.
The most convenient time of the year for this travel is between June and August.
Yours, etc.,
Harry P. Buxton.
Jubilee Recreation Ground Fund.
The following is published for general inform-ation in accordance with section 8 (3) of the Jubilee Recreation Ground Fund Ordinance, 1939.
Audit Report on the Accounts of the Jubilee Recreation Ground Fund for the three years ended the 31st December, 1952.
1. No satisfactory vouchers were produced to support a large number of payments in 1950 and 1951. Most of these unvouched payments appear to have related to regular recurrent expenditure such as staff wages, and have been accepted unvouched. However a nett amount of $349.74 appearing in the Income and Expenditure Account as "Cheques Unaccounted for in 1950" represents
the remainder of the unvouched items which it has not been possible to identify.
2. “Cash in hand 31.12.49—$62.92" written off in the Income and Expenditure Account represents the balance of cash in hand as shown by the Cash Book at the end of 1949. No explanation has been received of how this cash was disposed of, but it cannot apparently now be traced.
3. "Depreciation Written Off—$183.49" in the Income and Expenditure Account is the same amount as for the single year 1949. The present accounts cover a period of three years, however, and it appears that the amount now written off should have been considerably larger.
4. The Buildings are shown in the Balance Sheet at a figure of $31,979.88, which represents the cost of construction ($25,679.88 in 1941, $1,500.00 in 1946 and $4,800.00 in 1947). No amounts have been written off for depreciation to date.
5. No subsidiary records of the renting or leasing of the Fund's properties have been seen, and it was not possible to verify that all rentals due have been brought to account.
T. D. TOWERS, m.b.e.
12th March, 1953.
JUBILEE RECREATION GROUND FUND.
INCOME AND EXPENDITURE ACCOUNT.
For the 3 Years 1950, 1951 and 1952.
EXPENDITURE.
Clerk's Salary	...	$ 495.00
Upkeep of Ground
Wages Caretaker	...	$1,296.00
Extra labour cleaning under-
growth	...	170.00- 1 ,466.00
Maintenance of Building
P.W.D. bills—Labour and
Materials	...	148.06
Miscellaneous Expenditure
Assessment for year 1950 and 1951 288.00
Fire Insurance premia $450.50
Less : Recovered from
Supply Office	137.72	312.78
Sundries	...	97.71	698.49
Lighting and Water Bills
1 month October 1950	... 6.65
December 1950 to November 1952	268.45	275.10
Depreciation Written Off :—(same as in 1949)
Furniture	...	12.12
Office Appliances	...	20.48
Electric lighting Installation ...	139.07
Water ... 12.72	184.39
Cheques drawn unaccounted for—1950*	...	1.049.99
Less : Honorarium to A. P. Merrells in Balance Sheet 1949 already received by him $ 40.00
Less : Caretaker wages,
Clerks Salary and
F/Insurance	660.25	700.25	349.74
Cash-in-hand on 31.12.1949. Unaccounted for 62.92
$3,679.70
*Can account for $660.25 but no vouchers to support.
INCOME.
Property Revenue Account
Rents collected—1950	...	$	410.00
Rents collected—1951	...	375.00
Damage to building-recovered from Supply Office	...	895.00
Rents collected—1952	4,400.00
Less paid in advance by Happy World (unex-pired portion) 1.1.53 to 29.9.53 8 2/3 months at $4,000.00 p.a. 2,890.00 1,510.00 3,190.00
Donations received	...	130.14
Expenditure over Income transferred to Balance Sheet	...	359.56
$3,679.70
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, MARCH 31, 1953.
56
BALANCE-SHEET.
As at 31st December, 1952.
LIABILITIES.
Accumulated Fund
Balance as at 31.12.19 $33,841.46
Less : Balance trans-
ferred from lncome
& Expenditure
Account	359.56	33,481.90
30.8.5O War Damage Claim 1st and Final Award	...	2,656.00	36,137.90
Rent paid in advance
Happy World Company 1.1.53 to
20.9.53	...	2,890.00
$39,027.90
I have examined the above Balance Sheet with the books and Vouchers of the Fund and am of the opinion that the same is property drawn up so as to exhibit a true and fair view of the state of the Fund's affairs, subject to the observations in my report dated 12th March, 1953.
T. D. TOWERS, m.b.e.,
Hon. Auditor.
Kuching, 12th March, 1953.
ASSETS.
Grounds not valued	...	$	—
Building	...	31,979.88
Furniture	...	48.47
Less : Depreciation	...	12.12 36.35
Office Appliances	...	81.92
Less Depreciation	...	20.48	61.41
Electric Lighting Installation ... 556.27
Less : Depreciation ...	139.07	417.20
Water Installation	...	50.86
Less : Depreciation ...	12.72	38.14
Unexpired Expenditure
Fire Insurance Prem : 1.1.53 to
13.8.53 ...	93.75
Suspense Account
Amount in last Balance Sheet ...	3.00
Chartered Bank
On current account	...	6,398.14
$39,027.90
A. R. SNELUS,
Chairman.
PHILIP JONES,
Member of Committee.
Kuching, 19th January, 1953.
The Sarawak Club.
January Bowls Competition.
Name. Scores. Handi-cap. Total
Ladies.
Mrs. S. Kitto	98	54	152
Mrs. E. Steele	85	52	137
Men.
O. F. Wright	291	45	336
M. Steele	217	22	239
February Bowls Competition.
Ladies.
Mrs. M. Steele	105	86	191
Mrs. S.	Kitto	95	57	152
Mrs. V.	Nicol	90	46	136
Mrs. N.	Marjoribanks	68.	61	129
Men.
J. Nicol	300	84	384
O. F. Wright	284	57	341
R. Sherlock	222	115	337
J. M. Earley	238	94	332
Island Club, Sibu.
Bowling Averages for February, 1953.
Name. No. of Rolls. Average. Handicap.
A. Webb	11	178	+ 3
D. Mansfield	16	174	+9
J. J. Howard	5	171	+13
D. C. White	11	170	+15
G. H. Rackham	13	169	+16
D. F. Henderson	8	166	+21
H. Rafter	6	164	+24
D. Niblett	6	160	+30
W. H. Dickie	10	153	+40
L. Macey	4	150	+45
T. Niblett	14	150	+45
L. B. Poole	5	147	+49
M. Whiteside	4	136	+66
M. Dickie	6	122	+87
Mrs. Macey	13	115	+97
Australian Federal Senate Elections.
The following press release has been received from the Australian Government Commission for
Malaya :—
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, MARCH 31, 1953.
57
Some Australians in Singapore, Malaya or the British Borneo Territories may be eligible to vote in the Australian Federal Senate elections which are expected to take place on 9th May, 1953. Any person enrolled on an Australian Commonwealth Electoral Roll who is temporarily absent overseas may apply to the Australian Commission in Singa-pore for a form for the issue of a postal vote certificate and a postal ballot paper.
It is emphasised that only persons who are enrolled on an Electoral Roll are entitled to vote at the forthcoming elections.
Kuching Market Price List.
20th February to 20th March, 1953.
RICE—(per gantang)
Local, White milling ...	...	.. $2.80
Govt.	Siam, White	...	...	... 2.52
Rangoon	2.52
Broken ... ... 2.16
Pulut	...	...	...	Local Milled Broken ...	...	...	—
Whole ...	...	...	2.28
Pulut	...	...	...	—
Dayak Pounded	...	...	... —
SUGAR—(per kati)
Java, White (Govt.) Refined ...	.37
Brown	...	—
Nipah Sugar ...	... ... .20
SALT—(per kati)
Coarse ... ...	... ... .10
Fine ...	...	...	... .15
FLOUR AND BREAD-
Wheat Flour, per kati	.40
Bread per loaf .10
MILK—(per tin)
Milkmaid	.72
Golden Wheel .65
EGGS—(each)
Duck, fresh	.20
salted .18
Fowl ...	.20
EDIBLE FATS-(per kati)
Coconut Oil	...	...	... .72
Pork Fat No. 1	... ...	...	1.60
2	... ...	... 1.20
PORK—(per kati)
Lean No. 1 ...	... 3.30
Lean with fat 2 ...	...	1.60
BEEF AND OTHER MEATS-(per kati)
Mutton (Australian)	...	...	2.80
Beef, Steak ... ... 3.00
Beef, curry meat	...	...	1.60
Buffalo No. 1	...	...	...	3.00
curry meat	...	...	...	1.60
Kambing (daging)	...	...	...	3.00
POULTRY-(per kati)
Capons	...	3.40
Duck	...	2.74
Fowl, Chinese breed ...	... ...	3.40
Fowl, Dayak breed	...	...	...	2.58
FISH—(per kati)
Fresh fish	No. 1	...	...	...	1.81
2	...	...	...	1.18
3 ... .48
Prawns 1	...	...	1.72
2	...	...	...	1.22
Crab	No.l	...	...	...	$1.20
2	...	...	...	.80
Salted fish	1	...	...	...	2.40
2	1.20
3	.70
roe	...	...	...	2.20
VEGETABLES—(pet kati)
Bangkuang (Yam beans)	...	...	.17
Bayam	...	...	...	.38
Bean Sprouts	...	...	...	.30
Cabbage Imported	...	...	...	.70
Changkok Manis	...	...	...	.38
Daun Bawang	...	...	...	1.20
Ensahi Puteh	...	...	...	.69
Bunga ... ... ... .54
French beans	...	...	...	.80
Garlic, fresh	...	...	...	.50
Kachang panjang	...	...	...	.42
Kangkong	...	...	...	.39
Keladi (China)	...	...	...	.38
Ketola	...	...	...	.40
Kribang	...	...	...	.16
Kundor	...	...	...	.20
Labu	...	...	...	.11
Ladies Fingers ...	...	...	.60
Lettuce (per tie)	...	...	...	.10
Lobak (Chinese radish)	...	...	.50
Lobak, salted, imported	.70
Onions, Bombay	...	...	...	.35
Onions, small ...	...	...	.88
Potatoes, Bengal	...	...	...	.35
Pria (Bitter Gourd)	...	...	...	.68
Bamboo shoots, salted	...	...	.40
Trong (Brinjals)	...	.40
Yams	...	...	...	.20
Cucumber (timun) ...	...	.39
Ginger	...	...	.53
Chillies (red)	...	...	...	2.85
(green)	...	...	...	1.08
Sauerkraut, imported	...	...	.90
local	...	...	...	.60
Tamarind	...	... ...	.40
Tomatoes, fresh	...	...	...	1.11
TEA—
Tea, Lipton per lb.	...	...	3.70
Chinese per packet	...	...	.80
COFFEE-(per kati)
Raw, Java No. 1	...	...	...	2.60
Java No. 2	...	...	...	2.20
FRUIT-
Pisang Umbun	...	per kati	...	.15
Pisang Tandok	...	each	.10 to .20
Pineapples	...	per kati	...	.12
Papayas	...	...	.15
SUNDRIES—
Bean Curd	...	per 6 square piece...	.10
Cake (white)	...	per piece	...	.15
(yellow)	...	...	.25
Kerosene Oil	...	per tin	...	5.90
...	per bottle	...	.25
Charcoal	...	per pkl.	...	8.00
semi-converted ...	...	5.00
Sauce (kitchup) ... bot. (1) $1.00, (2).70, (3) .50 Blachan	...	per kati	...	.70
Dried prawn	...	...	2.82
Coconut, fresh	...	each	...	.21
Bako Wood	...	per panchang ...	28.00
Gembong, salted, imported per kati	... .60
Sepat ... .84
Cigarettes:
Players ...	...	3	sticks for	.12
Craven "A"	...	3	...	.12
Capstan ... ...	3	...	.11
Rough Rider	...	3	...	.10
State Express	...	1 stick for	...	.05
iii
DVERTISEMENTS.
[March 31, 1953.]
[12-7]
[12-8]