 Vol. LXXIX.
No. 1145.
PRICE
KUCHING, Friday, July 31st, 1953.
50 CENTS.
Contents.
Page.
Birth:— Phillips	...	...	181
Marriage:—
Lightley—Luson	...	131
Civility a Great Virtue ...	131
Notes and Comments	...	...	... 132
Comings and Goings ... ... ... 133
The Visit of His Excellency the Governor to Coastal
Districts	...	... ... 134
The Visit of His Excellency the Governor to Limbang 135
Obituary	...	...	... 136
Correspondence: Penan or Punan?	136
The Good Old Days	...	. 136
The Museum ...	137
Kuching Football Association	...	... 140
Kuching Racing	...	140
Results of Coronation Regatta	...	142
Kuching Club	...	143
Golf, Sarawak Club	...	... 144
Annual Report Lawas (Sarawak) Estates Limited	145
Sibu Market Price List	...	... 145
The Sarawak Gazette.
FRIDAY, JULY 31st, 1953.
Birth
Phillips—To Betty, wife of Wyndham Phillips, on June 23rd, at Kampala, Uganda, a daughter Sarah Catherine.
Marriage
Lightley—Luson
On July 4th, 1953, at Kuching, Clifford Lightley to Frances Anne Luson.
Civility a Great Virtue
We are told that a certain lady of standing in the community was once out driving with friends during the Emergency when a road-check was in progress. The lady, as luck would have it, had left her identity
card behind on that day, and in consequence she apologized profusely. Her apologies were cut short by peremptory remarks by the police which ran some-what in this fashion: "Lain kali mana2 pergi mesti bawa kat, sunggoh-pun masok jamban. Lebeh bagus tepeh kat di-atas muka sahaja supaya tidak lupa!"
It is not the purport of this article to disparage in any way our police force whose duty is is to carry out such checks (and they have done so with great efficiency), nor do we necessarily sympathize with the lady's absent-mindedness at a time when the loss of an identity card could well have brought about a good deal of unpleasantness, let alone dangerously far-reaching consequences. We hope, however, to discuss dispassionately a theme which, as matters stand, is none the less important, if it is less evident (except to the people at the receiving end), and not less cogent because it is invidious. The police undoubtedly have the right to exercise their powers, but it is equally expected that they should use their privilege to caution, with civility. And a little civility pays dividends, as is irrefutably evidenced by the good relationship be-tween the public of Great Britain and the "boys in blue", not to mention the respect and esteem in which the latter are held everywhere. By contrast, a police uniform appears in this country to be an object shunned or feared by saints and sinners alike. Is this state of affairs attributable to lack of civic education, or could it be that the insidious element of incivility (sometimes on both sides, it is true) is a contributory cause?
And the police are not the only section of the public service who have run the gauntlet of criticism for the absence of a great and essential virtue. It is for-tunately a matter for consolation and pride that the general run of public officials are now as well com-mended for their patient and understanding treatment of public affairs as they are distinguished for loyal and efficient service. But there are others, whether as individual officers or as a group of public servants, at whom the accusing finger of the man-in-the-street may continue to point as lacking in ordinary civility.
Whether or not the charges of incivility are always well-founded it is difficult to hazard a guess. The public, we understand, are exacting customers—so exacting, in fact, that there appears at times to be no lengths to which some would not go in the pursuit of real slights or imaginary wrongs. This is a lot that every public servant must bear. But it is salutary also that public servants should keep before them the thought that they are public servants and that, as such, it is incumbent on them to be courteous to all people, be they old or young, wealthy or destitute, and at all times, regardless of whether the public servant had just had a singularly pleasurable weekend at Santubong or had obviously got out in the morning on the wrong side of the bed.
132
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, JULY 31, 1953.
What then of relations among civil servants belong-ing to different stations and strata? We venture to say that civility is the first prerequisite to real under-standing and close co-operation. We refer to the genuine article (which is at once evident and permeates the individual as a very human attitude) in case we are accused of confusing the issue with the dignity and aloofness that it may be found desirable to maintain between persons of different stations. Government servants who work side by side for the common good should try to understand each other and, above all, be civil to each other—with a civility extending not only to equals and colleagues but also to their subor-dinates; for the wise administrator takes careful stock of the situation and discovers that a kind word or a gesture here and there goes a long way toward assuag-ing the rebellious feelings of a hurt ego, and thereby establishing that spontaneous goodwill which is often redected in ready and more efficient service.
So let civil servants be civil. Let the lowest peons practise civility to each other and to their superiors, with their cheery "good mornings"; let the highest executives issue instructions to their subordinates with a ready smile that supplants a characteristic frown.
The beginning of this new Elizabethan era of tolerance and benevolence is perhaps a propitious time for a little quiet reflection and soul-searching on the part of all of us, and not public servants only. Have we been civil? Have we learned to be courteous to others and among ourselves, not only in the things that count, but also in matters, minor though they may be to us, that are enormously important to others with whom we come into daily contact?
How important the last sentence is may be judged from the extract of a letter we recently received from a reader whose words we quote and who deplores that courtesy is conspicuous by its absence in the rank and file of our public service today:
“It is time, I think, that “Operation Service” was practised by all sections of the Government Service, as a government is judged by the contacts which members of the public make with its servants. It is, therefore, incumbent that Government officers who are in direct daily contact with the public should show the same courtesy as is expected in the commercial world; and remember the adage, “the customer is always right.”
There are still, I regret to say, some die-hards who, while they themselves expect to be addressed as "Esquire”, cannot condescend to prefix the simple word "Mr.” to the name of an addressee who does not happen to possess an European name. Whether this failing is through force of habit or the inability to get rid of a superiority complex—one cannot definitely say, I have heard the remark made by an addressee, “I am not neuter gender.”
Government servants are civil servants, and if they "have the honour to be your obedient servants” they should have the honour to be courteous. It should not be difficult to be courteous.
It is not my purpose to start a controversy, but I am merely recording facts, however unpalatable they may be. Observations may be made by your readers that this should properly take the form of a directive from Government to its officers, but one thinks that such a directive would not be so widely read as these notes.”
These words, we suggest, give us ample food for thought, and in thinking of them we might also keep in our minds the words of that great master of English writing, Hilaire Belloc, who died a few days ago:
Of Courtesy—it is much less
Than courage of heart or holiness: Yet in my walks it seems to me That the Grace of God is in Courtesy.
Notes and Comments.
The Kuching Regatta as an annual event is always something eagerly looked forward to, especially by the Malay and Dayak Communities who regard it as a national sport and a public holiday. This year it became "extra special" as the Regatta Committee set about the task of making it a fitting part of the general celebrations in honour of the Coronation of Her Majesty, Queen Elizabeth II. The 1953 Regatta was a special two-day affair, on the 30th June and 1st July, and was highlighted by the entrance of lady competitors in the races; and speaking of the number of entrants, the variety of the trophies and the hopefully large cash prizes, it was generally conceded that they outshone many a regatta of the past years. Mr. E. W. Howell and his Committee are to be congratulated for the excellent show they put up. At the conclusion of the Regatta Mrs. R. G. Aikman very kindly gave away the prizes.	Among the large crowds at the Regatta who enjoyed the show were two distinguished visitors from Australia, Mr. and Mrs. H. E. Phillips, uncle and aunt of Mrs. R. G. Aikman. Mr. Phillips is the General Manager of Lane’s Motors, one of the largest automobile distributing firms in Melbourne. Mr. and Mrs. Phillips are both keen motorists and at home they are pro-minent members of a country automobile club at Healesville, to reach which from the city it is necessary to pass the house and grounds of the late Madame Melba, Australian soprano of international fame. Owing to the indisposition of Mr. R. G. Aikman recently, the couple had unfortunately to cancel part of their plan to visit other parts of Sarawak, but they saw the Regatta, took part in the Coronation Tuba Fishing and enjoyed its novelty, and they were shown round areas along Simanggang Road where pepper plantations flourish. They also took time off for picnics at the seaside. Apart from attending functions and parties they were invited to the Astana where they stayed as guests of H.E. the Governor for several days. Mr. and Mrs. Phillips left Kuching en route for home in T.S.M.V. Rajah Brooke on the 25th July. They told us that they enjoyed every moment of their stay here as we certainly did. We wish them bon voyage.
The Coronation Tuba Fishing which took place on Sunday, 12th July, presented a spectacle in the Sarawak River that had been absent from Sarawak's water sports for many years. It was a fitting finale to the series of rejoicings and celebrations which marked the crowning of a revered monarch a month earlier. Long before dawn broke that day, thousands of fishermen (professional and amateur), forming assorted crews of truly international aspect, could be seen manning boats and crafts of all sizes and shapes, and conglomerating in the upper reaches of the Sarawak River (near Pasir Paroh), awaiting the two-gun signal and the pouring-in of the juice of crushed tuba to begin their activities on the river. As fish of all species began to be under the influence of the tuba and surface, these fishermen worked their way gradually downstream. Sharp eyes on the look out, tamburin or srampang glinting in the morning sun, they speared and caught with the cheledok, to the accompaniment of vociferous exhortations from spectators who lined the shores and did their best to enjoy the fun. What mattered what everyone caught or did not catch? It was hilarious fun and sport while it lasted.
While the old timers regaled the new ones with their exploits at the grand tuba fishing held in 1927, others recounted the sporadic attempts made by the Japanese during the Occupation to fish in the streams and rivers of the Ulu, very often sans tuba but with grrenades, dynamite and anything else coming in handy.
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, JULY 31, 1953.
133
We have always been scandalized by the lack of respect shown by the audience in all cinemas and theatres in Kuching when the National Anthem is played simultaneously with the showing of the picture of the Queen. Whether or not the Anthem is played at the beginning of the performance (as in the past) or in the interlude between the showing of notices and advertisements and the main features (as at present), the effect is the same: the audience with very few exceptions remain seated.
We have endeavoured to discover the reason. Ignorance appears, in a large measure, to be res-ponsible, while embarrassment does the rest. A good proportion of the audience each night represents manual workers, shop assistants, bus drivers and others with perhaps little or no education and still less sense, to whom the playing of the Anthem and the showing of Her Majesty's picture may well appear to be a part of the programme. While there are others who, though most loyal in important things, cannot bring themselves to observe “those little practices" which they link up with formality. Those who know and appreciate the significance of the procedure (we refer particularly to Asians in this category) are apt to feel shy and embarrassed to stand up, perhaps them-selves alone, in a crowd of several hundred, who, instead of following suit, often stare at them as if they were strange specimens from the Zoo.
The above points to the need for our public to be educated. Efforts should be made (if not already contemplated) to explain to the man-in-the-street the truth and significance of the National Anthem. Emphasis should be laid on the fact that far from being the sign of some foreign yoke imposed on un-willing peoples, it is a symbol of unity of the Common-wealth of Nations of which the Crown is the source and inspiration. A local press campaign will undoubtedly achieve results, while the showing of appropriate films and the dissemination of literature bearing on this subject by the Information Service to the public will ensure lasting co-operation. It is suggested that the campaign should first be directed at all school children.
Alternatively, as is the practice in many a theatre in the United Kingdom, the National Anthem is played only on special occasions. Familiarity breeds con-tempt. This adage applies, it seems, equally to the Anthem in our picture houses. We have but to see the respect shown by perhaps the same indifferent crowd on a different occasion (a formal one) during which the Anthem is sung or played to be convinced of the truth of this saying.
According to a report of the Postmaster-General, not less than 95,459 copies of the special 10 cent Coronation stamp were sold on 3rd June, 1953, the first day of issue. The stamp bears an attractive por-trait of H.M. the Queen, surrounded by a blue border.
Some of the signposts standing in front of Govern-ment forest reserves in various areas still bear an old Chinese inscription (together with the English and Malay versions) which reads as follows:—
Company's reserved and protected forest locality (area).
One is particularly intrigued by the Chinese characters (Kong-pan-gay (Hokkien)) which being rendered into English is "Company”. These characters are used phonetically and do not refer to a standard Chinese term. The Gay or Ya (Man-darin) used in this instance is the same character for “Yamen"( ).
Perhaps the influence of the East India Company (with whom Sir James Brooke was personally associated before his arrival in Sarawak) was felt in more ways than one in many parts of the East Indies in those days, including Borneo, and the overseas Chinese in residence on the islands, in an attempt to coin a suitable name for a colonial system of Govern-
ment, indubitably thought of the exploits of the E.I.C. and so the term Kong-pan-gay came to stay. In the same way the popular Chinese term for “Courts” remains "Po-ley" (Hokkien) (This term is universally used with slight variations of tone by Chinese speaking other dialects than Hokkien) which no one would miss for the corrupted form of "Police" as in "Police Court”.
Perhaps some sinologues can throw more light on this mailer.
Finally, we are reminded that in this age of change words tend to lose their meaning. Just as we were going to press one of those little, amusing anecdotes floated into our “IN" basket, and upon examination we found it worthy of recounting.
An officer of a department had had occasion to “rub it in" when he found that his urgent orders were often treated as ordinary matters by his subordinates. He therefore hit upon the brilliant idea of prefixing the pink “Urgent” slips with tempestuous words like "very" and "most", describing the relative degree of urgency of the matters he wished dealt with. For the first few days after his amended slips made their appearance he sat back and congratulated himself, for his little stratagem was working perfectly. Then, as the weeks passed he was dismayed to find that the same lackadaisical attitude prevailed as before. After a little research on the quiet he discovered that his “very urgent'' slips were apparently taken for matters that could wait for a week, and that “most urgent" was something that had to be attended to the next day.
Still we hand our friend the bouquet for conceiving an unusually bright idea, especially as we, the static sticklers for the adat lama often find that our “urgent” slips are regarded as bearing no urgency at all to the business on hand, while it provides an excellent excuse for the messenger to slip out for his mid-morning cup of tea or...................
Omnia mutantur nos et mutamur in illis!
Comings & Goings
The period covered by the comings and goings in this issue extends from 1st June until 24th July inclu-sive. During this period the goings exceeded the com-ings so let us take them first.
Sarawak, early in June, said good-bye to her Director of Lands and Surveys, D. L. Leach, who, with Mrs. Leach, left the country on furlough prior to retirement from Government service. Mr. Leach, whose highly competent work both as a Surveyor and as a Land Administrator will long be remembered, had been in this country since 1930. Mrs. Leach, during her short residence in Sarawak, rendered yeoman service as Co-lony Commissioner of Girl Guides. These two cheer-ful personalities will be greatly missed.
During May and June the following Government officers left the country on furlough:
Mr. P. B. Smith, Acting District Officer, Lundu; Mr. D. F. A. E. D. Morgan, Assistant District Officer, Lo-wer Rejang with Mrs. Morgan and family; Mr. H. M. Cockle, Accountant General, with Mrs. Cockle and Rosemary; Mr. J. R. Blagden. Acting Puisne Judge, with Mrs. Blagden, Joanna and Josephine; Mr. J. C. H. Barcroft, British Resident, Brunei, and finally, Mr. J. R. Blease, Marine Officer, with Mrs. Blease and their two children.
July saw another substantial exodus. Those leav-ing prior to 24th of that month being Mr. R. W. R. Miller, Director of Agriculture; Mr. T. Harrisson, Curator, Sarawak Museum and Government Ethnolo-gist; Mr. R. G. Keech, Administrative Officer; Mr. J. Woods, Administrative Officer, accompanied by Mrs.
134
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, JULY 31, 1953.
Woods Mr. J. F. Storey, Assistant Superintendent, Sarawak Constabulary with Mrs. Storey, Helen Ann and Johnny.
We have also to bid farewell to Mrs. G. Strickland, Mrs. J. R. Outram and Mrs. R. J. G. Hogg.
As regards the comings we have to welcome back to Sarawak Mr. and Mrs. R. H. Morris and family: Mr. Morris goes to Kanowit to act as District Officer there.
Mr. & Mrs. J. Pike return to Lawas where Mr. Pike was acting as District Officer prior to departure on furlough.
Mr. W. P. N. L. Ditmas, Resident, returned early in June and has gone to Simanggang as Resident. Se-cond Division. Dr. and Mrs. P. P. Gopalapillai, back from furlough in India with two of their children: Dr. Pillai resumes duty in the General Hospital, Kuching.
Finally there is Mr. W. C. B. Wilson who returned towards the end of July and is to go (o Simunjan as District Officer, Lower Sadong.
We welcome to Sarawak a number of new arrivals. To take the ladies first there are two additional steno-graphers/secretaries for the Secretariat in the persons of the Misses D. C. Gray and V. B. Dudin who arrived on 8th and 30th June respectively.
Mr. F. S. Harper, from Nigeria, arrived in mid-June to take up the post of Deputy Director of Agriculture. During the absence of Mr. R. W. R. Miller on fur-lough, Mr. Harper will act as Director.
A new appointment for Sarawak is that of Advisor on Land Transport, a post which is filled by Mr. R. N. Worthington, formerly Controller of Land Trans-port, Libya and Tripolitania. who arrived late in July, accompanied by Mrs. Worthington and their two children.
Visit of His Excellency the Governor to Coastal Districts
His Excellency the Governor, accompanied by the Private Secretary, embarked in the Mermaid at Pending at 2.00 p.m. on 12th July and after a short stop to visit Kedurong arrived at dawn on the !4th July off Kuala Sibuti where he was met by the Honour-able the Acting Resident, Fourth Division (Mr. A. F. R. Griffin), the Acting District Officer, Miri (Mr. E. G. White) and the Assistant Superintendent of Police (Mr. R. W. Gambrill).
The party embarked in the Rainbow and made for Kampong Kuala Sibuti. His Excellency made a quick, unheralded tour of the village and embarked in the Lorna Doone and the party made for Sibuti.
His Excellency was met at Sibuti by the Native Officer (Abang Zainorin) and inspected a Guard of Honour, the Chinese School children and the Malay School children, the latter looking very smart in their scout like uniforms. He also shook hands with the local dignitaries.
The party then proceeded to the much-shot-up old kubu, where His Excellency heard addresses of wel-come and listened to requests. After this His Ex-cellency visited the Malay School, the Chinese School and had refreshments with the members of the Chinese Chamber of Commerce.
After lunch in the Lorna Doone, His Excellency's party proceeded a short way upriver and reached Berkenu. Berkenu is the site of the new Government station and bazaar that is to replace Sibuti.
At Berkenu His Excellency inspected the fine new bazaar, which is nearly completed and then, amongst
much local rejoicing, formally declared the new Government offices open. Refreshments were served, speeches were made and the new station of Berkenu was launched in a most auspicious atmosphere of goodwill and friendship.
His Excellency's party made for Rumah Dian, Pidek. The Tuai Rumah met His Excellency and took him into his fine house for refreshments, after which His Excellency walked to Penghulu Barat's house at Mamut.
We were all surprised to note how well Penghulu Barat had made and kept up his roads. Indeed, at times, it seemed one might have been walking through a well kept estate, with coffee, fruit trees, rubber and swamp padi areas neatly parcelled off. Before going into the house His Excellency did a bederah cere-mony and ceremoniously killed a pig. He also looked at the Local Authority School and noted its fine playing field.
The whole party had a very pleasant time in Peng-hulu Barat's house. In the evening His Excellency gave a talk after which there was Dayak dancing and the party went on until early into the morning. The house itself was noticeable for the way it was well built as a complete unity and for its remarkable clean-liness throughout. The Penghulu and many of his subordinates were ex-Sarawak Rangers.
Next morning His Excellency and party walked round more of the well kept estate and then embarked in outboards and returned to Berkenu. Here Messrs. White and Gambrill and the Native Officer, Sibuti, remained, while (he rest of us embarked in the Lorna Doone and set off for the Mermaid.
At about 5.00 p.m. the Mermaid anchored off Kuala Similajau, and the Manager of the Bombay Burmah Co., Ltd. (Mr. D. Brown) and several of his staff came out in the Chindwin to take His Excellency and party to Similajau. Before dusk His Excellency walked round the encampment and that evening visited the Company Club and met many of the staff and their wives.
Next morning, the 16th July, His Excellency and party, spread out between two Land Rovers, set off to inspect the timber working areas. The roads were well suited to their purposes but tested the capabilities of the Land Rovers and their drivers to the utmost. His Excellency saw a great deal of the timber work-ing area and witnessed some of the methods of ex-traction and was most interested in all he saw. There was a happy international atmosphere about the camp.
Regretfully His Excellency and party had to leave Similajau. The Chindwin took his party out to the Mermaid where His Excellency took a cordial farewell of Mr. Brown and his staff.
Off Kuala Bintulu, His Excellency transferred once more to the Lorna Doone and reached Bintulu about 3.00 p.m. in a driving rainstorm. He was met by the Acting District Officer (Mr. P. Scanlon) and his wife, and by Senior Native Officer (Abang Zainudin) and Native Officer (Abang Adenan), and after inspecting a smart Guard of Honour and the school children and being introduced to the local dignitaries, he went to the District Officer's bungalow.
With much trepidation Mr. and Mrs. Scanlon decided to have the scheduled garden party in their garden and not in the house, and mercifully the weather played up and His Excellency was able to meet repre-sentatives of all communities at a most successful party which well repaid the hard work that had obviously been put into it. Throughout the party a new but promising local band was performing.
His Excellency had a well-cooked dinner with the Kapitan China and the Chinese Chamber of Commerce and then went to the new and very fine Malay School to watch a bangsawan and have refreshments. The bangsawan was unusually good and consisted of a play composed by Agricultural Field Assistant Abang Bohan with other items. Abang Bohan is to be con-
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, JULY 31, 1953.
135
gratulated on his fine production. Also well worthy of special mention amongst the “other items“ were the “sailor girls", who had been trained and dressed by the wife of the Senior Native Officer (Dayang Radiah).
On the morning of the 17th July, His Excellency visited the Government Dispensary, and then went to the Government Offices where he inspected a Guard of Honour and also complimented the Malay School boys, in Sea Scout uniform, on their smart appearance, after which he went into the Court Room, presented Kapitan Tan Kim Sia with his Coronation Medal, received addresses of welcome from all communities, and listened to requests. His Excellency then inspected the site of the airstrip and the Malay School. He was especially pleased to be able to congratulate the Bin-tulu Malays and Melanaus on the progress they had made and on the way they had co-operated amongst themselves and raised the funds and energy to build a most beautiful school. After this he went upstream a short distance to the Chicle Development Company, where he was greeted by Mr. Laude and shown round the factory.
Once again His Excellency and party embarked in the Lorna Doone and rejoined the Mermaid and set sail for Kuala Tatau, where yet once again we trans-ferred to the Lorna Doone.
About 5.00 p.m. the Lorna Doone reached Jalai where an escort of colourful and highly-decorated Iban and Malay boats, with Iban band and dancers on board, acted as escort to His Excellency for the remaining short distance to Tatau. Here His Ex-cellency was very struck by the hard work that had been put into decorating the place and making it beautiful.
His Excellency stepped ashore and the Native Officer-in-Charge (Tungku Bujang) introduced him to the local dignitaries and then His Excellency inspected the kubu and walked round the area. That evening His Excellency and party and representatives of all communities were treated to a most succulent curry at Tungku Bujang's house, after which we all adjourned to a large stage erected on the padang and watched traditional Iban and Punan dancing, some of the latter being particularly well done. Next His Excellency visited the side shows in the old Police barracks and managed to lose money the whole time though the Honourable the Resident succeeded in win-ning beer, hair vaseline and other useful items.
Next morning, the 18th July, His Excellency listened to addresses of welcome and heard requests in the kubu and then went a little way upriver to the Iban Local Authority School after which he returned to the Chinese School where there were refreshments.
Time was running short and regretfully we embarked once again in the Lorna Doone and set sail for the Mermaid, stopping for refreshments with the Tua Kampong, Kuala Tatau, en route.
We waved good-bye to the Resident, Fourth Division, and District Officer, Bintulu, who were sailing North-wards in the Lorna Doone, as the Mermaid set sail for the South.
Soon after 2.30 p.m. we were off Kuala Balingian where the Alice Lorraine, with the Honourable the Acting Resident, Third Division (Mr. A. R. Snelus) on board met us. His Excellency did the usual transfer and the Alice Lorraine sailed for Balingian.
At about 4.00 p.m. we reached Balingian and were met by the Acting District Officer, Mukah (Mr. A. R. Meikle), the Native Officer, Balingian (Mr. Michael Sadin), and local notabilities.
His Excellency went to the kubu and heard requests and then walked round the kampong, visited the Malay School and toured the bazaar, and His Excellency complimented the people on their arches. Later on he watched badminton and that evening there was a pleasant all community dinner given by the Chinese in their School.
At 6.30 a.m. on the 19th, the Alice Lorraine left Balingian. We did the usual transfer to the Mermaid
and as she was unfortunately unable to get over the Mukah bar by about 10 minutes, we transferred back again and were met at the wharf by Senior Native Officer Abang Mustapha, Native Officer Michael Toyad and Sarawak Administrative Cadet Anthony Druce and local dignitaries.
That afternoon Mr. and Mrs. Meikle gave a pleasant tea party to the Government and Local Authority staffs and to leaders of the various communities, and that evening His Excellency went to the Chinese Chamber of Commerce and had an excellent dinner, at which speeches were made.
Next morning His Excellency carried out a two hour walking tour of Mukah visiting the Local Authority, the Chinese School, the Bazaar and riverside area, the Malay School, part of the water-works, the new Junior Service quarters and ended up visiting the Mission School and hospital.
In his speeches His Excellency congratulated the members and staff of the Mukah Mixed Local Author-ity on the excellent work they were doing and looked forward to further progress.
At 2.00 p.m. His Excellency was driven to Oya where he was met by the Officer-in-Charge (Awang Lai) and also the Native Officer, Dalat, (Abang Suhaimi) and various dignitaries of both places. He especially noticed an unusual but very attractive arch at the bridge.
His Excellency went to the kubu and heard requests, then to the Chinese School where the Chinese com-munity gave him a good tea, and Malay and Chinese representatives read addresses of welcome. After this he went round the Bazaar.
At 5.30 p.m. His Excellency embarked in the Alice Lorraine, having taken farewell of Mr. Meikle, and the launch managed to slip over the bar. His Ex-cellency transferred to the Mermaid and said good-bye to Mr. Snelus.
The Mermaid reached Kuching at 11.00 a.m. on 21st July. The trip had been a full one though most en-joyable and interesting. The crew of the Mermaid, however, deserve much sympathy as the ship's draft prevented her entering the rivers and apart from one or two of them who got ashore for two hours or so at Mukah, none of them touched land from the day we left to the day we returned.
The Visit of H.E. the Governor to Limbang
On the 10th June at 7 p. m. H.E. the Governor, Sir A. F. Abell, K.C.M.G., arrived at Limbang accompanied by his Private Secretary and A.D.C., Mr. A. I, N. Urquhart, by the m.l. Lafollette. His Excellency was met by the Hon'ble the Resident, Fifth Division, the District Officer, Abang Haji Abdul-Rahim, the Cadet Officer, Mr. Chua Sim Chui, President of Limbang District Council, Awang Damit, Vice-President, L. D. C., Mr. Chia Ah Tak, Secretary L.D.C., Mr. Rakawi, Asst. Superintendent of Shipping, and the Officer-in-Charge of the Sarawak Constabulary. After a brief talk with the above gentlemen His Excellency proceeded to the Residency.
On the 11th June at 9.30 a.m. His Excellency accom-panied by the Hon'ble the Resident proceeded to the Resident's office. At 9.45 a.m. His Excellency inspec-ted a full guard of honour of the Sarawak Constabu-lary which was drawn up in front of the Court-house. After this His Excellency proceeded to the office of the District Council where he addressed the Council in special session. Then His Excellency inspected the Police Barracks and made a short visit to the Hospital and the site of the new Junior Service quarters. After-wards he went by Land Rover to the “Padi" storage
136
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, JULY 3J, 1953.
godown, the new bazaar site lay-out, the new road, and "Kampong", and the new Senior Service quarters at the Agricultural Station.
At 12.30 p.m. H.E. was entertained at a curry luncheon in the Limbang Recreation Club given by the members of the Club. H.E. spoke highly of the food prepared, and the credit, of course, goes to the cook and members of the Club who made the party a great success. After lunch a photograph was taken in front of the Club to commemorate H.E's visit.
From 7 p.m. to 8 p.m. H.E. entertained officials and others at a cocktail party held in the Residency.
On the 11th at 6.30 a.m. H.E. and party left for Jesselton.
C. R.
Obituary
We regret to announce the death of Mr. James Parker Baird which took place suddenly at 25, Monu-ment Road, Ayr, Scotland, on the 5th June.
Mr. Baird, who was bom on 3rd August, 1890, came out to Sarawak in 1916 to join the Lawas Planting Company Limited as an Assistant. He left then in 1921 to take up an appointment in the Public Works Department of the Sarawak Government. Later he was transferred to the Municipal Department and he became Municipal Commissioner in 1926. This appointment he held until his retirement in July, 1940.
The late Mr. Baird was a keen sportsman and excel-lent at tennis, golf, and football. He was one of the founders of the Kuching Football Club for which he played for many years.
Our sincere sympathies go out to his widow and daughter.
CORRESPONDENCE.
26th July, 1953.
The Editor, Sarawak Gazette, Kuching.
PENAN OR PUNAN?
Institute of Social Anthropology Oxford University,
Sir:
With reference to Mr. Urquhart's letter of 14th March, I have not the slightest doubt that on the occasion he refers to the Lusong people called them-selves 'Punan'. Mr. Urquhart has written an admir-able paper on the Penan he met (Sarawak Museum Journal V. No. 3, 1951, pp. 495-533), what is the most detailed and competent description in any language of Bornean forest nomads; and in the face of this it would be not only discourteous but rash of me to controvert him in a case where, after all, he has met the groups concerned (those in the Linau) and I have not.
But what they called themselves to him and to his Kayan interpreter on that particular occasion is not the issue. On certain occasions and for certain reasons (matters too lengthy to go into here) Penan may call themselves 'Punan', and I am not surprised that the Lusong people should have done so then. The nomadic Punan (e.g. Busang. Aput) and the Penan (e.g. Silat, G ng, Akah) are two quite distinct peoples.
The main issues are whether the Lusong groups are Punan or Penan, and what they call themselves in their own language among themselves.
The Lusong groups are indubitably (and this partly on the basis of Mr. Urquhart's material) different from the Punan, and are linguistically and culturally prac-tically the same as all the Penan groups. All Penan groups that know of them (including Penan G ng whom I have met) name them 'Penan' and claim them as being the same people with them. (One man I knew over many months was the son of a Penan Lusong woman and was in no doubt about the characteristics of his maternal kinspeople.) The Lu-song groups are not Punan, but belong to the Penan people.
What the Penan Lusong call themselves among themselves (whether they say 'we Penan' or 'we Punan') can be satisfactorily determined only by some-one who speaks the Penan language. It is not likely that people speaking the same language as the other Penan groups should call themselves in their own company and in that language by the name of another people. I hope to visit the Usun Apau and to meet the few Penan groups with which I have had no adequate contact. If I find myself wrong I promise Mr. Urquhart and your other readers that I shall publish a correction in the Gazette.
However, the major point that I wished to make (Sarawak Gazette, 27th February, 1953), that the Penan and the nomadic Punan are different peoples, is apparently accepted by Mr. Urquhart (though he per-sists in calling the Penan G ng 'Punan'), and whatever the status of peripheral groups this is what is really important.
Rodney Needham.
The Good Old Days
Evidences of the “good old days'' in Sarawak are available from extant records, showing in many respects an enlightened administration under the White Rajahs' regime. Take the following remarkable examples of the humane treatment meted out to long-term prisoners and the privileges accorded some of them and the mandors or warders. Was it concidence, one wonders, that the old jail with its guard-house (the latter is now used as the local headquarters for the Rotary International) was built on a spot almost directly in line with the Astana, on the right bank of the Sarawak River, thereby affording a good view of the busy traffic going up and downstream, or that the Kuching jail for many years enjoyed the euphe-mism of the “Sarawak House of Correction"?
"Regulations on terms of Imprisonment" (as published in the Sarawak Gazette, October 6th. 1875),
5. Should a prisoner conform to all the rules of prison discipline, and bear a high character during the time of his incarceration; then after a term of two years, he will be entitled to be made a prison mandore or overseer, and will receive wages not exceeding $2 a month, which will be increased, should his character remain unexceptionally good, at the rate of $2 every two years, to a maximum pay of $6 a month, exclusive of prison fare.
6. Should there be no employment for a prisoner entitled under Rule 5 to be made a mandore he will, after a term of five years, provided his conduct remain good, receive $1/- a month, the same to be increased at the rate of $1/- every two years to a maximum of $4/-a month exclusive of prison fare.
7. After the term of ten years of good character, he will be entitled to a ticket of leave for six months at the end of which time he will report himself and return to his duties under prison restraint: his scale of wages to continue after his return, and to increase, if under maximum, as before mentioned".
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, JULY 31, 1953.
137
Sometimes H.H. the Rajah's directive could be effectually lucid, like this one—
Kuching, July 23rd, 1886
To encourage more activity and zeal among the Prison Mandors. I wish an arrangement to be made that a bonus should be given every six months to the most deserving of them. The bonus not to exceed six dollars. It will be necessary to get Mr. Sulivan's report of their conduct during the six months. I cannot recommend that Mr. Henderson's report can be taken as he seems to generally have all the laziest individuals in the country around him, and to prefer them to others.
Please record this letter for the future guidance of the Resident.
C. BROOKE,
Rajah.
The Museum
Return from the Coronation
Pageantry is especially the stuff of ethnology.
On June 17th H.H. the Sultan of Brunei returned from the Coronation ceremonies in London. The present writer happened to be there preparing the way for the first excavations at Brunei. It was an impressive and clearly spontaneous occasion of welcome of the kind so suited to Brunei with its fine water approaches. Large crowds had gathered by 5 p. m., an hour before H.H. was expected; the men upon the wharves and banks, the women in boats with their great toadstool hats. Two of the thin swift Brunei racing prahus paddle away down river. More and more boats jam the jetties, more and more hajis line the pier and road. School-children crowd in up the road too. Flags are out. The throning house is decorated with all the royal symbols.
Just before 6 p. m., a bark of cannon discharge at the bend of the river; all become eager, alerted in sound. Then the handsome new launch Sultan rounds the bend, pursued by small craft, by the racing boats in blade-whirling water. The yellow umbrella of state glitters gold in the declining sun. The boat deck seems as teeming as the riverside—and there are several natty W. 1 suitings to adumbrate the urbane claims of those who've "been home" with H. H. (a rolling stone gathers no moss, bros?").
The royal pendant carriers, crimson flagged, line the pier behind an admirably turned out, drill-proficient police Guard of Honour. The crowds sway, throng, follow, run. Alas. H. H. gets into his car and drives off rather less excitingly than he had followed the old way (to Astana by barge). He must, we know, be tired after his long journey from London. But like Brunei's Queen a few days before, he bats not an eye-lid, shows the control all true rulers need.
An old hand says: "Each time he comes back, the welcome is bigger." It certainly is something to see so much of popular pride—without arrogance—in a fairly small state.
Brunei Hari Raya
In Brunei the sense of history is strong. The festival of Hari Raya always brings this and other traditional moods to the surface strongly. The illuminations of the river kampong never looked more delightful. And it was good to be able to observe fairly little increase in the encroachment of “The Brylcream boys." the younger generation dressed au spiv or cum Yankee. The clothes were mostly handsome, tasteful, colourful and right. The clearing of the royal graveyard and the ceremonial procession thereto was impressive, though unfortunately marred by rain.
There is one respect in which Brunei's proud tradition as a capital set in a wide river sometimes seems inade-quate. The habit of water travel and the concentration of Malay homes on river houses has led in late years to a multitude of outboards—some very noisy. At the same time, landwise expansion has barely been met by land transport. Motor vehicles are hard to come by despite a more extensive and better kept road coverage of the area than around Kuching. There is not a single taxi in Brunei. The casual visitor finds this far from convenient.
Into Brunei's sense of history and beyond, during June a Museum unit started the first excavations in the state, at Kota Batu, below the present town. First indi-cations are highly favourable and suggest a site on the Santubong scale though different in character.
Old Coal
There is something about coal-fields in Borneo. They usually seem to be in the wrong place, for one thing—like the outcrops at remote points up the Tinjar and Balleh, and behind Pa Bengar in the Kelabit country. Oil has been much more obliging, and often emerged directly handy to ships at sea, as at Seria, Tarakan and Balik Papan.
The most accessible and successful coal is in Brunei. For many years this was worked, with a large resident staff, at Brooketon. Now it is a still little village. Even the name has vanished. Brooketon is now called Muara, as is the island opposite. There is a small police station with Dollah, one of those worthwhile village constables in the old style—in Borneo as in Berkshire. There is a Customs post; the hospitable Pengeran Puteh in charge of it also looks after the Yacht Club, a recent innovation, whose honorary members include H. H. the Sultan and H. E. the High Commissioner; with a pleasant category of "non-sailing members" too.
There is a small jetty, a wonderful view to far off Mt. Mulu and the border ranges of North Borneo, and a deal of coal fragments still upon the ground—to remind one that this was once a bustling place, where now you may sit half a day and hear no mechanical sound. On this visit there was a more regular sound which you would have heard. A great surf was pound-ing the sea beach half a mile off. Here there is usually calm deep bathing. But the tail end of the typhoon which swept further north and did damage as far down as North Borneo, beat itself out upon the long oleage-nous sands from Brunei Bay to Bintulu—closing Miri to shipping for some days. At Muara a surf-board could easily have been enjoyable. Without it, bathing was a battle, pounding, buffeting, eventual defeat.
But NOT in the South?..........
The Yacht Club is not, like some, a cypher. It is an active little body with five small sail craft purchased ex-Singapore. So far in every race, H. E. the High Commissioner of Brunei (Sir Anthony Abell's) Joss has been unbeaten. Indeed it seems unbeatable, although the Mary Lynn, with the British Resident (Mr. John Gilbert) as expert helmsman and the present writer as inexpert crew very nearly overlapped her at the second buoy last Sunday.
The activity of this body, of which Pengeran Karma-indra is vice-commodore, is typical at one level, of the ways things are alive in Brunei town,—as also at Seria, Miri and points north. We only just got out of Brunei in time to avoid a highly organised (and we hope highly successful) "Baby Week” the place alive with poster, film, display, propaganda, for bigger, better, bonnier babies—we must admit the Brunei ones looked plenty
138
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, JULY 31, 1953.
bonny (and plenty many) before Baby Week anyway. But that's the way it is up north; always something doing! Is it possible that the climate is sufficiently more lowering down at Kuching to make it the dullest, least active Borneo town, socially, sportingly, intel-lectually? ...........
Shortly after writing the above, a rather different view was expressed. We had arrived at Labuan for Kuching. After the usual passport delays and currency declarations which make travel between the three colonies of British Borneo so stimulating, we reached the Airport Hotel basking at arterial ease. As life surfaced slowly, a B.M.P. executive and old friend came alongside. We commented upon the illimitable calm of Labuan at this moment. "Nay, nay,“ he cried, with sweeping parody gesture, "here life is alive. A pulse, a living pulse, flickers, continues, nearly beats under this surface,—if you have enough feeling to feel it. My dear sir, if you want the static world, go north, go north, to J.—There is the valhalla of vacui.”
Thus he spoke, and swooned towards the bar. We only report him; do not agree. Eyes see differently, fingers feel other pulses........ By the same tokens,
some people might find Muara noisy, for its cicadas and grasshoppers and bees. We, it so happens, hear the quiet, with undertone echoes of a vanished port busy and dirty long ago with coal.
Kutch and Virtue
Kutch behaves rather like coal in Borneo. There are—or, until the Island Trading Company lately closed down one of its operations in this field, were—two Kutch factories in British Borneo, one at Selalang at the mouth of the Rejang in Sarawak (still going) and one on the verges of Brunei town. Kutch is one of those curious marginal commodities, with uncertain if considerable markets; it is a colouring material extracted from mangrove bark, used for fish-nets, saddlery and beer, among other things. (Early in this century there was also a Kutch unit at Santubong).
Reading an old Somerset Maugham story in Brunei over Hari Raya, one was reminded that his "Virtue" (vol. 2 of "The Complete Short Stories" editon, 1952 ed. p. 599) is set in a place with Kutch, a resthouse and a developing road. Like most fiction writers Maugham merges places. His setting here is a hybrid Brunei-Muara-Lawas. Maugham was often less considerate in disguising characters and events drawn from real life; it is for this that he has been much criticised in Borneo and other lands which gave him both simple hospitality and lucrative material. But author with story-writing in his blood can no more resist an opport-unity than entomologist. The described butterfly is in one respect more fortunate than the D. O.: it cannot read its own shame or stupidity. On the other hand, it is dead upon its pin.
Somerset Maugham is, in our view, subject to criti-cism on a much wider count: the serious one of superficiality. His stories are so often shallow: his solutions too facile. An expert craftsman of the pen he frequently allows himself to escape from the dilemma of the overdrawn into a crude climax. Sui-cide, murder or absconsion are his cure-alls to a situa-tion drained dry without irrigation.
"Virtue,” however, is one of his best stories in this sense. Here he gets the feel of a Borneo bachelor D. O. bungalow—“very untidy, but not uncomfortable“—his loneliness and his localised ambitions. These qualities are as true as ever to-day,—as in any abiding, deep situation. He picks up again the D. O. still lonely and now also adrift on leave in London, and handles him with a sympathetic understanding lacking
in most Maughamia. The rest is more typical, the end once more over-climax (murder). But for some pages one almost feels that the author really rather liked Borneo, despite himself and itself. It is a feeling that few who have travelled it as widely as he can escape.
The Superficialities of Somerset Maugham
A visiting author is in much the same category—in small (culturally speaking) lands like Sarawak—as the visiting anthropologist. That is to say, both, by their trained capacity to report outwards—and by inference, misreport—threaten immediate (and usually resolutely blind) equanimities. There tends, however, to be one major difference between autho and anthro. The latter is pledged to report only “fact” and is largely engaged with the study of illiterates who will not, yet awhile, be able to read and react to his generalisations or characterisations. The former, on the other hand, tends to be most interested in those best able to read what he writes; he has no obligation to be exact,— rather the opposite, an obligation towards being "creative," transforming "reality" emphasising, ignoring all the other apparatus of imposed artistry.
Of the anthropologists who have fluttered or will. we hope, flutter the calm surfaces of Sarawakary, we have not yet felt the full impact; their "results" are still in the report stage. The authors of fiction (who cannot draw upon taxpayers money for their visits) have been fewer and far between. The only talented writers of West Borneo have been Somerset Maugham and, more vaguely (for his Borneo stories centre on the east coast, especially the Batang Kayan delta) Joseph Conrad. Lesser novelists have included the late Owen Rutter, ex-administrator in North Borneo and Averill Mack-enzie-Grieve, married to a very Senior Sarawak Ad-ministrative Officer pre-war and author of “The Water-fall" a minor effort in Sarawak-mosphere.
The one who has lastingly turned over human stone in search of paper slugs is Somerset Maugham. “Virtue” is perhaps his kindest tale of Asia. Most are harshly cruel in a boggy sort of way. Maugham fancies himself as a cynic, and loves directly to des-cribe himself such. It is not so. The ice is thinner than that. And under it is a slushy quag of bittery, peated mud: the choice soil for Sarawak's noted sweet pineapples. That is why this author is in fact at his best in the stories which are least characteristic of him. In vol. 2 of his Short Stories two rather trivial witty tales of sentiment and sexual reflex ("The Treasure” and “The Round Dozen") shine out from the predic-table artificialities of “The Taipan," and the nasty flavour of “Alien Corn." While the rather overdrawn joke of Mrs. Alfred Forrester's husband and cook in "The Creative impulse" compensates somewhat for the banal braveries of Ashenden, stupidest of sup-posedly clever special agents. The light crafty stories are mostly of England or China, well-known lands where it is harder to get away with literary murder. Borneo is, after all, a temptation to facility.
The Fidelities of James Thurber
At times Somerset Maugham comes fearfully near farce—though he clearly, complacently, has no idea of it. His littered field of liars, murderers, defaulters, social degradations, sometimes reminds in reverse of that far more perceptive mind, who achieves a far deeper effort by slap-stick instead of sententiousness. In a delicious take off of novels about the "Deep South" in the United States, James Thurber puts us in the mood of "Old Nat Birge" with one starting sent-ence, grimly: "He was chewing on a splinter of wood and watching the moon come up lazily out of the old
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, JULY 31, 1953.
139
cemetry in which nine of his daughters were lying, only two of whom were dead.”
As Thurber concludes, after sustaining this theme for a few pages and letting the moon go up and down twice in one night:
"If you keep on (like this) long enough it turns into a novel."
No, reader! If you happen to want (by reading) to elucidate a little the world you think you live in, whether it be at Pusa or in Paris, Manhattan or Ma-rudi, read James T; turn to Somerset M. only as and when you would turn to tomato juice (at 4 a. m.?) in coloric oblivion—or moral catharsis (or defensive operation). Thurber, without being nearer a Dayak than Detroit, understands them better than the urbane sophisticate of every continent.
Babies, their Mothers Slain
Two more Maias (Orang utan) were surrendered last month, following on the previous reference to this subject in this column. These two were babies still unweaned; they were being offered for sale by a Sadong Dayak. Despite every effort, bottle feeding, hourly care, injections, one has since died. Little ones like these can usually only be got by shooting the mothers. And then, unless someone can spend most of day and night caring for them as for a human baby—not just feeding; they need also affection, solicitude, jokes, lessons in living—their chances of survival are small.
It is a shameful thing that the law should continue to be ignored. Would government officers please adopt a firm line here—and especially not buy Maias themselves (illegal), instead take legal action against any owner, seller or buyer forthwith. Otherwise, the Orang-utan is doomed—and in the near future too.
O.U.E.S. 1932
New book catalogues are quoting Sarawak Papers published by the Oxford University Press. We have received several inquiries as to the nature of this book, which is very expensive.
It is not, strictly, a book. The title is incomplete, and needs the sub-title. It is in fact a bound volume of 48 separate papers by scientists on the results of the Oxford University Expedition to Sarawak 1932, of which the present Curator (then age 20) was general organiser, as well as being responsible for raising and use of funds (about $20,000.00 plus a large amount of free equipment and food from kindly firms) and selection of personnel (nine, Oxford and Cambridge). The previous Curator, Mr. E. Banks, was leader in the field; he does not contribute to these results.
The 48 papers here assembled show that what some Sarawakians then thought not without some justifica-tion—was a body of wild under-graduates, proved also and in fact to be a team capable of solid scientific research with far-reaching results. In those Brooke rest-houseless days, visitors were even more the cause of suspicion than to-day.
The expedition worked principally on top of Mt. Dulit in the Tinjar. It incidentally did much to accelerate the use of outboards on prahus upriver, with 3 Thorneycrofts presented by that firm. Individual members made the first ascents of Mts. Mulu and Kalulong and achieved other original explorations. Twenty years ago large areas of Sarawak were still unvisited and unsurveyed
After a general account, the text of a lecture to the Royal Geographical Society by the organiser, comes a long study of rain forest by the expedition's senior
botanist, P. W. Richards, now Professor Richards and the recognised leading authority on jungle formations— his latest book has been widely acclaimed. The junior botanist Pay Synge, who later climbed Mt. Ruwenzori and has written several botanical best-sellers (e.g. "Plants with Personality") studies pitcher-plants in a fascinating way; he is now editor of the Royal Horti-cultural Society journals.
The massive tome runs on through orchids, insects, birds. Hundreds of species new to science collected by the expedition are described. It is hardly a work for the layman. It is a source book for experts in parti-cular fields. The two decades it has taken to produce is not due to any negligence. The work of scientific recording, sorting, indexing and comparing is necessa-rily slow—and rightly so in the needs of accuracy. Indeed, the foreword states that plenty of the expedi-tions' results are still being worked upon and remain to be described. One long paper from a British Museum expert on an insect group has lately been received here for publication in the Sarawak Museum Journal.
One valuable part of the Dulit collections, including many probably new dragonflies from the lovely Koyan brook (which flows from the mountain summit to join the Belaga days away and down) was destroyed by the R. A. F. in air attack on Dresden, whither the speci-mens had been sent—in the normal channels of inter-national science— to the leading expert there before the war.
There are varied photographs, text figures, and a map prepared by the expedition's surveyor, E. Shackleton (whose later interests, like those of his famed father, led him to polar regions and subsequently to become a Member of Parliament (Labour)).
Gifts.
From Mr. Richard Baron, the souvenir booklet of the Coronation Regatta and Agricultural Show at Limbang, a nice job. We are always anxious to obtain these local items for archives. Those not printed by government have, by law, to be sent (3 copies) to the Museum. Please note. Mrs. J. Warne, Labuan, has been good enough to obtain for us copies of “Bintang” by Hilda Bates. These are nice children's stories of a calf, a puppy and a pony, set at Keningau in inland North Borneo, by the long-established health visitor there; well illustrated by Phyllis MacKenzie. Miss Bates has been good enough to autograph the copies.
Mr. Alastair Morrison sends some sample material from what is believed to be a Punan cave burial ground in the Bakong area. This is important material because it contains unquestionable specimens of Sung celadon china and a large piece of a fine Annamese bowl of about the 13th century, another large piece of a Ming blue-and-white plate, and a piece of a type of pottery from Sawankholok in Central Siam with a very un-usual "combed" pattern—the Curator collected iden-tical pieces in Sawankholok last year, one of which almost exactly matches the piece sent by Mr. Morrison. Mr. Morrison reports that there is probably much more material under the surface and it looks as if this would be a site well worth fuller excavation next year. We hope to report upon the material more fully at a future date; this has been received just as we are going to press.
Other gifts include a Dusun head-hunting symbol from Mr. I. H. N. Evans; valuable Sarawak stamps from Mr. Peter Williams-Hunt, whose sudden death by accident in the Sakai country of Malaya is a terrible loss both to the so-called Malayan aborigines (he was
140
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, JULY 31, 1953.
officially Protector of Aborigines) and to the museum world (he had only lately also been appointed Director of Museums in Malaya).
Mr. Max Martin of S.E.S.C.O., Sibu has sent us a specimen of an uncommon flying lizard. These are much in demand in institutions in other countries and
we are always glad to have them for this purpose as well as for our own collection here.
(We believe our correspondent may have erred here. We think that Muara has always been Muara and that Brooketon was the name of the area leased to the Ra-jah for coal mining purposes—Ed.)
(Contributed).
Kuching Football Association
League Fixture List,
1953
17th June Wed. 20th Sat. 24th Wed. 30th Tu.
3rd July Fri.
8th Wed.
11th Sat.
15th ,, Wed.
18th Sat. 22nd Wed.
25th Sat.
29th ,,	Wed.
1st Aug. Sat.
5th Wed. 8th Sat.
12th ,, Wed.
15th Sat.
19th Wed.
22nd ,,	Sat.
26th Wed.
29th ,, Sat.
2nd Sept. Wed.
5th ,, Sat.
9th Wed.
12th Sat. 16th Wed.
19th Sat.
23rd Wed. 26th Sat.
30th Wed.
St. Thomas's "A" Pemuda
St. Joseph's "A" St. Joseph's "B" Chinese "A" St. Thomas's "B" B. G. S.
S. L. P. A. S. SGAOU
Police Training Sch. Chinese "A”
St. Joseph's "B" Central Police St. Thomas's “B” St. Thomas's "A" Pemuda
B. G. S.
Chinese "B"
St. Joseph's "A" St. Thomas's "B" Central Police
S. L. P, A. S. SGAOU
St. Joseph's “B” St. Thomas's "A” Police Training Sch. Chinese "A" Chinese "B” SGAOU
Police Training Sch.
Vs.
,,
,, ,,
,, ,,
,,
,,
,,
,,
,,
,,
,,
,,
,, ,,
,,
,, ,,
,, ,,
,,
B. G. S.	(Sr.)
S. L. P. A. S.	(Jr.)
SGAOU	(Sr.)
Police Training Sch.	(Jr.)
Central Police	(Sr.)
Chinese "B"	(Jr.)
St. Joseph's "A"	(Sr.)
St. Joseph's "B"	(Jr.)
St. Thomas's "A”	(Sr.)
Pemuda	(Jr.)
B. G. S.	(6r.)
Chinese "B"	(Jr.)
St. Joseph's "A"	(Sr.)
S. L. P, A, S.	(Jr.)
Chinese “A”	(Sr.)
St. Joseph's "B"	(Jr.)
SGAOU	(Sr.)
Police Training Sch.	(Jr.)
St. Thomas's "A"	(Sr.)
Pemuda	(Jr.)
B. G. S.	(Sr.)
Chinese "B"	(Jr.)
Chinese "A"	(Sr.)
St. Thomas's "B"	(Jr.)
Central Police	(Sr.)
S. L. P. A. S.	(Jr.)
St. Joseph's "A"	(Sr.)
Pemuda	(Jr.)
Central Police	(Sr.)
St. Thomas's "B"	(Jr.)
Sarawak Turf Club
CORONATION MEETING, 1953.
First Day, 30th May, 1953.
Race 1, The Ong Tiang Swee Memorial Cup.
Ponies Division III. 3 furlongs.
V2 Kongsi's
1.	Kudat Prince	8.1 (7.8)	Liben	521
2.	Tanjong Hijau	8.10	Samsudin	327
3.	Brisbane River	8.1	Sebli	137
4.	Sunny Boy	7.11	(7.4)	Mat II	71
1056
Scratched: Bujang Samsu 9.0, Silver Star 7.7, Bujang Brunei 7.11.
Won By: 1 length, 1 length, 5 lengths.
Time: 46 1/5 secs. Tote: S1.60.
Race 2. The Teo Cheng Seah Cup. Ponies Division II. 3 furlongs.
Mr. Tay Cheng Chua's
1.	Bintang Selatan	8.3 (7.10) Keram	185
2.	Victory Parade	9.13	Samsudin	622
3.	Miss Kudat	8.8	Teo Ek	Pah 183
4.	Smoke Screen	8.4	Sebli	131
Also ran:
Bintang Aru	7.7 (7.4)	Liben	417
Phoenix	7.11 (7.6)	Manan	150
Cabaret	10.3 Tan Tau En 525
Darling River	10.12 (10.5) Mat I	56
2269
Scratched: Atom Boy 10.12, Suiyuan 9.13.
Won By: length, 5 lenghs, length.
Time: 46 secs. Tote: $9.80.
Race 3. The Staff Plate.
Ponies Division I. 4 furlongs.
Mr. R. Kirkwood's
1.	Snowy River	8.5	Ekom	874
2.	Kaswari	7.7	(7.2)	Manan	305
3.	Bintang Timor	9.3	(8.10)	Putit I	253
4.	Lucky Boy	12.6	(12.1)	Then Joon Loi 697
Also ran:
Happy Ending	7.11 (7.10) Sebli	343
Gobi	7.10 (8.1) Samsudin	337
2809
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, JULY 31, 1953.
141
Scratched: Chienlimah 7.13.
Won By: length, length, neck.
Time: 1 min. 1 sec. Tote: $2.50.
Race 4. The Happy Cup.
Division II Horses. 5 furlongs.
Mrs. Janet Ong's
1. Kanda	8.0	(8.1)	Teo Ek Pah	1173
2.	Heretic	9.2	(8.9)	Sirat	189
3.	Stars Remember	9.6	Matnor	699
Also ran:
The Banker	8.1	(7.8)	Keram	267
Mont Blot	9.7	(9.0)	Lamat	153
First Ra	9.3	Tan Tau En	1688
4169
Won By: Neck, length, 1 length.
Time: 1 min. 4 secs. Tote: $2.80.
Race 5. The Steward's Plate.
Division I Horses. 5 furlongs.
Mr. Ong Soo Keng's
1. Remember Me	9.1	Tan Tau En	1543
2.	Brightstar Minstrel	8.3	Samsudin	696
3.	Alton	9.13	Matnor	1053
4.	Blondie	10.5 (9.12) Lamat	286
Also ran:
Hua Tara	8.1	Asing 246
Rosy Morn	8.0	Teo Ek Pah 414
4238
Won By: Distance, length, neck.
Time: 1 min. 03 secs. Tote: $2.10
Race 6. The Chan Tiaw Swee: Cup.
Division III Ponies. 1 mile.
Mr. Morgan Chui & Bros'
1. Bintang Aru	8.9 (8.2)	Liben	237
2. Silver Star	7.9 (8.1)	Tan Tau En	1196
3. Bujang Samsu	8.10	Samsudin	275
Also ran:
Tanjong Hijau	7.13 (7.8)	Manan	266
Brisbane River	7.10 (7.9)	Sebli	493
Oriental	7.7 (8.1)	Mat I	431
2898
Scratched: Bujang Brunei 7.12, Lintang Lad 7.7.
Won By: length, distance, 2 lengths.
Time: 2 mins. 12 2/5 secs. Tote: $9.70.
Race 7. The Printer's Plate.
Division II Ponies. 6 furlongs.
Messrs. Ong Eng Hin & Wee Hian Teck's
1.	Atom Boy	9.10	Matnor	800
2.	Bintang	Selatan 7.7 (7.8)	Mat III	322
3.	Kaswari	9.13	(9.6)	Putit I	507
4.	Cabaret	8.12	Tan Tau En 868
Also ran:
Victory Parade	8.9 (8.4)	Eddie	296
Lordship	8.7 (8.2)	Liben	229
Darling River	9.13 (9.6)	Mat I	94
3116
Scratched: Suiyuan 8.0, Mongol 7.7.
Won By: 2 lengths, 3 lengths, 6 lengths.
Time: 1 min. 36 secs. Tote: $3.10.
Race 8. The Tan Tai Chua Memorial Cup. Division 1 Ponies. 6 furlongs.
The Ong Kongsi's
1.	Bintang Timor	9.13	Samsudin	1178
2.	Happy Ending	8.10 (8.5)	Sebli	498
3.	Chienlimah	7.7 (7.5)	Liben	417
4.	Lucky Boy 11.13(11.8) Then Joon Loi 435
2528
Scratched: Snowy River 7.9, Gobi 7.7.
Won By: Head, 5 lengths, 6 lengths.
Time: 1 min. 37 secs. Tote: $1.70.
Race 9. The Coronation Cup.
Horses Open. 1 miles.
Mr. Ong Soo Keng's
1.	Gay Bird	7.10	(7.5)	Keram	545
2.	Knight Gallant 7.7 (7.8)	Asing	40
3.	Craughan	8.3	Tan Tau En 420
4.	Atlantas	8.10	Samsudin	1552
2551
Scratched: Bunga Singapura 7.12, First Ra 7.9.
Won By: 4 lengths, distance, length.
Time: 2 mins. 40 secs. Tote: $4.00.
Second Day, 6th June, 1953.
Race 1. The Ong Kwan Hin Birthday Cup. Division III Ponies. 4 furlongs.
H.H. Sultan of Brunei's
1.	Bujang Brunei	7.7	(7.9)	Asing	213
2.	Tanjong Hijau	8.5	(8.2)	Eddie	332
3.	Bujang Samsu	8.5	(8.6)	Samsudin	177
4.	Brisbane River	7.7	(7.10)	Sebli	183
Also ran:
Phoenix	9.7	(9.2)	Bujang	116
Oriental	8.13 (8.7) Mat I	67
Kudat Prince	8.5	(8.0)	Liben	817
Silver Star	7.7	(8.1)	Tan Tau En 441
Sunny Boy	7.7	(7.4)	Mat IV	27
Lintang Lad	7.7	(7.6)	Mat II	30
2402
Won By: 1 lengths, 1 length, 2 lengths. Time: 1 min. 4 secs. Tote: $9.00.
Race 2. The William Ong Challenge Cup. Division II Ponies. 5 furlongs.
Mr. Morgan Chai & Bros'
1.	Bintang Aru	7.9 (8.2)	Liben 1297
2.	Victory Parade	9.5 (9.12)	Putit I	603
3.	Cabaret	8.13 (9.6)	Then Joon Loi 631
4.	Smoke Screen	7.10 (8.3)	Bujang	310
Also ran:
Miss Kudat	7.7 (8.0)	Sintek	220
Darling River	10.0 (10.7) Mat I	108
3169
Scratched: Bintang Selatan 9.9, Mongol 8.4.
Won By: 2 lengths, length, 3 lengths.
Time: 1 min. 20 3/5 secs. Tote: $1.90.
Race 3. The Coronation Cup. Division I Ponies. 5 furlongs.
Messrs. Ong Eng Hin & Wee Hian Teck's
1. Atom Boy	8.6	Matnor	697
2. Snowy River	8.5	Ekum	1746
3.	Kaswari	7.7	(7.4)	Manan	566
4.	Happy Ending	10.2	(9.11)	Sebli	228
142
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, JULY 31, 1953.
Also ran:
Gobi	7.13 (8.2) Samsudin	366
Chienlimah	8.4 Tan Tau En	443
3986
Scratched: Bintang Timor 12.3.
Won By: 1 lengths, 1 lengths, 5 lengths.
Time: 1 min. 18 secs. Tote: $4.50.
Race 4. The Poh Hua Cup. Division II Horses. 1 mile.
Sarawak Stable's
1.	Stars Remember 8.1	Samsudin	765
2.	First Ra	9.7	Tan Tau En 1156
3.	Deep Fields	9.8	Matnor	223
4.	The Banker	8.0 (8.9) Keram	445
Also ran:
Kanda	8.5 Teo Ek Pah 988
3577
Won By: length, 5 lengths, length. Time: 1 min. 47 secs. Tote: $3.70.
Race 5. The Miri Cup.
Division I Horses. 1 mile.
Mr. Wee Kheng Chiang & Mrs. L. J. Clapham's
1.	Knight Gallant	8.3	Asing	518
2.	Remember Me	8.13	Tan Tau En 2059
3.	Craughan	8.0	(7.9) Keram	344
4.	Atlantas	8.4	Samsudin	1076
Also ran:
Gay Bird	9.0 (8.7) Tambi	343
Rosy Morn	8.7	Teo Ek Pah 379
4719
Won By: length, length, 1 length.
Time: 1 min. 45 2/5 secs. Tote: $7.20.
Race 6. The Timber Cup.
Division III Ponies. 5 furlongs.
V2 Kongsi's
1.	Kudat Prince	8.10 (8.5)	Liben	513
2.	Brisbane River	8.5 (8.0)	Sebli	386
3. Tanjong Hijau	7.7 (7.4)	Manan	570
4.	Bujang Brunei	7.12 (8.5)	Asing	975
Also ran:
Phoenix	9.7	(9.2)	Bujang	191
Bujang Samsu	9.2	(8.10)	Putit I	274
Silver Star 8.12 Tan Tau En 609
Lintang Lad	7.7	(7.5)	Mat II	147
Oriental	8.7	(8.3)	Mat I	133
3798
Won By: length, length, length.
Time: 1 min. 18 3/5 secs. Tote: $5.90.
Race 7. The Yap Leong Swee Cup.
Horses Open. 6 furlongs.
Mr. Wee Kheng Chiang's
1.	Hua Tara	7.7	Asing	191
2.	Blondie	10.0	Tan Tau En	1324
3.	Heretic	7.9	Teo Ek Pah	809
4.	Alton	9.11	Matnor	696
Also ran:
Brightstar Minstrel 8.4 Samsudin 651
3670
Scratched: Remember Me 10.6.
Won By: Head, distance, distance.
Time: 1 min. 21 2/5 secs. Tote: $15.40.
Race 8. The Tan Sum Guan Memorial Cup.
Ponies Division II. 1 mile.
Mr. Tay Cheng Chua's
1.	Bintang Selatan	8.6	Keram	708
2.	Victory Parade	7.13	Eddie	283
3.	Cabaret	9.9	Then Joon Loi 211
4.	Bintang Aru	7.8 (8.1) Liben	853
Also ran:
Darling River	9.11 (9.6)	Mat I	77
Mongol	7.7 (7.12)	Teo Ek Pah 321
2453
Won By: 3 lengths, distance, 1 length. Time: 2 mins. 12 secs. Tote: $2.70.
Race 9. The 1953 B.C.L. Cup. Ponies Division I. 1 mile.
The Triple Kongsi's
1.	Kaswari	7.11 (7.6)	Manan	741
2.	Atom Boy	7.7 (8.0)	Matnor	1368
3.	Snowy River	9.9	Ekom	416
4.	Happy Ending	8.13 (8.8)	Sebli	361
Also ran:
Bintang Timor 11.2(10.11) Putit I 454
Chienlimah 8.3 Tan Tau En 390
3730
Won By: 2 lengths, length, 1 length. Time: 2 mins. 11 secs. Tote: $4.00.
Results of Coronation Regatta
The following are the results of the Coronation Regatta held on 30th June and 1st July, 1953:—
FIRST DAY, 30th June, 1953.
Race 1: The Hariah Cup. (School Boys) Boat named Mutu Empin manned by the Sekolah Ra'ayat Kampong Pinang; Seri Sahari (Madarasah Melayu); Lang Nyambar (St. Joseph's School).
Race 2. The Borneo Company's Cup. (Outboard Motor Jr. Class.)
Shooting Star owned by Hj. Osman bin Hj. Sebli; Angelina (Mr. P. F. S. Spencer); Burak (Ahmad bin Lajim).
Race 3: The Datu's Cup (Office race for 8-man boats).
Lang Nyambar, Kuching Municipal Council A; Mutu Empin, Agriculture; Ujan Sari, Batu Lintang (Education).
Race 4: The Borneo Company's Cup (Outboard Motor Sr. Class.)
Shooting Star, Hj. Osman bin Hj. Sebli; Juliet, William R. Chin; Nona Muda, Abg. Hj. Jaya & Mohd. bin Hj. Bakri.
Race 5: The Chief Secretary's Cup.
In dispute. No prizes were given.
SECOND DAY, 1st July, 1953.
Race 1. The Wee Kheng Chiang Trophy.
Putri Dunia, W.T.K. Bujang; Mentri Suka, Mrs. R. D. Clarke-Jones; Raja Bali, Dol bin Osman, Napis bin Hj. Amin & Salleh bin Sanyut.
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, JULY 31, 1953.
143
Race 2. The Steamship Trophy.
Bunga Tanjong, Mrs. R. D. Clarke Jones; Mentri Tua, Mr. E. W. Howell; Champaka Lundu. Mr. James Gelimmer.
Race 3. The Matang Cup.
Raja Wali, Mr. E. W. Howell; Buan Rasa Hati Suka, Sulong Kpg. Melayu; Intan Sarawak, Hj. Kawi & Dawi.
Race 4. The Totalisator's Cup.
Tuan Muda, T.R. Rabeng ak. Kuang; Bujang Udara Baharu, Pengarah Angkon; Kilat, Manggie ak. Usau.
Race 5. The Dragon Cup.
Yellow Dragon manned by Kuching Municipal Chekor Market; Red Dragon, KMC Labourers' Union; Blue Dragon, All Communities team.
Race 6. The Contractor's Plate.
Pintu Batu Kota Raja, Mrs. R. D. Clarke-Jones; Singa Terbang Ular Belanchar, Ulong bin Ahed; Singa Kala Burong Terbang, Manggie ak. Usau.
Race 7. The Tua Kampong Cup.
Shilling Sarawak, Abg. Hj. Jaya, Mohd. bin Hj. Bakri & Abg. Hj. Gobil, Champaka Lundu, Mr. James Gelimmer: Sri Lawas, Dr. L. J. Clapham & Mohd. Zen bin Malek.
Race 8. The Timber Store's Cup.
Sapu Dunia, Kongsi 4; Raja Muda, Buang bin Majair; Seri Kornia, Mohd. Shaid bin Abg.
Race 9. The Vanguard Cup.
Chaya Ladong, Mohd. Hashim bin Mas Abu Bakar; Mutu Empin, Messrs. Ong Kee Chong & Suhaili; Melati Sarawak, Hj. Kawi, Mahli & Budin.
Race 10. The Dragon Cup.
Green Dragon manned by Batu Lintang Training Centre & School; Blue Dragon, Kuching Municipal Chekor Market II; Yellow Dragon, Mercantile Employees' Union.
Race 11. The Tiger Plate.
Pintu Batu Kota Raja, Mrs. R. D. Clarke-Jones; Singa Kala Burong Terbang, Manggie ak. Usau; Sri Kilat, Manggai Baja.
Race 12, The William Jack's Plate.
Mentri Suka, Mrs. R. D. Clarke-Jones; Putri Dunia, W.T.K. Bujang; Raja Bali, Dol bin Osman, Napis bin Hj. Amit & Salleh bin Sanyut.
Race 13. The Chartered Bank Cup.
Mentri Tua. Mr. E. W. Howell; Bunga Tanjong, Mrs. R. D. Clarke-Jones; Champaka Lundu, Mr. James Gelimmer.
Race 14. The Neptune Cup.
Raja Wali, Mr. E. W. Howell; Buan Rasa Hati Suka, Sulong Kpg. Melayu; Intan Sarawak, Hj. Kawi & Dawi.
Race 15. The Totalisator's Cup.
Sri Kilat, Manggie ak. Usau; Bujang Udara Baharu; Pengarah Angkon; Shilling Sarawak, T.R. Rabeng ak. Kuang.
Race 16, The Boustead Cup.
Yellow Dragon, St. Joseph's School; Green Dragon, Madarasah Melayu; Blue Dragon, St. Thomas's School.
Race 17. The CORONATION CUP.
(The Champion Race)
Pintu Batu Kota Raja, Mrs. R. D. Clarke-Jones; Singa Terbang Ular Belanchar, Ulong bin Ahed; Singa Kala Burong Terbang, Manggie ak. Usau.
Race 18. The Printer's Plate.
Sri Lawas, Dr. L. J. Clapham & Mohd. Zen bin Malek; Champaka Lundu, Mr. James Gelimmer; Tedong Mas, Mansu ak. Bungan.
Race 19. The Anzani Plate.
Chinta Mata, Haji Kawi & Workshop Staff; Seri Kornia, Mohd. Shaid bin Abg; Raja Muda, Buang bin Majair.
Race 20. The Datu's Cup.
Tuan Muda, Mr. J. Goatly; Melati Sarawak, Hj. Kawi, Mahli & Budin; Chaya Ladong, Mohd. Hashim bin Mas Abu Bakar.
Race 21. Champion Race. The Dragon Cpu.
Blue Dragon, Municipal: Yellow Dragon, Chekor; Green Dragon, Batu Lintang.
Race 22. The Champion Race.
(The Rajah's Cup)
Putri Dunia, W.T.K. Bujang; Mentri Suka, Mrs. R. D. Clarke-Jones; Bunga Tanjong, Mrs. R. D. Clarke-Jones.
Race 23. The Governor's Cup.
Shilling Sarawak, Abg. Hj. Jaya; Seri Kornia, Mohd. Shaid; Raja Muda, Buang Majair.
Race 24. Consolation Race. The Sime Darby Cup.
Belalang Simanggang, Lawan ak. Ngumbang;
Belalang Banting, Pengarah Angkon.
Kuching Club
Bowling Averages
April, 1953
No. of rolls
Highest roll
Average
Ladies
Mrs. F. Clarke-Hunt	9	166	127
”	D. Beckett	13	150	117
”	P. Courtenay	11	145	114
”	E. Steele	8	131	103
”	N. Marjoribanks	6	110	89
Gentlemen
Mr.	J.	Nicol	7	178	153
“	T.	V. Courtenay	8	175	151
M.	Steele	13	166	150
O.	F. Wright	14	171	147
G.	Beckett	13	172	144
F.	Clarke-Hunt	8	176	137
G.	Case	7	137	134
R.	Sherlock	7	194	117
Ladies' Competition
Mrs.	D.	Becket	187
N.	Marjoribanks	181
E.	Steele	171
F.	Clarke-Hunt	169
Gentlemen's Competition
Mr.	M. Steele	345
”	T. Courtenay	333
”	G.	Beckett	322
O.	F. Wright	272
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, JULY 31, 1953.
144
May, 1953
No. of rolls
Highest roll
Average
Ladies
Mrs. S. Kitto	7	139	123
F. Clarke-Hunt	7	148	120
D. Beckett	10	158	117
P. Courtenay	9	136	107
E. Steele	7	113	101
N. Marjoribanks	7	121	94
Gentlemen
Mr. T. V. Courtenay	11	179	153
G. Beckett	13	186	142
M. Steele	7	171	141
O. F. Wright	14	167	130
F. Clarke-Hunt	5	142	119
Ladies' Competition
Mrs. E. Steele	186
F. Clarke-Hunt 179
D. Beckett 159
N. Marjoribanks 159
P. Courtenay 157
S. Kitto 156
Gentlemen's Competition
Mr. M. Steele	374
T. Courtenay	362
G. Beckett	334
June, 1953
No. of rolls
Highest roll
Average
Ladies
Mrs. F. A. Clarke-Hunt	9	145	128
F. D. Becket	7	149	126
S. Kitto	5	145	119
P. Courtenay	9	145	115
N. Marjoribanks	8	128	109
J. Greene	10	115	100
Gentlemen
Mr.	T. Courtenay	14	177	161
D. Dickerson	9	170	151
G. Becket	12	160	140
F. C. Ggden	8	175	139
O. F. Wright	16	158	135
F. Clarke-Hunt	14	161	131
S. Larkin	7	131	123
R. Greene	11	133 108
Ladies' June Competition
Mrs. S. Kitto	169
J. Greene	166
N. Marjoribanks 163
P. Courtenay	153
F. A. Clarke-Hunt 147
Gentlemen's June Competition
Mr.	F. Clarke-Hunt	421
D. Dickerson	353
G. Becket	336
T. Courtenay	331
F. Ogden	319
S. Larkin	312
O. F. Wright 309
Golf, Sarawak Club
April, Eclectic Competition
( Handicap)
Gross
Handi-cap
Nett
1.	G. E. Strickland	64	14	50
2.	H. W. Harcus	58	6	52
Gross
Handi-cap
Nett
3.	C. O. Adams	57	3	54
4.	D. K. MacDonald	70	15	55
5.	D. W. Gay	75	17	S8
6.	A. E. H. Bulford	73	15	59
R. G. Aikman
C. B. Hon
No return
Conditions: Extensively variable.
May Tombstone Competition
1.	L. R. Poole	102 yards	from 19th hole
2.	J. R. Outram	15 18th	3.	D. K. MacDonald 2 feet	17th	4.	C. O. Adams	6 17th	5.	N. Thomas	20 yards	17th	6.	W. L. Whyte	In the 16th hole.
7.	D. W. Gay	1 yard from 16th hole
8.	H. W. Harcus
9.	J. D. Beeket
10.	F. R. K. Kitto
No return
Conditions: Very tolerable:
June “One-Club” Competition
Gross
Handicap
Nett
1. C. 0. Adams	77	3	74
2. D. K. MacDonald	95	18	77
H. W. Harcus	84	7	77
Conditions: Unmentionably bad over last nine holes— heavy continuous rain and waterlogged greens.
L. R. Poole N. Thomas A. E. H. Bulford D. W. Gay W. L. Whyte G. E. Strickland A. N. Outram
No return.
36-Holes Coronation Bogey Competition (June) 14th & 15th June, 1953.
1. C. O. Adams	2 down
2.	Mrs. G. Strickland	6	”
3.	D. W. Gay	7	”
4.	J. R. Outram	8	”
5.	W. L. Whyte	12	”
6.	H. W. Harcus	12	”
7.	G. Strickland	13	”
8.	N. Thomas	15	”
9.	L. R. Poole	16	”
10.	D. K. MacDonald	25	"
Conditions: Excellent, apart from long grass on greens.
July Stroke Competition
Gross
Handi-cap
Nett
1.	W. L. Whyte	70	6	64
2.	Mrs. G. E. Strickland	81	16	65
3.	G.	E.	Strickland	81	15	66
4.	C.	O.	Adams	72*	3	69
5.	N.	Thomas	89	20	69
6.	B.	T.	Joyce	95	20	75
*Includes an 11 at 1st Hole (3 out of bounds from tee).
H. W. Harcus
D. W. Gay
No return.
Conditions: Dry and exceedingly hot.
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, JULY 31, 1953.
145
Annual Report Lawas (Sarawak) Estates Limited
The annual report of this rubber company has just come to hand and reveals that a profit of £28,980 was made for the year ending 31st of December, 1952.
The following comparative statement of output and costs will be of interest:—
Year.
Output.
F.O.B. Cost.
Net Average Sale Price.
1948	...	1,735,496	7.47d.	9.26d.
1949	...	1,844,561	7.67d.	9.71d.
1950	...	1,381,458	11.21d.	17.89d.
1951	...	1,150,230	19.28d.	33.78d.
1952	...	1,414,577 17.01d.	23.04d.
The total area of the company's estate is 9,403 acres. This includes 4,248 acres of mature and 327 of immature rubber. 928 acres are not upkept and there is a reserve of 3,443 acres. The balance area of 457 acres is taken up by buildings, waste land and oil palms. It is proposed to pay a dividend of 7 % less income tax.
Sibu Market Price List
(Average price for April and May, 1953.) (1) EGGS—(each)
Duck, fresh	...	...	$	.22
salted	...	...	.15
Fowl	...	...	.22
(2) PORK—(per kati)
Lean—No. 1	...	...	2.60
Lean with fat—No. 2 ... ... 2.00
(3) BEEF—(per kati)
Beef, steak	...	...	3.20
Beef, Curry meat ... ...	2.00
Buffalo No. 1	...	...	3.20
curry meat ...	...	2.00
(4) POULTRY—(per kati)
Duck	...	...	3.20
Fowl,	Chinese breed ...	...	3.20
Fowl,	Dayak breed	...	...	2.70
(5) FISH—(per kati)
Fresh fish No. 1	... ... 2.30
No. 2	... ... 1.60
No. 3 ... ... 1.30
Prawns	No.	1 ... ...	1.30
Crab No. 1	...	...	1.40
No. 2 ... ...	1.20
Salted Fish No. 1	...	...	2.40
No. 2 ... ...	1.60
No. 3	... ... 1.20
(6) VEGETABLES—(per kati)
Bangkuang (Yam beans)	...	.30
Bayam	...	...	.30
Bean Sprouts	...	...	.30
Cabbage	... ... 1.00
Changkok Manis	...	...	.30
Daun Bawang	...	...	1.20
Ensahi	...	...	.30
French beans	...	...	.70
Garlic, fresh	...	...	1.40
Kachang panjang	...	...	.40
Kangkong	...	...	.25
Keladi ... ...	$ .50
Ketola	... ... .40
Kribang	...	...	.20
Kundor	...	...	.30
Labu	...	...	.25
Ladies Fingers ... ...	.44
Lettuce ...	...	.54
Lobak (Chinese Radish)	...	.60
Lobak, salted	...	...	.60
Onions, Bombay	... ...	.30
Onions, small	...	...	.50
Potatoes, Bengal	...	...	.30
Pria (Bitter Gourd) ... ...	.80
Bamboo shoots	...	...	.30
Trong (Brinjals)	...	...	.30
Yams ... ...	.30
Cucumber (Timun)	...	...	.25
Ginger	... ...	.80
Chillies (Red)	... ...	.80
(7) FRUIT—
Pisang Umbun	...	per kati	.25
Pisang Tandok	...	each	.15
Pineapples	...	per kati	.15
Papayas	.30
Sibu, 8th June, 1953.
iii
ADVERTISEMENTS.
[July 31, 1953.]
SARAWAK TURF CLUB.
Results—Coronation Meeting, 1953—30th May and 6th June, 1963.
TOTALIZATOR
Race
1st Day 30.5.53
Dividend.
1.	KUDAT PRINCE	$ 1.60
2.	BINTANG SELATAN	9.80
3.	SNOWY RIVER	2.50
4.	KANDA	2.80
5.	REMEMBER ME	2.10
6.	BINTANG ARU	9.70
7.	ATOM BOY	3.10
8.	BINTANG TIMOR	1.70
9.	GAY BIRD	4.00
Race
2nd Day 6.6.53
Dividend.
1.	BUJANG BRUNEI	$ 9.00
2.	BINTANG ARU	1.90
3.	ATOM BOY	4.50
4.	STARS REMEMBER	3.70
5.	KNIGHT GALLANT	7.20
6.	KUDAT PRINCE	5.90
7.	HUA TARA	15.40
8.	BINTANG SELATAN	1.70
9.	KASWARI	4.00
$1.00 COURSE CASH SWEEP
Race
1st Day 30.5.53
1. 1st No, 2552 $240—2nd No. 1662 $120.—3rd No. 1583 560.—Acceptors: 1108; 1637; 1377; 1628; 1584: $12.— each.
2. 1st No. 2136 $458.—2nd No. 1194 $229.—3rd No. 2593 $114,—Acceptors: 1406; 1429; 2524; 1248; 1546; 1384; 1750; $16.—each.
3. 1st No. 1865 $630—2nd No. 2523 $315—3rd No. 2776 $157,—Acceptors: 1973; 1364; 1227; 2670; $39.—each.
4. 1st No. 1341 $770.—2nd No. 1077 $385.—3rd No. 2969
$192.—Acceptors: 1323; 1452; 2553; $64.—each.
5. 1st No. 2513 $806.—2nd No. 1942 $403.—3rd No. 1717 $201.—Acceptors: 1104; 2574: 3782; $67.—each.
6. 1st No. 1317 $735.—2nd No. 3587 $367.—3rd No. 2322
$183.—Acceptors: 2163; 1277; 1104; 2938; 1002; $36.— each.
7. 1st No. 1815 $643.—2nd No. 1205 $321.—3rd No. 2062
$160.—Acceptors: 2523; 2982; 2572; 2612; 2098; 1326; $26.—each.
8. 1st No. 1464 $464 —2nd No. 1048 $232.—3rd No. 1555 $116.—Acceptors: 1226; 1091; 2560; $38.—each.
9. 1st No. 1665 $385.—2nd No. 1593 $192.—3rd No, 1395 $96.—Acceptors: 1046; 1111; 1835; $32.—each.
Race
2nd Day 6.6.53
1. 1st No. 2067 $500.—2nd No. 1362 $250.—3rd No. 1693 $125.—Acceptors: 1835; 1894; 2655; 2611; 1085: 1758; 2753; $17,—each.
2. 1st No. 1438 $787.—2nd No. 1381 $393.—3rd No. 2237 $196.—Acceptors: 2648; 1471; 1666; 2147; 1208; $39.— each.
3. 1st No. 1711 $1015.—2nd No. 1808 $507.—3rd No. 2159 $253.—Acceptors: 3570; 2976; 2422; 1623; $63.— each.
4. 1st No. 2102 $1023.—2nd No. 1050 $511.—3rd No.
3634 $255.—Acceptors: 2810; 2915; $127.—each.
5. 1st No. 3704 $1071.—2nd No. 1562 $535.—3rd No.
2909 $267.—Acceptors: 4168; 2964; 4208; $89.— each.
6. 1st No, 3717 $866.—2nd No. 1759 $433.—3rd No. 1277 $216.—Acceptors: 1256; 1438; 2971; 3916; 2791; 3698; $36.—each.
7. 1st No. 1221 $611.—2nd No. 1882 $305.—3rd No. 1192 $152.—Acceptors: 1139; 1897; 2826; $50.—each.
8. 1st No. 1026 $431.—2nd No. 1324 $215—3rd No. 1321 $107.—Acceptors: 1694; 1020; 2224 ;$35.—each.
9. 1st No. 1549 $420.—2nd No. 1783 $210.—3rd No. 1311 $105.—Acceptors: 2111; 1642; 1628; $35.—each.
$1.00 UNLIMITED SWEEP.
Drawn on Race No. 6, Second Day—6.6.53.
VALUE OF THE SWEEP ...	... $103,335.00
Less: 10% Government Tax	$10,333.50
5% Added Money	5,166.75
10%	Charitable Organisations	10,333.50
10%	Sarawak Turf Club	10,333.50, 36,167.25
POOL DIVISIBLE $ 67,167.75
HORSE
NUMBER
PRIZE
FIRST	KUDAT PRINCE	159945	$33,583.00
SECOND	BRISBANE RIVER	146101	16,791.00
THIRD	TANJONG HIJAU	215038	6,716.00
ACCEPTORS	PHOENIX	168282	1,119.00
BUJANG SAMSU	140296	1,119.00
SILVER STAR	108866	1,119.00
ORIENTAL	142817	1,119.00
BUJANG BRUNEI	146295 1,119.00
LINTANG LAD	115769	1,119.00
10 CONSOLATION PRIZES $335.—EACH.
Nos. 213937; 207753; 150743; 112973; 208946; 160473; 132635; 107890; 132046; 115063.
SCRUTINEERS.
UNLIMITED SWEEPS—Messrs. Tan Kui Choon, Ong Guan Tee, Phillip Soh Fu, Song Thian Cheok and Dr. W. Glyn Evans.
CASH SWEEPS—Messrs. Tan Kui Choon and Song Thian Cheok.
TOTALIZATOR—Abang Haji Mohd. Kassim and Mr. Ee Ghim Seng.
ADVISERS.
Messrs. C. E. Sandbach and Ong Kee Hui (Sweeps Sub-committee)
A. P. MERRELLS, Treasurer.
HENRY ONG, Secretary.
S. T. C.
Kuching, 6th June, 1953.