 Vol. LXXXIV
No. 1210
PRICE
KUCHING, Wednesday, December 31st, 1958
$1.00
Contents
Page
Births ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 231
New Year Honours ... ... ... ... ... ... 231
The Shadow of Apartheid ... ... ... ... ... 231
Notes and Comments ... ... ... ... ... 232
Arrivals and Departures ... ... ... ...	... 234
His Excellency the Governor's Speech to Council Negri,
December 9, 1958 ...	... ... ... ... ... 234
Unlicences Unlimited ... ... ... ... ... 236
The Peoples of Sarawak—Melanaus and Bisayas ... 237
Local Authority Taxation ... ... ... ... ... 241
Excerpts from Reports of Administrative Officers for the
First Half-year of 1958 ... ... ... ... ... 243
Kuching Letter ... ... ... ... ... ... 251
Water Sport ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 252
Problems of English in Chinese Schools ... ... ... 252
Diary of a Sedentary Officer ... ... ... ... 253
Correspondence ... ... ... ... ... ... 254
From Kuching to the United Kingdom ...	...	... 255
Five Hundred Centuries of Borneo Man ... ... 257
Book Review ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 257
Sarawak Turf Club ... ... ... ... ... ... 258
Recent Books ...	...	...	...	...	...	... 261
Kuching Market Price List ... ... ... ... ... 262
The Sarawak Gazette
WEDNESDAY, DECEMBER 31st, 1958
Births
Parsons—On 28th November 1958, at Sibu Hospital, to Patricia and David a son.
Scanlon—On December 9th at Henley-on-Thames to Betty, wife of Peter Scanlon, a daughter.
Kirk—On 19th December, 1958, in Kuching General Hospital, to Janet, wife of Henry Kirk, a son, Peter Gerard.
New Year Honours
Her Majesty the Queen has graciously approved the following awards of Officer of the Most Excellent Order of the British Empire to
Mr. Khoo Peng Loong who has been a member of Council Negri since 1941 and a member of the Supreme Council since 1956.
Mr. Tom Harnett Harrisson, D.S.O., the Curator of the Sarawak Museum and Government Ethnologist since 1947.
Mr. Colin Hunter, Director of Audit since 1954 and Member of the Most Excellent Order of the British Empire to
Mr. Ignatius Yong Yaw Tong, the Assistant Private Secretary to His Excellency the Governor. He joined the Sarawak Government Service in 1931.
Mr. Frank James, Superintendent Engineer of the Sarawak Steamship Company Limited since 1927, a member of many committees on social problems and a councillor of the Kuching Municipal Council since 1958.
Colonial Police Medals have been awarded to Mr. Eric Arthur Edmeades, M.C. and Mr. Dublin anak Sijur.
His Excellency has been pleased to award a Certificate of Honour to Mr. Lai Ted Fah of the Resident’s and District Office, Kuching and to
Mohamad bin Sapiudin, Engine Driver of the Marine Department.
The title of Datu with the emoluments that pertain thereto has been bestowed on Abang Indih bin Datu Abang Abdul Gapor.
The Shadow of Apartheid
The relationship between the Chinese and the other peoples of Sarawak is becoming an issue of increasing importance. During the past year, in the press and in the Council Negri, there has been voiced considerable concern on this subject. Such public discussion has not been confined to Sarawak but has occurred in Brunei as well and even the hitherto unshakeable complacency of North Borneo has received a slight jolt.
There are three main issues which have been engaging the attention of the public: the existence of communism amongst members of the Chinese community, particularly the Chinese-educated student body; the economic power of the Chinese community; and the position of the Chinese school system. The question of communism has mainly been raised with regard to North Borneo where there has for so long been a stoutly-held if perhaps over-optimistic belief that such a thing cannot happen there. In Sarawak more attention has been paid to the economic question and the schools problem. Members of the Malay community have been most outspoken in their views but it is probably fair to say that their views are largely shared by members of the other indigenous communities.
Some of the views expressed have been fair and reasonable ones; some very much less so. It is not fair to criticise the Chinese community for the energy and industry of their members and the material, rewards which these qualities have brought them. Envy is a harmful sentiment and it must be remembered that in Sarawak the indigenous peoples have been well protected from the immigrant communities, particularly in regard to land. The weaker economic position of the native derives largely from an inability to resist the temptation of easy credit and a reluctance to accept the disciplines and troubles of practical co-operation.
232
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, DECEMBER 31, 1958
Nor is the mere existence of a Chinese school system a valid object for criticism. The Chinese established their schools and evolved a particular pattern of schooling because they appreciated the value of education and in pre-war days the Government did little or nothing to promote education in the country apart from the establishment of Malay primary schools. The Chinese school system is not ideal. It contains many defects from both the management and academic points of view but it is not fair or reasonable to question its right to exist.
What does exercise the thoughtful, non-Chinese inhabitants of Sarawak, and many Chinese too, is that the perpetuation of the present Chinese school system is likely to keep the peoples of Sarawak apart when they should be drawing closer together. No reasonable person objects to the Chinese language being taught in Sarawak and devotion to Chinese culture in so far as it is a devotion to the intellectual fruits of a great civilisation has never been, and never should be, an issue between the peoples of Sarawak. Unfortunately culture is all too often a misused term. For those possessing little culture themselves it is sometimes held to be not a matter of literature and the arts but a barren state of Chinese separateness. Devotion to Chinese culture at its best is devotion to a great and highly-developed language and its literature and poetry and to other related arts. At its worst, a worst that is not as rare in Sarawak as it should be, it bears an awkward resemblance to South African apartheid. The danger of separateness is that it can and does nurture an unhealthy spirit of race feeling.
The thoughtful Sarawakian wants to see the peoples of the country brought together. He has only to look abroad to some of the newly independent countries of Asia to see how movement towards political independence is all too often characterised by deteriorating and not improving race relations. And in the particular context of Sarawak it is to be feared that many of the younger generation of Chinese are less in touch with the other peoples of the country than were their fathers.
The dilemma of the Chinese is a difficult one. On the one hand is their traditional loyalty to the tongue of their forefathers and a desire to be educated in that medium even though it does keep them apart and even though such an education greatly restricts the employment, economic and cultural outlets for their children. On the other hand is an appreciation on the part of many of the value of close relations with the other peoples of Sarawak and of the special value of a good English education. It is a dilemma which is still not resolved and until it is the present yawning gulf between the Chinese-educated and the Rest must continue.
There is no easy solution for this state of affairs. Sarawak is really paying for past neglect but there is still a great deal that can be done. There is no reason why the primary schools of Sarawak should not have a common curriculum with differing emphasis on different languages. There is equally no reason why Chinese secondary schools should not adopt the curriculum of the slowly expanding Government secondary schools with their English teaching-medium and special attention to a vernacular language, including Chinese, as a subject. There is no reason why all schools should not have a common medium of instruction in English. There is no reason why doubtful methods of school finance which ultimately impose levies on other communities, understandable perhaps in the past but unnecessary and uncalled for today, should not be abandoned. There is no reason why the many admirable and public-spirited leaders of all communities in Sarawak should not guide and encourage their people to adopt a positive and conciliatory attitude in the matter of race relation before attitudes have time to settle into a pattern of antipathy, jealousy and distrust. Let there be no mistake, the danger is a real one and to think otherwise is to indulge in a game of smug make-believe. Postwar experience in Asia has
unquestionably shown that with the withdrawal of European political control the danger can grow far too easily for the comfort of any thinking person.
There is a need for statesmanship and restraint. The native of Sarawak must make up his mind to advance himself through his own resource and energy and hard work and to look upon the problem of race relations confidently from a position of strength based on his own achievements and self-respect. The Chinese must appreciate with sympathy and understanding the fears and anxieties to which their own industry and efficiency and fecundity are liable to give rise and above all abhor the very thought and notion of apartheid.
Wanted. Prewar volumes of the Sarawak Gazette £2 per volume offered plus cost of postage. Some postwar volumes also required. Reply to Box 13, Sarawak Gazette, Kuching.
Notes and Comments
The Council Negri met on December 9th. The main business of the meeting was to consider the Budget for 1959. The Budget was a modest one, in keeping with our financial position but a fair amount of money was made available for schemes to better our economy. The Financial Secretary's speech is too long to print and too detailed to allow of quotation but Mr. Ong Kee Hui, a member of the Finance Committee of Supreme Council summed the matter up in saying that "the Budget reflected the period of recession through which we are passing and is based on a consideration that during times such as this public opinion would demand that Government should set an example by curtailing expenditure as much as possible rather than impose additional burdens of taxation on the people.”
The separateness of the Chinese school system is increasingly becoming a matter of comment amongst the other communities and Haji Su'ut who talked about the nationalising of schools at the last meeting of the Council asked a number of questions about the financing of the Chinese schools at this meeting.
His Excellency the Governor stated in his speech to the Council Negri that there is evidence that Communist activities are continuing in Sarawak and mentioned the existence of Hsueh Hshih. Young Chinese, conscious of the renascence of their ancient homeland and its emergence as a world power are particularly susceptible to these influences. Many of them have a high idealism which, because of their limited experience and modest and, possibly, narrow education, is easily perverted to serve unworthy causes. The stimulation in them of a greater interest in Sarawak and their neighbours in it, the encouragement of good fellowship of an unregimented kind and the provision of better objects to serve their idealism are necessary. Positive counter-measures are being undertaken but they must seem small beer to a narrow and earnest youngster compared to the fascinating and dangerous game of Communist activity.
As a contrast to this, there are the activities of Local Authorities. There people of all our races sit down together to discuss the common problems of their district. It would be ideal to pretend that communalism and self-interest are absent from these discussions: what is important is that so many Councillors rise above these feelings. One of the most valuable lessons that Councillors are learning—it is one of the most valuable that anyone can learn—is that of give-and-take. No community or problem can, at this stage, be considered in isolation. They are all part of a much
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, DECEMBER 31, 1958
233
bigger whole. What affects the padi-farmer in his field must in one way or another affect the merchant in the bazaar. We sink or swim together and development, which is the main theme of all Local Authorities at present, will only come as a result of common effort and common sacrifice.
The individualist will always be with us, of course. One of these is the Sibu timber merchant who was recently found guilty by the District Court there of exporting considerably more ramin than he was entitled to and deceiving the Customs Department in the process. The timber was already loaded into a ship at Tanjong Mani when this was discovered and in order to avoid detaining and unloading the ship, a statutory declaration was made before a Magistrate by the gentleman concerned to the effect that all the timber aboard was ramin. The ship was then allowed to leave. At his trial, his defence was that the timber aboard was not all ramin, the declaration was made because in the circumstances he had no option if he wanted to get the ship away, the declaration was, of course, quite untrue and was only made to deceive the Customs Department into releasing the ship. This defence did not amuse the Magistrate who imposed a year's imprisonment and fines totalling $65,000. On appeal the fine was slightly reduced but the prison sentence stood. An appeal is now apparently being made to Her Majesty the Queen in Council.
The Secretary of State has approved the appointment of Mr. Derek Francis Jakeway, C.M.G., O.B.E., as Chief Secretary. Mr. Jakeway is at present Chief Secretary, British Guaina and has served in Nigeria, the Seychelles and the Colonial Office.
In the course of the year, the B.E.M was awarded to W.O. II Gon anak Semada of the Rangers and five other Rangers were mentioned in despatches for gallant conduct. For so small a force this is indeed creditable.
A party was given on the evening of the 20th by Lucy Morison, Chairman of the Kuching Art Club at her house across river. It was intended as a farewell party for Mrs. Field, long a pillar of the Club, and Miss Aitken-Swan, and a large number of members were present. Mrs. Field had, unfortunately, had to leave Kuching beforehand and on her behalf Mr. Field accepted the good wishes of the members and the promise of a picture as a memento. A presentation was made to Miss Aitken-Swan. What occult influence the Club possesses is not known but there was a break in the torrential rain we have been having for this event and a glorious night was crowned, literally, with a superb and perfect lunar nimbus.
On the afternoon of the 20th, the Boys' Home had its annual Christmas Party and generously threw it open to a large number of guests led by His Excellency the Governor. There was an exhibition and sale of handcrafts and a concert. One or two attractive young ladies helped at the concert but it was mainly the boys who performed. They put on lively sketches and sang rousing songs with obvious gusto, a pleasing contrast with the falsetto-in-the-boots style favoured by many of our leading tenors.
Another social event of the month was the first British Borneo Territories Photographic Exhibition organised by the Sarawak Photographic Society and presented in the Chinese Chamber of Commerce. The public of Kuching owe much to the Chamber which generously allows its premises to be used for so many exhibitions, but the space available is not large and, in the case of this exhibition as with so many in the past, the display was crowded and inadequate. The trade recession makes it an inauspicious moment to
cry for a proper community centre with adequate facilities for exhibitions such as these but there is no doubt that Kuching needs one.
The competition had forty-seven Sarawak entrants, thirty-nine North Borneo entrants and three Brunei entrants. The average number of prints submitted by each entrant was slightly over three. A hundred and one prints belonging to fifty-two entrants were exhibited. Most exhibitors appeared to favour carefully-posed photographs, and there were quite a number of exhibitors who had preferred to do the major work of production in the dark-room rather than with the camera. Many of these photographs displayed considerable ingenuity and most of them were revealed in prints of high quality, some of them displaying an advanced technique. Inevitably they were rather lacking in naturalness although it is only fair to say that a considerable school among modern photographers does not consider naturalness to be a virtue and their work frequently carries off the highest awards. But it is photography for photographers (and also appeal to advertisers) and to the ordinary layman perhaps the photographs of Mr. Brian Brake, a collection of which the Club had on display, are of greater interest and appeal. These consisted of vivid and revealing glimpses of life in London and Moscow and of the royal celebrations in Ghana and Nigeria.
With their customary generosity, the members of the Saint Andrew’s Society provided an excellent dinner and a most entertaining evening for their guests, including Sassenachs and ithers, on the night of their annual dinner and dance at the end of November. Highland Chieftains one normally envisages against a background of bens and glens but the Chieftain of this Gathering was a well-known seafaring man and the ceremonies were conducted with nautical nonchalance. The Royal Air Force Pipe Band from Singapore provided the traditional barbaric music and displays of native dancing which seems nearly as good as ngajat.
There is ever a refreshing earthiness about Sarawak. Whilst travelling by the excellent Rejang to Sibu and having gone out into the heaving blackness of the night to inhale a little ozone before dinner, a sailor cheerfully informed us that the deck was awash with vomit. We appreciated the amiability of the remark but it did not make our soup any the more interesting.
The Kuching Boat Club, of which more elsewhere in this issue, had its fourth annual general meeting on 1st December. This was said to be one of the most successful annual general meetings (of any club in Kuching) with about one third of the ninety members present. Great progress was reported during the year 1958 and an excellent programme approved for 1959.
During the meeting the President of the Club, Sir Ernest Williams, was presented with a suitably inscribed pair of belian book ends bearing the club badge. Sir Ernest has, almost from its inception, shown great keenness in the affairs of the club and has given every encouragement possible.
The Sarawak Government, and many others, will sadly miss Mr. G. A. C. Field, the Commissioner of Trade and Customs, when he leaves Sarawak on retirement on January 1st, 1959. Mr. Field who, this month, has been making a series of farewell tours of the various Customs Stations in Sarawak, has received the highest praise from all his subordinates, praise he richly deserves after serving this country for twenty-nine years.
The first showing of a wholly Sarawak film entitled “Five hundred centuries of Borneo Man" was given in the William Tan Auditorium on 18th December,
234
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, DECEMBER 31, 1958
1958. The hall was full and the audience very appreciative of this excellent film taken by K. F. Wong under the direction of Tom Harrisson and edited by Barbara Harrisson.
A review appears elsewhere in this issue.
Mr. Malcolm MacDonald, British High Commissioner in India and former Commissioner-General for the United Kingdom in South East Asia, passed rapidly through Sarawak twice during the month—once on his way to Brunei and a second time, when he stayed for one night as the guest of His Excellency the Governor in Kuching, on his return.
Arrivals and Departures
Arrivals
Miss J. B Calderwood By Rajah Brooke arriving (Newly appointed Kuching 1.12.58. On first Women Social Welfare appointment Officer)
Mr. M. Glegg	By air Singapore/Kuching on
8.12.58. Returning from leave.
Mr. G. A. James By Darvel arriving Kuching on 8.12.58. Returning from leave.
Miss M. R. Malloy By air Singapore/Kuching on (Newly appointed	22.12.58. On first appointment.
Nursing Sister)
Miss D. M. Simpson By air Singapore/Sibu on 23.12.58.
(Newly appointed	On first appointment
Matron, Grade II)
Departures
Mr. L. W. Ranson By air Kuching/Singapore on 8.12.58. Proceeding on short leave to the United Kingdom.
Mr. K. G. Robinson By air Kuching/Singapore on 10.12.58 Proceeding on leave to the United Kingdom.
Mr. P. S. Jones By air Kuching/Singapore on 11.12.58. Proceeding on Local leave to the United Kingdom.
Mr. G. H. Rackham By air Kuching/Singapore on 12.12.58. Proceeding on short leave to the United Kingdom.
Dr. R. Dickie	By Auby sailing Kuching/
Singapore on 13.12.58. Proceeding on short leave to the United Kingdom.
Mr. Justice L. D. Smith By air Jesselton/Kuching/ Singapore 13.12.58. Proceeding on leave to the United Kingdom.
Mr. S. C. Larkin	By air Kuching/Singapore on
14.12.58. Proceeding on short leave to the United Kingdom.
Mr. P. E. H. Pike By air Kuching/Singapore on 14.12.58. Proceeding on leave to the United Kingdom and Jamaica.
Mr. W. C. B. Wilson By air Kuching/Singapore on 21.12.58. Proceeding on leave to New Zealand.
His Excellency the Governor’s Speech to Council Negri December 9, 1958
Mr. President,
I have asked that a printed address which sets out the main activities of the departments of Government during the course of this year should be placed before you. Honourable Members of Council can study this address at leisure and I hope you will find that progress in many directions has been made in spite of a period of financial stringency.
Before considering our own problems I would like to say a word or two on matters outside these shores which affect us. Although events in Europe, the
Middle East and in the Formosa Straits alarmed and disturbed the peace of mind of many people in Sarawak, they did little to interrupt the peaceful course of our lives. We of course share with other small countries the anxieties and fears of the day even though there is little we can do to influence them. But in our membership of the Commonwealth we have the comfort and good cheer of companionship and the strength and purpose of a united family. It is our duty to do what we can not to add to the heavy burden of those who bear the grave responsibility for our foreign relations and provide for the safety of our shores. We make our best contribution to Commonwealth defence by the stability of our Government and the healthy progress we are making towards political and economic maturity. It is fashionable in some quarters to decry the value of family ties and the loyalty, discipline and obligations which they entail. But no community has been anything but the poorer for the weakening of those ties. We in Sarawak are family-minded people and we are proud and happy in our membership of the Commonwealth family. Our proudest and happiest moment will be when we are here assembled in this chamber to greet in person His Royal Highness The Prince Philip, the husband of the head of our great Commonwealth family. It will be as members of a happy united family that we will welcome His Royal Highness to these shores and we will, I know, make him feel at home sharing this great occasion with everyone of every race and creed and estate who rejoices in the feeling of kinship and the gaiety of a great family occasion.
Mr. President, at the last meeting of this Council, Honourable Members agreed to a motion that the President should appoint a Committee of Unofficial Members of the Council to examine the implications of closer association and to report to Council on the more detailed information which should be presented to the people of these territories. The position is that our friends in North Borneo are thinking on much the same lines as ourselves in regard to the next step which should be taken and it has been agreed with them that the Committee of Unofficial Members of both territories should undertake a conducted tour of North Borneo and Sarawak in order to study the circumstances of each and so be better qualified to report back to their respective legislatures. We hope to arrange for these excursions to take place as soon in 1959 as the weather and other engagements allow. The Government of Brunei has asked to be excused participation in this investigation at this stage.
The annual conference of the Malaya-Borneo Regional Group of the Commonwealth Parliamentary Association met at Jesselton in August, 1958. Malaya, Singapore and Sarawak sent representatives and Australia, New Zealand and Brunei sent observers. This was the first conference at which observers from Australia and New Zealand were present and both publicly and privately they expressed their satisfaction in being given the opportunity of being present. All representatives and observers considered that the conference had served a most useful purpose.
The Inter-territorial conference was held in March in Brunei by the kind invitation of His Highness the Sultan. Matters of common interest to the three territories were discussed and a report on departmental co-operation and co-ordination of policy considered by the conference.
The friendly relations we have always enjoyed with Malaya and Singapore are of value to us in many directions. Apart from the facilities for higher education available in the university, the Medical Department and the authorities in the Singapore General Hospital have been most helpful to us in the training of Health Inspectors and in many other ways. Malaya offers to our Constabulary training courses in Special Branch, Courses for Instructors and in leadership of which we have made fullest use. The Colombo Plan countries particularly Australia and New Zealand
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, DECEMBER 31, 1958
235
continue to give us every help and encouragement. There are at present 132 Sarawak men and women studying abroad. The total number of awards to date has been 413 and 281 persons have completed their training. During the last three months alone 24 additional awards have been made under the Colombo Plan, 14 of them by Australia.
The Sarawak Rangers have continued to play an important and successful part against the Communist terrorists in Malaya. The strength of the force in Malaya is now 248 and in Sarawak there is a very useful reserve of 450 ex-Rangers who undertake an annual camp of training and are always available to us in an emergency. There seems every prospect that this long drawn-out struggle in Malaya against the terrorists will come to an end in the near future. We hope for the sake of Malaya that this will be so. The Sarawak Rangers have proved in this campaign that their skill in tracking, their knowledge of the jungle and their ability to live and fight in it are very great assets which are a valuable contribution to the defence of the region. We are now considering, in consultation with the army authorities, how best to maintain this useful force in training for use in the event of an emergency.
We were very glad to welcome to Sarawak officers and men of the 1st Battalion, the Cheshire Regiment, who undertook a combined exercise in the First Division with units of the Sarawak Constabulary. I am sure that the experience gained and the lessons learnt in these exercises are of great value to the country and I hope that similar exercises can be arranged elsewhere from time to time. The men of the Cheshires by their bearing, kindness and good discipline endeared themselves to people of all races in Sarawak. During the course of the year we have also received most welcome visits by units of the Royal Navy, the Royal Australian Navy, the Royal New Zealand Navy, and the Royal Malayan Navy.
The Commander-in-Chief of the Far East Station, Admiral Sir Gerald Gladstone, visited Sarawak in September, 1958. These visits by Commonwealth forces are a welcome reminder of the strong arm which guards our shores.
Mr. President, the main business before you at this Session is the Budget for 1959. Copies of the draft Estimates of Revenue and Expenditure and an explanatory Memorandum on the Estimates have been sent to you and I do not wish to comment in detail on the financial proposals which will be put before you for consideration.
During 1958 export prices have been lower than they have been for several years. The price of rubber for example has been below an average of 80 cents a pound. The tonnage of pepper exported has also been lower but the total value of pepper exported is much the same as in 1957, since producers have wisely increased their output of the more valuable white pepper at the expense of black. Most countries have received lower prices for their primary products so the present situation has not been confined to Sarawak alone. We have for several years enjoyed a relatively high price for our exports and a period of lower prices must be expected. The value of our external trade has decreased by about $30 million, and this has in turn affected Government revenue.
The policy adopted by the Government in connection with the 1959 Budget is one of consolidation rather than expansion. This, in my view, is a wise policy in the light of the present financial situation. Every effort has been made to save on Government expenditure and the Financial Secretary with the assistance of members of the Finance Committee of Supreme Council have approached the Estimates of Expenditure with this object in mind. There are many things which we would like to do and we must decide whether to defer expansion of the services or to pay increased taxation. I believe that in a time of recession it is
wise to keep a tight control on recurrent expenditure and that the general public will welcome economy by the Government at this time.
The Estimates follow the form of the 1958 Estimates which you will remember was designed to ensure that our annual recurrent expenditure does not rise beyond what we can afford when the prices of our export products are low. The wisdom of this policy has been demonstrated by the fact that although revenue has fallen in 1958, there will still be a small surplus. This has been largely due to savings in expenditure.
In the Recurrent Budget by far the greatest part of the increased expenditure for next year is due to the continued expansion of the educational system. The total number of pupils in all schools in 1958 is about 94,000. It is expected that in 1959 enrolment will increase by 11,000 bringing the total number of children in schools to over 105,000. It is the Government’s aim to provide as soon as possible primary education for every child in Sarawak. The cost of this will involve large increases of public expenditure every year. To make it possible for these increases to be met, the Government is compelled to place some limit on expenditure in other sections of the school system. With reluctance therefore the Government has decided to propose an increase in secondary school fees.
Our Development Plan calls for a large amount of capital expenditure during the period 1955-1960. A revision of this plan is now taking place which will cover the period 1959-1963. This revision has become necessary not only to take stock of what has been accomplished and what remains to be done, but to relate our plans to the funds likely to be available for Development. I warned members last year that, if revenue was not available, we would have to prune our Development Plan and this in fact is what we will have to do now. If we continue with our present plan and capital and recurrent expenditure continue at that level there is a very real danger that the surplus balances of the territory will become exhausted by the early 1960s. Expenditure on our Development programme will now be kept under constant and rigid review in order that we may avoid entering into commitments beyond the resources available to us.
For the first time in its recent history, as far as I am aware, Sarawak has incurred a public debt. This year Government Debentures were placed on sale and, although response was at first discouraging, the final figure of just over $1 million was not unsatisfactory. It is proposed to raise further loans for development during the year and you will see that the 1959 Estimates of Expenditure provide for the charges on these loans. These charges will be met from annual revenue.
The proposed expenditure on development schemes in 1959 exceeds the money available in the Fund by about $6 million, and one of the questions which will cause concern is where this $6 million can be found. We may get additional assistance from Her Majesty's Government by way of Colonial Development and Welfare Grants, but this is not yet certain. There is talk of a large illipe nut crop in the early part of next year; if this materialises and the price of our exports is higher than expected, then we shall be able to find the additional funds we require. You will see that in the Development Estimates a number of items have been put under requisition and it will not be possible to proceed with these works until we know if additional funds will be forthcoming during 1959.
I would like to draw your attention to one other item of importance to the economy of Sarawak. I refer to the proposal to levy a cess of 2 cents a pound on rubber exported. The Rubber Planting Scheme continues with great vigour and success and the demand for participation in the scheme far exceeds what we originally contemplated. There are insufficient funds in the Development Fund to finance an expansion of the scheme or to pay increased subsidy which I am advised is required to enable farmers
236
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, DECEMBER 31, 1958
to maintain newly-planted high-yielding rubber in a satisfactory condition. Furthermore you will no doubt have seen in the newspapers that the Federation Government have imposed an export tax on planting material. If that tax had been payable in 1958 it would have cost us no less than an additional $300,000. If we plant 10,000 acres each year in 1959 and 1960 as we have planned, this new tax will cost us $150,000 per annum. If the proposed cess or another means of augmenting the funds is not approved then our rubber replanting scheme will come to a full stop. It is estimated that the cess of 2 cents a pound will yield additional revenue of about $1.6 million per annum. This money will be paid into the Rubber Fund and used only for increased expenditure on rubber planting. The expenditure on the Rubber Planting Scheme is heavy but it should put us in a better position to compete with others in the rubber trade in the future, and it is a trade which is vital to the economy of this country.
To sum up. Our finances are sound but we cannot expect to spend at a rate of expenditure possible in boom years since the war. We must watch particularly our recurrent commitments. Government departments must exercise caution and economy particularly in the increase in their staff. The present estimates do not envisage any increase in taxation unless of course Honourable Members wish to increase the expenditure provisions.
My printed address covers fairly fully the main activities of the departments of Government and I do not want to go over the same ground again. There are, however, one or two points which I would like to underline. In the field of Education I have already referred to the very rapid expansion which has been made and the great sums of money which this is costing the country. As the guardian of the taxpayers’ money, it is the Government's duty to see that these funds are spent to the best advantage of the country. The vociferous demand for more and more academic secondary education in urban areas cannot be met. Government policy is to provide in time primary education for all and secondary education for those who can make the best use of it and grow up to serve their country. A reckless increase in academic secondary schools to meet the demand would pose not only financial problems which we cannot solve but a grave social problem as well. If we do not take heed we will find that we have on our hands boys and girls with a secondary education which has divorced them from their rural family background, without jobs, disgruntled, looking for excitement and an outlet for their youthful energy in many disagreeable forms of mischief. The cry is for secondary schools at all costs but what we want is quality in our secondary schools to raise standards of teaching and output so that the best material in the country is given an education worthy of it. Various steps have not been popular but have been generally accepted as fair and prudent.
In the field of agriculture I would like briefly to refer to the proposals for an improved and enlarged agricultural extension service for which you will see provision in the Estimates. It should be explained that "extension" means all those services which a Government can provide in order to bring about an improvement in farming efficiency and a rise in the standard of living of the farmers and his family. The Department’s proposals will direct its extension service not at the farmer alone as has been done hitherto but at the farmer and his family as a whole. Not only will the farmer be encouraged to practise diversification of cropping, more extensive production and to give greater attention to quality but, through the agency of trained women Home Demonstrators, his wife will be instructed in such activities as home hygiene, cooking, vegetable cultivation, poultry keeping, home crafts and so on. In short these extension services should pave the way for a better and more healthy life for the farmer, his wife and family.
As I have reported in my written address, the progress made by Local Authorities, the increase in experience and in the technique of managing local affairs, their growing sense of responsibility gives solid ground for encouragement. Honourable Members will be aware that in accordance with the provisions of the Constitution Order in Council of 1956 I shall be dissolving this Council at the end of 1959. Many of the District Councils are also due to be dissolved at the same time. I have therefore deemed it advisable to arrange for all the Councils to be similarly dissolved at the end of the year 1959. This will enable elections to be held in all Council areas throughout the country at roughly the same time. Fresh electoral colleges will therefore be set up simultaneously in order to elect members to to a new Council Negri. I have accordingly extended by one year the terms of office of the members of the Lower Sadong, Binatang and Bintulu District Councils whose period of office would otherwise have come to an end on the 31st December of this year. For the same reason I have decided to curtail by one year the terms of office of the members of six other Councils whose period of office would otherwise extend beyond the end of 1959. These decisions have been taken after consultation with and with the agreement of the Councils concerned.
Tribute was paid by you Mr. President and Honourable Members at your last meeting to the memory of the late President of this Council and I mention again this most grievous blow to our fortunes and our great personal loss because I wish to draw attention to the burden of work which has fallen on the Acting Chief Secretary and the staff of the Secretariat. In a small country such as this the loss of two Chief Secretaries in the year most seriously affect the smooth running of a Secretariat and throws additional work and greater responsibility all down the line on unprepared shoulders. The whole Secretariat rose manfully to the occasion and there has been no lowering of standards. I am most grateful to them for the very hard work and long hours of overtime which this has often entailed.
Finally I know how anxiously and patiently the country has waited for the decision of the Secretary of State regarding the post of Chief Secretary. I hope to be in a position to make an announcement very shortly both in regard to this appointment and the question of an extension of my term of office. Of one thing I can assure you the Secretary of State will be influenced only by consideration for the best interests of Sarawak. Most of you Honourable Members have met the present Secretary of State and having met him will know that his one concern is for our welfare and progress. We can have confidence that whatever action he takes will be after the fullest consideration of all the circumstances for our good and in the interests of our future development.
Unlicences Unlimited
from a Treasury advertisement:—
"All persons who are engaged in any occupation carried on for profit other than an unlawful business . . . are reminded that Trades Licenses for the year 1958 expire on 31st December, 1958.”
Three hearty cheers for the Treasury, They’ve shown us all the way!
Confounding all the miseries Who tell us “Crime don’t pay”.
No need to have a Licence (Though I know it does sound awful) If you carry on a business Which is not exactly lawful!
So chaps, press on regardless Don't post that application A little bit of Sinful Trade Will still bring home the Bacon.
W.T.P.
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, DECEMBER 31, 1958
237
The Peoples of Sarawak*
X and XI
MELANAUS
BY
R. G. Aikman
The people in Sarawak known to us as Melanaus do not refer to themselves by that name. They call themselves a Liko meaning Melanaus in general or, for example, a Liko Muka meaning, specifically, a Melanau of the Muka river. Nevertheless the name Melanau has been used for a very long time and is so well known that no apology is needed for using it here.
The Melanaus may be said to occupy a coastal belt of land extending from the mouth of the Rejang river to the mouth of the river Baram and extending inland some twenty miles from the sea. This environment has played an all important part in their lives, as will be seen when one comes to consider their history and occupations.
What sort of people are they, these Melanaus? What do they look like and what part do they play in the general life of the communities of Sarawak? Superficially they look just like Malays and, with the uniformity that accompanies modem education, are likely to look even more like them in the future. But to anyone who has lived amongst Melanaus for any length of time there can be no doubt that they have physical characteristics of their own which render them distinct from the true Malay. Both men and women are stockier and broader shouldered than the average Sarawak Malay and are generally of a lighter hue. They are a handsome people and the womenfolk have long enjoyed a reputation for beauty. Amongst female Melanaus a concave forehead was considered a sign of beauty and steps were taken to ensure that the girls should conform to this ideal of Melanau beauty. While still in infancy the parietal bones of the skull are subjected to pressure by means of an ingenious instrument known in the speech of the Muka Melanaus as a jah and in the dialect of the Oya river as api. This instrument consists of a piece of hardwood about two feet long having holes bored through each end. First a cloth covered weight is placed on the baby’s forehead and on top of this weight is the hardwood jah. This is fixed to the infant's head by cords extending through the holes at each end of the piece of wood and passing behind the head. The cords can be tightened by means of two “screws” fixed at either end of the jah. As often as not these “screws” are formed by two obsolete Sarawak coins—one cent or half cent pieces—having holes in the centre through which the cord is threaded. The use of the jah is dying out; indeed its use is now extremely rare and it would be interesting to know in how many cases it has been used in the last ten years.
The speech of the Melanaus is substantially different from that of the Malay and amongst Melanaus themselves there is considerable difference in dialect, though it is easy to exaggerate these differences. Most Melanaus can understand one another without any great difficulty except where Bintulu is concerned. Bintulu Melanau is unlike the other dialects and must be one of the few, if not the only, speech in the whole island of Borneo which does not use the word malam for night. Two notable points about the Melanau speech are worth mentioning; first that anyone with a good knowledge of, say, Oya
*This series of talks, originally broadcast over Radio Sarawak, is now reproduced by courtesy of the Director of Broadcasting. For a general introduction to, and explanation of, the series by their editor, Mr. Tom Harrisson, Government Ethnologist and Curator of the Sarawak Museum, see Sarawak Gazette No. 1204.
Melanau can sit in a Sekapan long-house near Belaga and have little or no difficulty in understanding what is being said around him. Second that if a Melanau word list is compared with a similar list of words used by some Land Dayaks living in the First Division, a good long way from the Melanaus, it will be found that as many as forty per cent of the words are the same.
Over five hundred years ago, before the coming of Islam, the Melanaus were all pagans and were ruled by their own chiefs, the most famous of whom was the legendary Tugau who dwelt in the Retus, a tributary of the Igan river. The chiefs of Oya and Muka were his relatives and he had friends and allies as far up the coast as Belait and Tutong. Tugau, who was by way of being a giant, thought himself strong enough to challenge the might of Brunei and demand tribute and submission from Sultan Mohamed. In those days Brunei was a great power and it was rash of Tugau to challenge such a ruler; after two decisive victories by the Sultan's forces the Melanaus were beaten and their territory, from the Tutong to the Igan, became part of the Brunei empire. Later on Brunei Princes pangiran replaced the Melanau chiefs and there was a good deal of inter-marriage between Brunei noblemen and the womenfolk of the Melanau chiefs; their descendants are to be found in many of the coastal areas to this day. The Brunei Pangiran were authorised by the Sultan to collect taxes from his Melanau subjects, and there was much oppression and discontent—as everyone engaged in the collection of these taxes expected to obtain a commission and the unfortunate Melanaus were reduced to a state of poverty.
About twenty years after the establishment of the new State of Sarawak under Rajah Brooke, a number of unprincipled scoundrels were being given shelter at Muka, the most notorious of whom was Sherip Masahor, a life long enemy of Rajah Brooke and a thorn in the side of the Sarawak State. This man endeavoured to stir up the Dayaks so that they would raid the Melanau districts; and the Pangiran of Muka doubtless at the instigation of the Sherip, had forbidden Sarawak traders to enter the Muka river to obtain raw cargo and had prevented the Muka people from trading with Kuching, the capital of Sarawak. This was too much for Rajah Brooke and vigorous action was taken against those in Muka who were hostile to Sarawak and. despile mean attempts by the Governor of Labuan to impede the Rajah's efforts, the upshot was that in 1861 the Sultan of Brunei ceded to the Rajah the area from the Rejang river to Kedurong Point. Thus the vast majority of the Melanau people came under the rule of Rajah Brooke of Sarawak.
It was after the transfer of their territory to the Rajah that the Melanaus gradually gave up their habit of living in fortress-like long-houses and reverted to the use of individual houses in Malay-style villages. There were, until very recent years, some specimens of Melanau long-houses still in existence, notably at Sungei Sok, Matu, at Jemoreng, Matu and at Medong in the Oya River. A Seduan Melanau long-house on the outskirts of Sibu was burnt down in the period between the two World Wars. Consequent upon the long period of subjection to Brunei many of the Melanaus became Muslims and the process of conversion has continued until the present day. The remarkable thing is that there are still an appreciable number of non-Muslims. About thirty years ago the numbers of Muslim and Pagan Melanaus in the Oya river were about the same—something like 4,000 of each and about 5,000 Christians. There is reason to suppose that the proportions are much the same today.
In the course of a short talk of this nature it is not possible to go into the question of Melanau customs in any great detail and a brief mention of one or two of these must suffice. The customs which have been chosen for mention are to do with marriage and with
238
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, DECEMBER 31, 1958
sickness; the first because it is interesting and unusual, and the second because it illustrates the theme running through this talk—which is to the effect that the Melanaus are close relatives of certain upriver tribes, who may be regarded as intermediate between the coastal dwelling Melanaus and the upriver Kayans and Kenyahs; and also that there is a relationship between the Melanaus and the far distant Land Dayaks. Amongst the Melanaus there is a system of rank and every person belongs to a certain rank or bangsa. Amongst the Melanaus of the Oya river, for example, there are five named ranks which may be regarded as being divided into an upper class, a middle class and a lower class. It is not desirable for marriage to take place between members of different bangsa. The dowry in respect of these ranks is as follows:—
First Rank—a damascene sword and thirty piculs of brassware; Second Rank—a damascene sword and nine piculs of brassware; Third Rank—a damascene spear head and seven piculs of brassware; Fourth Rank—a plain spear head and five piculs of brassware; Fifth Rank—a plain spear or cloth and varying weights of brassware ranging from four to one picul. The picul is a measure of weight equivalent to one hundred and thirty three and one third pounds. An arbitrary value of $25 has been placed on the picul and in these modern times the picul may take the form of brassware, land, gold or cash. The dowry is divided into (a) the penyakab, consisting of a weapon and other items; (b) the berian, which should really consist of articles made of brass graded in weight according to bangsa; and (c) the pakan, which should consist of two piculs of brassware. When the penyakab and the berian have been accepted the marriage is considered to be legally binding. Nowadays the pakan is always paid in cash and, in practice, is a gift to the bride's parents, who are paying for the wedding, to compensate them for the loss of household manpower in the person of their daughter. The penyakab becomes unconditionally the sole property of the wife and so does the berian, provided the marriage lasts and is not broken up by reason of her misconduct.
Anyone who has had any dealings with Melanaus will have come across the sickness ceremonies of berbayoh and beraiyun. In the first the various spirits of sickness are called up through a spirit medium, a bayoh; the ceremony is performed by a dukun or expert in Malay medicine. The berbayoh consists of the beating of gongs and drums and singing in the Melanau tongue, whilst the dukun calls up the spirit of sickness and also his own friendly spirit. The friendly spirit is there to help and to advise. The dukun brushes the patient from head to foot with a bunch of leaves from the areca nut (pinang) palm. The spirit of sickness will very likely demand that a model image of the spirit or of an animal be made, and this is produced from sago pith under the instruction of the dukun. The dukun orders the model image to be set adrift in the river or placed on the bank at some selected spot. If the sickness persists or is really serious the last resort is the beraiyun ceremony. This is a much more elaborate ceremony than berbayoh and its unique feature is the appearance of a large swing made of rottan sega stretched across the sick room. The patient sits on the swing and is propelled backwards and forwards so that he (or she) becomes possessed by a supernatural spirit. A rottan noose is also got ready to snare the evil spirit if and when it emerges. A special model sickness boat, known as rabong, is provided for the underwater spirits and for the abduction of the evil spirit. This boat contains money, food, brassware and other valuables to keep the evil spirit contented as the boat drifts downriver and eventually out to sea if it has not already been arranged that it shall be placed at some agreed point on the river bank. A model house is also provided for the land spirits and placed in it are model images. The beraiyun ceremony continues for five days.
Now it is on record that a similar ceremony has been held in a Land Dayak house and the word beraiyun in both the Melanau and Land Dayak languages means hanging or suspended, as is the patient on the swing in the ceremony. From what has been said earlier it would seem that there is a good deal to be found in common between the Melanaus on the one hand and upriver people such as Sekapans, Kejamans, Sebops and so forth as well as Land Dayaks on the other.
The next question which comes to mind is how do these people occupy themselves? There are nearly 40,000 of them in Sarawak. First and foremost there must be mention of the production of raw sago. In nearly all the river basins occupied by Melanaus there is cultivation of the sago palm ( Metroxylon sagu) and at one time the amount of sago flour exported from Sarawak was very considerable and amounted to, possibly, as much as three-quarters of the world’s supply of that commodity. Of the total quantity of sago flour exported from Sarawak by far the greater amount of the raw product is produced by Melanaus. The area estimated to be under cultivation for the growth of the sago palm is about 150,000 acres. The whole subject of the production of sago flour from the palm to the finished article is a fascinating one and has been exhaustively examined by a scientist giving his whole time to the task. I cannot, therefore, do more than give passing mention in this short talk to the production of sago. But, although the Melanaus have, with the passing of the years diversified their occupations, they are still very dependent on the production of raw sago and the fortunes of the Melanau districts are still apt to wax and wane according to the price obtainable for sago flour on world markets. This seems to be the place to give the lie to the oft heard pronouncement that the Melanaus are a wholly sago eating people. There has been a tendency in the past when any form of rationing of rice has had to be introduced to say, "Oh, we needn’t worry about the Melanaus, they have got their sago”! I believe that the Melanaus dislike sago just as much as Sea Dayaks who have to eat it when there is a failure of their rice crop. Amongst the Melanaus a number of people own bakehouses (called blangar) and in these blangar are made sago biscuits, which are not pure sago but mixed with rice bran; and these biscuits are used to supplement the remainder of their diet and also for the purpose of trading with Dayaks and others. I believe that if Melanaus could afford to eat rice at all meals they would not expend so much effort on the making of sago biscuits, a task which is far from popular and which is decidedly strenuous.
The Melanaus have a well earned reputation as good seamen and skilled fishermen. I remember visiting a Melanau household on a particularly nasty day; it was raining and distinctly chilly. My host remarked that at that particular moment he was reminded of Liverpool! Further discussion revealed that he had been a kasap in steamers of the Ben Line and had travelled all over the world. And so it is with the Melanaus; many of those referred to as Malays and working in seafaring jobs overseas prove upon closer examination to be pure Melanaus or of mixed Melanau/Malay origin. Quite the most unusual job I have heard of as being held by a Melanau concerns a young lad whom, at one time, I knew quite well. When last I heard of him he was said to be working as a bell-hop in a hotel in Chicago. U.S.A.!
Melanaus are competent fishermen and those from the Oya, Muka and Bintulu rivers practise, an unusual type of fishing known as panau. The boats used are barong and are squat, beamy craft with a distinctive blunt, bow. They usually have two masts and are generally decked in, the crew sitting cross legged on the deck. Around the waist they have a pronounced bulwark and on one side there is a very large net mounted on a wooden framework. The boat is propelled by oars
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, DECEMBER 31, 1958
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, DECEMBER 31, 1958
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, DECEMBER 31, 1958
239
having characteristic square blades; and by means of sails when at sea and the wind is favourable. There are two massive rudders aft and a steering rudder. The boats are of shallow draught to permit of entry and exit over the bar at the mouth of the river and much depends on the skill of the steersman when negotiating these bars in anything but calm weather. Barang are good seaboats and can safely cross a bar when a launch would come to grief. One of the loveliest sights in all Sarawak is to see the panau boats entering the Muka river on a tine evening with all sails set and the western sun shining upon them. At sea the method of fishing is based on close observation of the habits of the fish. When there is evidence of fish in the vicinity the barang is stopped and a large palm frond heaved overboard. After some time and when it is noticed that the fish are congregating under the shade of the frond, a member of the crew slips overboard. Meanwhile the remainder of the fishermen prepare the net and cant the barong so that the net is below the surface of the sea. The crew member who is in the water then more or less “shoos" the fish into the net.
Melanaus are also well known as boat-builders and paddlers. Many are the arguments which have taken place as to the respective skills at regattas of Melanaus, Sea Dayaks and Brunei Malays. Since the conclusion of World War II many Melanaus have found work with the companies engaged in the production of timber, especially with those engaged in the extraction of timber from peat-swamp forests in or near the delta of the Rejang river and not too far away from their homes.
The Melanaus have been described as a people of taste and artistry, and one has only to consider some of the beautiful objects made by them to realize that this is a true statement. I invite attention to the Seduan baskets, to the large cartwheel sun hats from Igan, to the sera'ong or Matu terindak, to the models of barang boats; and last, but by no means least, the beautiful women’s paddles made by craftsmen in the Oya river. It is hoped that continued encouragement will be given to these Melanau men and women who produce such attractive articles and that an effort will be made to see that quality is not sacrificed for the sake of quantity.
In the past some harsh things have been said about Melanaus, but the fact remains that since 1861 when they came under the administration of Rajah Sir James Brooke—nearly a hundred years ago—they have proved themselves to be good citizens, peaceful and law abiding. They are not, perhaps, easy to get to know, but once their confidence has been gained they prove to be a kindly and friendly people. They have proved themselves to have no little political sense and it is interesting to note how successful has been the Muka local authority, composed originally of Melanaus, but now including all the peoples of the district. There is a sense of unity amongst Muslim Melanaus. Christian Melanaus and Liko Melanaus and there seems little doubt that a new racial consciousness is slowly but surely permeating the Melanau people; and there can nowadays be no excuse for lumping them together with Malays and forgetting the name and traditions of the Melanau. They are certainly a cultural group of considerable importance to Sarawak and with a language, customs, arts and crafts of their own concerning which they may well take pride. Such, then are the Melanaus, a race second to none amongst the peoples of Sarawak.
THE BISAYA GROUP
BY
R. A. Bewsher
Bisaya are a small, fragmented tribe inhabiting parts around Brunei Bay. They number about 8,000 in North Borneo, 2,000 in Sarawak, and an unknown number in Brunei. There are connected groups in the
Tutoh River (a tributary of the Baram) and in Labuan. An ancient relationship with the Visaya of the Southern Philippines, is suspected.
In North Borneo the Bisaya live in the Padas and Kelias river basins and are wholly, if rather unorthodox, Muslim. Spencer St. John a hundred years ago reported the North Borneo Bisaya to be cultivating pepper, using the methods of the Chinese, by whom they were said earlier to have been taught. If this was true they are the only Bisayas ever known to have grown pepper.
In Brunei the people calling themselves suang bukid and suang bawang, literally "people of the hills” and "people of the river", are of the same race as those who elsewhere call themselves Bisaya. They are predominantly pagan. In Sarawak, apart from a few in the Lawas and Trusan rivers, the Bisaya inhabit only the upper tidal reaches of the Limbang River in the Fifth Division.
I lived for nine years among the Limbang Bisaya before the war and it is of them that I shall now speak.
As concerns their history little is known. The most prevalent legend tells of seven brothers, born in Brunei to an immigrant man and wife from the Kinabatang River in North Borneo. These seven, in good Brunei tradition, competed in a boat race to decide who should be Rajah. Lok Batata (called by the Bruneis Alak Batata) won, and thus became the first Rajah of Brunei (he also became the first convert to Islam and was then renamed Sultan Mohammed). His brother, Gerambak, came second; he moved into the Limbang. The third moved to Tutoh, the fourth to Padas and so on.
That is legend. Not until the middle of the last century did any kind of continuous or reliable history begin to be recorded. Spencer St. John made a number of journeys of exploration up the Limbang employing a Bisaya guide. His 1856 and 1858 journals show that the Bisaya were then fewer than now, and the then more numerous Muruts occupied much territory now settled by Bisaya. Both tribes were harried by Bruneis from the coast and Kayans from the Baram. Some people evacuated from the Tutoh to the Limbang during this phase.
It was a Bisaya who in November 1858 killed James Brooke’s greatest enemy, Pengiran Makhota, during one of his concubine-collecting tours. And the Bisayas it was who hoisted the Sarawak flag and secured for Rajah Sir Charles Brooke the annexation of Limbang in 1890. Increased immigration to Limbang from Brunei followed this blessing, but the Bisayas of Sarawak mainly remain nevertheless a small and isolated group having little to do with others. Some inter-marriage with Malays, Murut and Iban has occurred, but the Limbang Bisaya continues, by and large, shy, conservative and pagan. Since his revolt against Brunei and secession to Sarawak he has influenced the affairs of state apparently not at all.
The Bisaya has been thought by some to be ethnically related variously to Kadayans, Muruts and others. Limbang Bisayas deny this, but acknowledge similarities of speech and culture with some North Borneo Dusuns and with the Melanau, though their contacts with both are negligible.
The Bisaya is of fair complexion. The features of the men have been called effeminate but I think this was more the result of the hair-style affected by Bisaya men (but now rarely seen) of coiling the uncut long hair loosely around the crown of the head. This did indeed give to the smoother featured gentleman a rather prissy school-marm look. But the Brooke haircut (as it was called in my day) made a man look more what he was, I think. Certainly the masculinity of the offences of which Bisaya men seemed too often to be convicted, belied any theory of effeminacy. The men also have very unlady-like feet. Nature has adapted the Bisaya body to his swampy environment.
240
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, DECEMBER 31, 1958
Short-legged and squatly-built like a buffalo, his feet are made to reduce his pounds-per-square-inch ground pressure. He can, better than any I know, walk on the water—as is literally necessary when crossing their overgrown lakes.
Bisaya women on the contrary are often delicately made. Fair and sometimes seemingly fragile. That they are fair, and often comely, is no doubt why they were at a premium in Brunei harems. But their frailty is, like the man’s effeminacy, often deceptive.
Neither men nor women are tattooed with any traditional designs, but burn-scar patterns were sometimes applied to the forearms of young men. The men never pierce the ears. Older women wear ear plugs of distinctive shape. These are truncated cones with the forward projection flared out and rounded; on this dome end, if not over the whole, there is gold and enamel ornamentation. But the young generation prefers modern ear rings and pendants, and favourite girl children are fitted with them at an early age as also with silver or other bracelets and anklets of Brunei or Chinese make. Young men. who once filed their upper incisor teeth like the Iban, and more recently fitted brass false teeth over the stumps, have now quite abandoned the practice.
The Bisaya language contains some Malay words, but it is not a Malay dialect. Apart from its relationship to certain North Borneo and Brunei Dusun tongues, associations in Sarawak, if any, are not known. The Limbang speech has peculiarities almost from kampong to kampong but is principally distinguished by its very gutteral character; being produced deep in the throat. It has no native literature or reliable published vocabulary.
In habit Bisayas are static; they do not move house, travel far, or migrate. This is because they are property owners. Their immovable assets are sago and rubber gardens and fruit groves. Their movable wealth is in buffaloes (and maybe some other livestock), ancient brassware and jars, gold and silver ornaments. They do not value beads.
They grow padi by very crude methods, but most Bisayas eat sago as a staple for part of the year. Their sago is prepared in the simplest possible fashion by stirring boiling water onto the crude wet sago flour, so producing a very stiff launderer’s starch. It is dirty brown in colour and eaten by stirring one's chopsticks quickly in a small circle, putting the adhering gobbet of goo in the mouth and withdrawing the chopsticks between tightly closed lips. The gag of gum is swallowed without salivation, and when in an hour or so all water is distilled from a heavy bellyfull of sago the result is very little except early hunger and subnutrition. But like Muruts and Kelabits, Bisayas like their starch starchy. They can and do cook rice as rice should be cooked, but to make it go further—and always for breakfast or a carried lunch—the Bisaya cooks the rice with too much water, beats it into a stiff paste and wraps measured portions in leaf. This, cold, with something sweet or sour, bland or bitter, salt or insipid—or even alone—is your breakfast or wrapped lunch, again eaten with chopsticks and swallowed without mastication.
Bisaya chopsticks require no skill to use. They have two kinds of chopstick. In one a sliver of bamboo is permanently bent to a long narrow U-shape like sugar tongs; in the other a chopstick length of bamboo is split to end at a node, the two bifurcations are spread permanently open at the business end like a pair of dressing forceps. Bisayas also use spoons; they never eat with the fingers.
Nor does a Bisaya eat off the mat. He will sit on a mat but his food, in plates and bowls, is usually raised on one or more brass cake-stand affairs, called gansa, to a convenient height. The meal is normally taken by the whole family together in the bilek, the private family apartment of the house.
Private is not the right word. They do not have such a word. Their only privacy is inside the opaque, mildewed, medium-to-heavy quality, unbleached calico mosquito net, which is also of course in the bilek.
Bisaya houses differ from most others slightly. A kampong may be of one or several houses. A house may be of two or several families—rarely of one; equally rarely of many. Houses are not long in the Iban or Kayan sense; kampongs are not of individual family dwellings as with Malays. The occupants of a house are all near relatives. The old couple, their children and their children's families make the normal composition—with perhaps one or more near or poor relations who have no one to make up a household with them. The house may be a permanent, timber, carpenter-built residence of Malay or Chinese design; but that is not typical. The typical house is of belian uprights (possibly very old), similar or nibong bearers and floor joists, and roof timbers of good sound stuff. The main frame is thus reasonably permanent. The plan is a simple rectangle with a longitudinal dividing wall under a gable, ridge roof. Onto this framework may go any variety of flooring, walling and roofing materials from board floor and wall to belian roof— but classically the most readily available, easily applicable and coolest materials are used, i.e. split bamboo floor, flat-beaten bamboo walls and sago-leaf atap roof.
In the use of bamboo and sago leaf the Bisaya is very skilful. Both are taken mature and can be of very large size and surprising durability. The bamboo must be cut on the waning moon when the sap is down. Both are cured by submersion in mud for a time before preparation in their various forms for building. The newly finished building is neat, clean and functional. It has the immaculate inner surface of the opened bamboo boards for its exterior wall surface; the hard, smooth outer skin of the bamboo affording a clean cool inner surface. The front wall has a window slit running full length through which, sitting on the mats, bare back to the cool wall, one may rest an arm, and by turning the head, view the changing river scene, and spit betel juice at the flies on the mud below.
The floor of open-spaced split bamboo is the most hygienic and convenient ever evolved—and you know why.
The longitudinal dividing wall is of beaten bamboo. Eyes spy outward through it at the visitor in the light front hall, but the visitor cannot see what goes on in the gloomy bilek. This wall has one or two doors, not more. Entering at one we are back in the bilek where we decided the house should be described.
Where we sit at our Bisaya meal may be on the same level as the hall, but, again classically, it should be a step or two lower so that one may sit on the higher level with the feet on the lower. The lower is the cooking and eating space. At this level, under the rear eaves, is a sort of fireplace common to all tribes.
The bilek is one, without dividing walls. Here Bisayas conceive, give birth, live, love and quarrel, in sickness and health, and here they die. This is the women's realm, the family hearth and home. Though everything occurring here is known, not everything is talked about — openly. Disloyalty, unkindness,
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, DECEMBER 31, 1958
Bisaya Woman
R. A. Bewsher
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, DECEMBER 31, 1958
241
jealousy and strife cannot long be tolerated here; the result is generally an island of quiet mutual trust, companionship, intimacy and sometimes affection that, understandably, make the Bisaya a great homelover little inclined to go abroad.
There is equality of the sexes. Women and girls are not segregated or repressed as some have supposed. Their quick disappearance at sight of strangers is but a relic of training in self-protection from former Brunei slave-raiding days. Work is fairly divided. Women cook and clean and carry water. Men build and hunt and fetch the firewood. Both work the padi fields as do other Borneo people. Men work the sago with the help of buffaloes. Both share many lighter occupations and either will substitute for the other in any work if necessary.
The buffalo is an important working member in the Bisaya family economy and is cared for as such. Bisaya do not use buffalo-drawn cultivating implements but have other appropriate devices for haulage. The buffalo is also ridden as a hack.
Marriage is generally contracted early. It normally follows a period of engagement, which may begin before birth, and is in any case entered into by parents on behalf of their children. It may be sealed with gifts including a ring. There is little premarriage courtship, but trial marriage is permitted with consent of the bride's parents and in their home. If successful, the contract is legalised by appropriate gifts in the presence of witnesses; if unsuccessful it is dissolved by payment of a fine or forfeit, which is not a common practice.
In religion Bisayas are animists with a multitude of heavenly hosts and other spirit beings, both malign and benign, to whom deference is given. There are also harmless spirit people like fairies, who simply contribute a little unexpected interest to a sometimes dull life.
Bisayas of substance provide themselves with a tomb or vault of belian wood in which the bones of their families may share their last repose. Great ceremony is paid to the dead.
Religious ceremonies, associated with the major events of birth, marriage, sickness, death and burial,— and the seasons—occasion the feasting, drinking, fine clothes, music and dancing loved by Bisayas. These revels keep guests in good humour and gain honour for the host, while providing atmosphere for the sacerdotal functions of priest or priestess, witch doctor or witch.
Women feature chiefly in Bisaya occult practice. Music is an essential concomitant of all major social occasions. Under the influence of gong music, lasting it may be continuously for up to three days and nights, the priestess and her acolytes may go into a trance and prophesy. Bisayas are the best gong musicians in Sarawak. Full Bisaya gong orchestras of nineteen pieces used to be shipped to Kuching for major state occasions in pre-war days. They also have a limited repertoire of tunes on a wider range of string, wind, and percussion instruments than other Sarawak tribes though virtuosity is now rare.
Limbang Bisayas have not taken full advantage of modem opportunities, though in this they are no more tardy than others in the Fifth Division. The highest educated Bisaya ever, is a boy now in Form Three at Batu Lintang School. The most notable living Bisaya is Datu Zin Galau, who, born in the Tutoh in 1887, and serving Government all his working life, retired in 1952 with a knowledge and influence among Baram peoples unmatched by anyone.
Local Authority Taxation
(As the bulk of local authority income is or should be obtained from levies on real estate it is with this aspect of taxation that this article is solely concerned).
With the considerable development of local authorities over the past few years and with these authorities assuming wider responsibilities local authority taxation has increased, and will continue to increase.
Taxes are levied by local authorities to pay for the services and amenities provided by the taxing authority.
At present local authorities find themselves largely free from organised public criticism. This state of affairs cannot be expected to continue and before long rate-payers will be organising themselves into associations to ensure that the levies collected by local bodies are put to the best possible use.
Rate-Payer Associations perform an extremely useful function in the community and any local authority knowing that its actions are answerable to an organised body representative of those who provide the finance will be more likely to carry out its duties in the best interests of the community concerned.
As local authority taxation is likely to increase it is essential that rate-payers and local authority members should be conversant with the several systems available for the levying of rates. It may well be that the method at present used in Sarawak (namely Annual Value Rating) is not the most suitable and that one or other of the alternative systems may prove more equitable under local conditions.
There are three generally accepted systems of rating all with certain advantages and disadvantages. A further and most promising method namely Site-Value Rating has come into prominence over the past few years.
The four possible methods then are: —
1.	Rating on Annual Value.
2.	Rating on Capital Value.
3.	Rating on Unimproved Value (U.V.)
4.	Rating on Site Value.
1.	Rating On Annual Value
Rateable value under this system is the rent at which such property would let from year to year if the owner undertook to meet the usual charges met with in running the properly.
This is an oversimplification; however a fuller definition is available in the Local Authority (Rating) Regulations, 1951.
Annual Value rating taxes both land and improvements and the more intensive the development the greater the tax that will be paid.
In assessing annual value any sum paid as premium (called tea money in Sarawak) for the granting of a lease shall be taken into account by way of enhancement. Large lump sums are often paid to landlords for the occupancy of premises.
This is a most useful provision for if present agitation to have the Rent Control Ordinance amended is successful then the payment of premium will become legal and local authorities should derive considerable benefit.
For the purpose of assessing annual value premium is usually considered as rent in advance or more correctly the present equivalent of future annual payments.
One of the main advantages accorded to Annual Value rating is that it taxes according to the ability to pay.
I have always held the view that ability to pay is largely the concern of the Central Government. Where two adjoining properties, equal in area, contour and soil enjoy equally the amenities and services provided by the community then they should both pay the same
242
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, DECEMBER 31, 1958
rates. The fact that one land owner has spent $100,000/- on developing his area and his neighbour only $10,000/- is in my opinion irrelevant. The man who has the highly developed property must obviously pay out more for such services as water and electricity and thus benefit the supplying authority. In addition he has risked considerable capital and his development cannot help but be of benefit to the community as a whole.
2.	Rating on Capital Value
The rateable value of property under this system is the sum at which the capital value is assessed and capital value is the sum of the values of the land plus the improvements thereon. Capital Value is generally the full market value of the property.
As in annual rating both land and improvements are taxed. Both these system can be considered to have similar advantages and disadvantages.
Advantages and Disadvantages of Annual Value and Capital Value Rating.
Advantages
(1)	They tax according to the ability to pay. This is more especially the case with annual value rating where the actual revenue being received from the property is the basis for assessment.
(As I pointed out earlier this is a somewhat doubtful advantage. In Sarawak accurate details of rentals are almost impossible to obtain).
(2)	They do not discourage large land holdings or large residential lots with ample gardens.
(3)	With the annual value system in particular valuations are usually made yearly and can take into account almost immediately any improvements to a district.
The main disadvantages are: —
(1)	They encourage the withholding of vacant land from use as the rates on such lands are low and it costs little to hold quite large areas for speculative purposes. This is all too evident in Sarawak.
(2)	Because rates are low selling prices of vacant lots tend to become inflated.
There is no economic compulsion to sell surplus areas.
(3)	Because of relatively low rates these systems do not encourage the rebuilding of dilapidated properties. Rates being more or less in direct proportion to the rentals received there is not the same incentive to improve the property and thereby its rental return in order to overcome the rating obstacle as there is in unimproved and site-value rating.
(4)	They directly penalise the landowner who develops his property.
3.	Rating on Unimproved Value
Under this system all improvements are exempted and only the land is rated.
What must be assessed is the virgin or natural value of the land. In Sarawak this is not an over-difficult task as the original state of the land is not hard to visualise.
Unimproved values can be arrived at with a fair degree of accuracy by deducting the value of improvements from the full capital value.
In highly-developed areas original improvements such as felling and stumping of jungle, clearing, drainage and filling tend to be lost sight of. They become what is known as invisible improvements and are merged into land values. Difficulties occur for example where the original contour has been altered by filling or levelling. Because of these difficulties the fourth system, site-value rating has been evolved.
4.	Rating on Site Value
In fixing site values such invisible improvements as original felling, stumping, clearing, drainage and filling
would be added to the so-called virgin value while visible improvements, such as fencing, paths, buildings would be disregarded.
The advantages of this system are immediately obvious. The task of the valuer is made very much easier for he will have available sales of large numbers of empty lots with merged invisible improvements on which to base his assessments. He will not be plagued with the necessity of discovering existing rentals under the annual value system (practically an impossibility in Sarawak in any case) nor will he have to delve into the past to discover the virgin condition of the subject lands.
A Local Government Commission appointed to report on desirable changes in the existing systems of rating in New Zealand in 1956 strongly advocated that the whole country change over to site-value rating. They had this to say also.
"The Commission is satisfied that the site-value system is not only more ethical, expedient and equitable than the existing system but would occasion only the minimum of anomalies which could be taken care of in the main by means of the existing hardship provisions in the Rating Act.”
Advantages and Disadvantages of Unimproved and Site-Value Rating.
Advantages
(i)	They discourage the withholding of land from use as vacant land pays full rates. As a corollary, they discourage speculation as it is expensive to hold land in anticipation of price rises.
In a country such as Sarawak development must be encouraged even to the extent of a little economic pressure.
(ii)	They encourage the erection of more and better buildings. As rates are levied on land only the man who erects a large and well-appointed building does not suffer a penalty as he does in annual value rating. They discourage slums for the rates are high in proportion to the income received.
(iii)	They tax the result of society-created increments in land values to a much greater extent than does annual value rating.
Land owners have certainly gained enormous unearned increments in values in this country in the past as a result of Government and local authority development projects. They will continue to gain considerable increments in the future; however there is no reason why a little of it should not be paid back in taxes.
(iv)	Site value in particular is relatively simple to assess.
Disadvantages
(i)	They tend to cause land to be subdivided into the smallest possible holdings in order to keep the rates down; however this factor can largely be overcome by local authority by-laws and town planning.
(ii)	Unimproved values can be difficult to assess accurately in highly developed and long-settled areas.
As a general rule Unimproved and Site-Value rating favours: —
1.	Residential properties in suburban areas where land values are not unduly high.
2.	Multi-unit houses and apartment houses.
3.	Multi-storey structures in the business areas.
4.	Industrial lands requiring substantial buildings but not a great deal of land other than that required for building purposes.
Rating on Annual and Capital Values favour: —
(1)	Empty and undeveloped lots.
(2)	Under-developed sites in business and commercial areas.
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, DECEMBER 31, 1958
243
(3)	Industrial enterprises where a large area of land is required with very little in the way of buildings.
(4)	Slum properties.
(5)	All properties where the ratio of value of improvements to land value is low.
In highly developed communities such as are found in the United Kingdom Annual and Capital Value rating has proved satisfactory for development is more or less complete and progress and values practically static.
In a developing country such as Sarawak rating on either unimproved value or on site value appears to have more to commend it for, and this is the most important aspect of the whole matter, neither system penalises the land owner who develops his property.
Site-Value rating in particular is a most promising development and is a system which could well be the one most suited to Sarawak needs.
B. A. Marshall
Excerpts from Reports of Administrative
Officers for the First Half-year of 1958
FOURTH DIVISION
Miri District
District Officer—P. Scanlon
Law and Order
There were no cases of individual importance or of particular interest. There have, however, been several prosecutions for gambling and a number of prosecutions for smoking opium. In the case of opium addicts, with the co-operation of the Divisional Medical Officer, Dr. Abbott, a great effort has been made to cure rather than to punish. Five opium addicts were sentenced to hospital for one month, and came out professing to be cured. It is unfortunately not possible to treat all opium addicts in this manner, owing to the expense.
Miri Area
Miri Urban District Council
In the Miri Bazaar, the slump unfortunately grew worse. Shopkeepers found it increasingly difficult to pay their debts to their suppliers and extract money owed to them by their customers.
Schools
In January, the Miri Middle School was handed back to public management after having been managed by a Government nominated committee for twenty-one months. By agreement between Government and the present Chinese organisations in the town, the School was given a constitution, providing for management by a committee consisting of one representative from each of the Chinese Community Associations. It was felt that such a committee would be stronger and better able to resist the sort of situation which led up to the Middle School strike in 1956, than would a committee comprised of individuals elected on their personal merits. Such individuals can hardly be considered able to deal severely with the children of their customers if required to do so, whereas the elected representatives of the various associations are able to reply that they have the backing of their associations for any action they may take.
Low Cost Houses
The Low Cost Housing area remained uninhabited. The Development Secretary visited Miri on the 26th May and after discussion, it was agreed to recommend that a three-pronged approach be made to this problem.
(a)	That thirty houses be made available for the use of Government servants.
(b)	That another block of houses be sold outright to the public on hire purchase terms.
(c)	Any houses remaining be rented out at minimal rates.
These proposals were approved in principle and at the end of June, arrangements were in hand for the construction of furniture to be used in the houses to be made available for Government servants. Efforts were being made to sell or rent the remainder of the houses. Seventeen have been sold outright. Details of rental scheme was not yet available.
Rural Areas
Agriculture
Dayaks continued to farm by traditional hill farming methods. They enjoyed an average harvest in 1958. In Suai, recent migrants from the Second Division found that the amount of land they occupy is not adequate for their needs. Much of it is sandy. It has therefore been necessary to attempt redistribution of Dayaks amongst the various houses, and also to resettle at least one group of migrants.
Chinese from Sibuti have shown great interest in the rubber replanting scheme, and are anxious to take out land along the new Jenggalas Road and to plant rubber. It seems likely that the usual difficulties will be encountered in allocating land to would-be rubber planters, which is claimed as old temuda by Malays and Kadayans but either rarely or very inadequately farmed. When the road is finished and in good condition, this question will have to be further investigated.
Lands and forests
The Forest Department has now completed its minimum programme for a belt of forest reserve to check erosion and to provide a reserve of timber, which can be worked over a long period of years and gradually improved.
Health
Health in the district seems to be reasonably good. The Travelling Dresser from Sibuti, Mr. Pao Kiu Teck, who has been there for seven years, was posted to Sibu at the end of June. His replacement arrived in Sibuti just in time to take over. Mr. Pao has done good work under difficult conditions for a long time, and deserved a change of station.
Communications
A lot of time and energy has gone into the building of Sibuti Road. It was originally intended that this road should run from Tusan to the Jenggalas River. A fall of rocks, however, from the cliffs just on the Miri side of Tusan, has made this section of the beach impassable to motor traffic except at very low tides. It was therefore necessary to build an extension circumnavigating this fall of rocks.
By the end of the half year, the road had been completed to the Jenggalas River although there remained a fair amount of grading and ditching to be done on the last three or four miles. It is hoped to complete this before the landas season starts in about September this year.
A franchised bus service started to run on January 1st. One franchise has been granted for the route from Miri to Kuala Baram and another franchise has been granted to the Miri Transport Company on the routes Miri to Lutong, Miri to Krokop, Miri to Pujut and Miri to Tanjong Lobang. It has unfortunattely not yet been possible to arrange with the Brunei Government for a franchise to be awarded to the company from Miri to Kuala Belait. Thus the Miri/Belait Bus Company is running a service from Miri to Kuala Belait with the franchise only as far as Kuala Baram. The Miri Transport Company is still encountering many teething troubles. Its buses are old, in poor condition and are not regularly maintained. Two new buses were purchased during the half year. The managers complained that many of the passengers they can legitimately expect to carry are stolen by taxis running
244
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, DECEMBER 31, 1958
along in front of the buses, or by other vehicles such as lorries which pick up passengers by the roadside and accept money from them when they get down. There is a limit to the usefulness of trying to deal with these problems by police action. It would be much more satisfactory if the Miri Transport Company could provide a regular service in good buses in order that the public would prefer to travel by them. This whole question should be carefully reviewed in another two or three months when the Miri Transport Company should have had time to see the effect of their new buses on their service, and the effect of a recent reduction in S.O.L. amenity and other transport.
Niah Caves
The Curator of the Sarawak Museum led another expedition to the Niah caves in February, March and April. This year's expedition was larger than any of its predecessors. Mr. Barnes was attached to the expedition as administrative manager for some three months. Professor von Koenigswald, discoverer of the Java man and a World-famous archaeologist visited the caves for a short period. It was understood that further interesting discoveries were made although at the time of writing, exact information as to the age and significance of the recent findings is not available.
The contract for extraction of guano from the caves was terminated at the end of March, in order to prevent if possible, damage to as yet undiscovered archaeological remains. This unfortunately deprived natives of the area of a means of their earning money and it was much resented. There has been a considerable amount of guano stealing in spite of the fact that the Museum is now maintaining a permanent watch by cave guards, who have a sulap in the mouth of the great cave.
Sarawak Oilfields Limited
Messrs. Sarawak Shell Oilfields Limited as they are now known, continued to reduce the scale of their operations. As far as possible, they have not been dismissing labour, but when any of their employees leave their service, they are rarely replaced.
Work commenced on two deep test-wells, one on the M.R.C. padang and one at Sungei Baong, Permaisuri Road. The well on the M.R.C. padang produced a supply of gas as was expected. It was understood that the amount of gas does not justify the institution of a separate gas supply from this well but does justify feeding this gas into the existing supply. At the time of writing, drilling had not commenced on the other deep test-well although the site was under preparation.
I have written in my last year's half-yearly report on the possible consequences to the Miri area of the reduction in S.O.L. activity. This matter was further discussed most carefully during the period under review with a number of senior officers. It does not appear practicable to inject industry, light or heavy, into the Miri area to absorb surplus labour formerly employed by S.O.L., rather would it appear desirable to open up new land and encourage agricultural development. The Urau/Jenggalas Road should be of assistance in this connection. It is desirable, however, that an extension to the Riam Road, at least to the far side of the water catchment area, should be constructed as soon as possible. Owing to pressure of other activities and shortage of administrative staff, it was regretably not possible to undertake this work during the first half of this year.
When the two deep test-wells have been drilled, if nothing promising of oil has been found, it would seem likely that S.S.O.L. will be in a position to consider releasing more land from their concession area. I have addressed them on the subject of either accepting or upgrading the classification of land in the Pujut area, in order to encourage people who would like to build houses or plant crops there. I suggest this is a matter which could well be reconsidered late this year, or early in 1959. By this time, the road system in
the Krokop area should be developed enough to make a conection from Krokop to Lutong Road near Pujut a comparatively simple matter.
It is unlikely that S.O.L. will undertake any more drilling in the Miri area, other than at sea and this must await the arrival of a mobile sea drilling barge.
Baram District
District Officer—M. M. McSporran
Interest
A verdict of death by drawning was returned on four Penans of L. Beku, who were drowned when attempting to reach their farms in the Akah during flood water. The Akah is a hazardous river and difficult even for experienced boatmen. The Penan are not.
A penyamun scare amongst Foochows in the Lubok Nibong—Poyut area in February resulted in a sharp decline in rubber shipments from Lubok Nibong. No Foochow dared to leave their houses before daylight. Strange lights were reported signalling near isolated houses and an old lady claimed to have seized the wrists of an intruder who tried to climb in through her bedroom window. Two sections of Field Force from Miri patrolled the area and laid ambushes. On one occasion they are reported to have charge a light near a house and found nothing apart from a rather surprised glow-worm sitting on the branch of a tree. Otherwise no incidents were reported.
Medical and Health
H. A. Francis Kueh spent a very useful two months in the Ulu Baram and Kelabit country between February and April visiting ulu dispensaries. More visits of this type are required. He had more than his share of troubles; his boat capsized in the Tinjar; hit a rock and all but capsized in the Akah; and he was chased by a wild buffalo at Pa Puak.
The dispensary at Long San has been completed. Equipment has been sent by the Catholic Medical Society of Holland. It is an excellent building. It is staffed by five nuns and fills a long felt want in the Ulu Baram.
The first Kenyah for training as a Hospital Assistant left for Kuching in February. He is Kajan the son of Penghulu Gau.
Four more Kelabits returned from their ulu dressers' course in Kuching in February and were posted to Pa Lungan, Pa Main, Pa Datih and Bareo. By the end of June there were eight ulu dressers in the Kelabit country. A ninth completed his training shortly afterwards.
Complaints were made following the instruction of increased dispensary charges. It was suggested that charges should be properly scaled so that the patient who received a couple of aspirins should not be asked to pay the same as the person who received an expensive injection. The S.H.A. who finds it very difficult to decide who should pay and who should be excused usually asks Dayaks to pay on the grounds that most of them have rubber gardens. The Orang Ulu who have few rubber trees normally receive free treatment although individuals may be far better off than most Dayaks. Meanwhile Baram people of all races continue to pay high rates for various types of local treatment.
Native Affairs
Ibans. Ex-T.R. Unang continues to make a thorough nuisance of himself. It had been agreed that land should be found for him in the proposed Lemit-ing Excision, but he moved in before land was allocated him. Unfortunately the area he chose is temuda belonging to the Penan Toyut who are very much alarmed. To make matters worse Unang has added some doors from Ulu Karap to his house. These doors have since been fined.
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, DECEMBER 31, 1958
245
Strong feelings are still running in the Kedit-Jaing land dispute in the Bakong. The case has already been the subject of a long series of Court cases. An appeal is pending. Meanwhile both houses have agreed not to farm the land this year.
Many kampars have been fined and have since returned home. The favourite method of infiltration is to get married first and request permission to remain afterwards.
Orang Ulu
The T.K. of Uma Pawa in the Belaga has requested permission to move with his house to the Tinjar. Penghulu Balan Lejau and the people of the Ulu Tinjar would be delighted to accept them, but apparently their own penghulu opposes the move.
Penghulu Jok Ngau is keen to acquire land at Long Liam on the main Baram river for rubber planting. There is insufficient land at Long Tebangan for the growing community there, particularly if rubber is to be planted. The Temonggong who claims right over the land is unwilling to part with it to anybody who does not permanently settle there. The Tua Kampong is opposed to any moves, but a split in the house is inevitable sooner or later as pressure on the land increases and it is to be hoped that the matter can be settled amicably.
Eighteen doors of Penghulu Balan Lejau's longhouse at Long Tejoi were burnt down in May. An immediate grant of $500 was made by the Miri branch of the Red Cross and this together with a donation from the B.D.C.H. & S.W. committee was used to purchase immediate necessities. Other houses in the Baram rallied round to help with cash and assistance in kind. An excellent temporary longhouse has since been built at Long Sobeng.
Requests for the move of twenty doors of Tabans from the Limbang to the Tutoh were refused when enquiries revealed that most of them were Ibans. Penghulu Tama Udeng was prepared to accept any more Tabans or Muruts from the Limbang provided they joined his longhouse at Long Terawan.
The Kelabits require strong leadership. Penghulu Lawai is no longer fit enough to visit his outlying kampongs and finds them impossible to control from Bareo. The Northern and Southern Kelabits disagree on any issue of principle.
There is an impressive amount of fertile land lying empty in the Pa Puak area of the Ulu Baram above Lio Matu.
The seven doors of Kenyah Lepo Keh from Indonesia have now built a house as close as possible to the Saban house at Pa Puak.
The clamour for permission to move downriver to the Long Ikang area from Long Sela'an and Long Semiang has died down and now only the two T.K.'s concerned and one or two doors seem interested. The remainder have requested subsidies under the rubber planting scheme and have every intention of remaining where they are.
Agriculture
There is widespread interest in the rubber planting scheme and many more applications have been received. To cope with these, two Junior Agricultural Assistants have been recruited locally—a Dayak for posting to Long Teru and a Kenyah for posting to Long San.
In January the Baram Foochow 2,000 acre block planting scheme was found to be below the standard expected and the representatives were warned. The Manager has since been changed and the Rubber Development Officer reports considerable improvement.
Two parties from the Baram attended courses at Samarahan. Fourteen Kenyahs from Ulu Baram attended Course No. 4 in March and twenty Dayaks from the Lower Tinjar attended course No. 6 in April.
All returned full of enthusiasm and the courses appear to have been most useful.
Increasing interest is being shown in irrigated padi farming. In the Akah Indonesian Muruts have been engaged on a contract basis and have prepared land ready for farming complete with bunds and water supply for $100 an acre. Now Long Seniai and Long Lellang are following suit. Penghulu Balan Lejan also wishes to experiment in the Ulu Tinjar.
Harvests in the Ulu Baram were extremely poor and many doors have insufficient to eat.
There is some excellent potential swamp farming land at Long Lama in the Community Development Project area. The Officer-in-Charge does not want the scheme to assume responsibility for this at present, but would like to see it used and has tried unsuccessfully to persuade the Long Laput people to open it up. Penghulu Jok Ngau has now been allocated a part of this land and is farming it this year with the aid of Indonesian Muruts.
Trade and Customs
Quantities of cigarettes are known to be smuggled into the district from Brunei, but very few offenders have been caught so far.
Brunei appears to have lost interest in the Pengalayan Canal project and there is now no hope of direct shipments from Kuala Belait to Marudi and establishment of a Customs Station in Marudi, meanwhile negotiations have gone ahead among local traders to form a Baram Chamber of Commerce which would consider the possibility of direct trading with Singapore and Hong Kong by using a launch to meet ships off Miri.
Labour
Indonesians have continued to come across the border in search of work, but they have had some difficulty in finding suitable jobs during the first few months.
Local Authority
The Baram District Council held its meeting in February at Long Lama, and gave Councillors an opportunity to see progress made at the Community Development Project and to discuss the policy of the project with the Officer-in-Charge, Mr. Southwell. The Councillors were impressed with progress made at the school. Another meeting of the full council was held in Marudi in May.
A party of Kota Belud Councillors attended the Baram Regatta and the Baram District Council meeting in May. They found the visit interesting, but admitted that they thought Baram drinking customs a little strenuous.
The bazaars at Long Lama, Long Teru, Beluru, Lubok Nibong and Long Akah have begun to pay assessment based on rateable value instead of the flat rate of $4 annually and the Baram District Council has been able to provide scavenging and maintenance services. Long Lama is now a model bazaar. Beluru has been considerably smartened up and even Long Teru and Lubok Nibong look reasonably respectable.
Public Works Department
Progress on Marudi Town Development has continued. The Bazaar Roads and rear access roads have been surfaced and earth access roads constructed in the new residential area behind Marudi bazaar.
Levels have been taken for the road up the hill from the bazaar which will link it to the Limbang Road. This at present crosses the airstrip and a deviation has been marked out, but it is unlikely that sufficient funds will be available for this particularly since it will involve acquisition of land. Work on the road has since begun.
246
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, DECEMBER 31, 1958
Work has at last begun on the Marudi commercial wharf and is progressing slowly. The contractor has been held up by failure of a sub-contractor to deliver materials.
Airstrips
Progress on Marudi airstrip has been held up by unserviceable equipment. Both bulldozers were out of action for long periods and one has been practically rebuilt. These breakdowns were later attributed to the presence of graves subsequently uncovered during earth-moving operations. Crackers were fired and the bones reburied.
Long Akah airstrip has been completed and used on several occasions by the B.E.M. Auster.
The Sabans at Pa Puak are interested in building an airstrip for use by Mission planes near their house.
Now the Ulu Airstrips have been built there is a demand upriver for an ulu air service particularly from the Kelabits. There are still no firm proposals for such a service.
Education
The problem of non-payment of Kelabit school fees has still to be solved. The Baram District Council proposed that Kelabit porters should carry travelling officers’ barang free for the first day's journey from kampong to kampong and the $3 per day which they would have received paid into the Kelabit schools account. The Southern group of kampongs agreed to this proposal, but the Northerners did not. The Baram District Council has since proposed that all Kelabit porters should be paid only $2 a day and the remaining $1 paid into the schools fund.
The drastic reduction in the Batu Lintang Grade IIIA Teacher Training intake hits the Baram particularly hard. There is nobody yet in the Baram capable of passing the IIA teachers' course entrance examination. It is possible that Grade IIA teachers from elsewhere in the country will volunteer to teach in Baram schools and one has in fact done so, but for many reasons it is preferable to have Orang Ulu teachers to staff the Kenyah/Kayan/Kelabit schools. It is hoped that a special course can be arranged to bring promising Baram candidates up to Grade IIA entrance standard.
General
The Baram Regatta was held in Marudi on the 24th May. Large crowds attended.
The Hon'ble the Resident led a contingent from Miri and S.O.L. Miri and B.S.P. Seria sent a large number from the oilfields. There would have been more visitors from Kuching had not Kuching chosen the same date for their Regatta.
Wireless sets lent by Brunei Shell Co. Ltd. and the Marine Department installed in starters' and umpires' launches and outboards and a central control point set up in the Kubu enabled races to be started more or less on time and there were no long delays between races. All Championship Cups went to the Tutoh and Apoh. The Ngajat competition was a great success. A Borak Competition attracted a large entry and a committee of experts headed by the British Resident, Brunei, Mr. J. O. Gilbert, had a difficult task to select the best bottle. Borak was later sold at the Borak Bar at ten cents a glass and raised $163.75 for the Baram H. & S.W. fund.
The stream of visitors to Marudi has continued. Very few travelling officers bring their own servants nowadays and it throws a heavy burden on my household staff. A Rest House is essential. It has been recommended that this should be incorporated in the terminal building to be built at Marudi airstrip. A caretaker/cook would be necessary.
Bintulu District
District Officer—R. J. Pole-Evans
Courts
Criminal. The total number of Criminal Cases was thirty-three.
Thirteen of these were in respect of offences against Native Customary Law.
Three of them were preliminary inquiries into murder. Following one of the latter the High Court sentenced Sirang anak Pusu to death for murdering Jabeng anak Kelaseh.
Native Affairs
Malays/Melanaus. Approval was given in March for the constitution of a Native Communal Reserve along the coastal strip between Kuala Bintulu and Sungei Mas. Seventy-two families lead by Tuan Imam, Haji Abdul Kadir intend to make use of the area.
Considerable interest was shown by Bintulu Kampong people in moving across to Kampong Baru in anticipation of a Bailey bridge being erected to span Sungei Sebiew.
At Pandan the Malay Community, spurred on by T.K. Johari, built themselves a new kampong road and bridge with financial help from Government.
The Malay rubber planters both at Senga and Sebiew achieved praiseworthy results on their land under subsidy. Similarly the Malay Schools in Bintulu and Tatau sub-district prospered under teams of keen teachers.
Dayaks. The lower Anap was hit by flood during the second week in January which damaged crops extensively. In most other areas the harvest was fair to good.
Tatau was lucky in having a good engkabang crop while other places didn't. Prices between $40—50 per picul were obtained in Tatau bazaar.
Following the harvest there was an outbreak of requests to tuba. Permission is given only once in three years.
Owing to the scarcity of racing boats it was decided not to hold a Regatta this year.
Throughout the district longhouses were very lax about paying Head Tax and reminders were sent to all Tuai2 Rumah.
A number of small communities were found to have split away from longhouses and to have either joined other houses or set up their own without permission. They will have to be dealt with after next harvest. Several cases of illegal pindah from outside the district were discovered and several parties of Dayaks arrived from Balingian, Oya and Mukah in search of land. Bungin anak Julong who arrived unannounced from Roban in 1957 with eight doors to join Rumah Ikom, Tatau was made to return home in May.
Lengthy and elaborate arrangements were made during February and succeeding months to receive and move sixty-five doors of immigrants from the Second Division to the Ulu Jelalong. In March the figure fell to forty-eight doors, and in April and May only thirty-three doors actually arrived. The last lot moved up to Kuala Merurong from the transit camp at Tubau on 3rd July after incessant procrastination. They brought mountains of jars and gongs but insufficient padi and rice. After staying in the transit bangsal they were loath to move upriver and start farming or building temporary houses. With connivance from the local Penans they put off their departure until it was too late to fell and borrowing of Penan temuda was the only possibility of obtaining a crop this season.
Within the district demands to pindah or for more land have been continuous. The demand is now almost entirely for paya NOT bukit. No interest at
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, DECEMBER 31, 1958
247
all is shown locally in moving to the Jelalong. Many covetous eyes have been cast on the Kakus and Simalajau.
Dayaks have been slowly overflowing out of the areas assigned to them by the 1941 Farming Areas Rules and there is now definite feeling amongst non-Dayaks that this has gone far enough. There is however general misapprehension as to the Farming Rules. Non-Dayaks regard the rules as a title to all land outside the Dayak Farming Areas whether there are customary rights or not. Though fallacious it is a very real fact that the Rules were a guarantee in the minds of non-Dayaks and this ought not to be forgotten. A statement on pindah policy within the district would be the best thing in the world.
Punans. Work started on the rebuilding of Rumah Berasap at Pandan. It could not have been left longer.
In the Kakus there was a great concern about the opening up of the river to Dayak immigrants and the strongest disapproval was voiced. This has never been Dayak country and it seems that there would be no justification for causing bitter quarrels about this peaceful part of the land, especially when the available areas in the Jelalong remain to be filled. This one fairly unspoilt river in the district should remain as such.
Chinese Affairs
Business did not flourish this half year and the upriver bazaars complained of hard times. Direct imports from Singapore decreased.
At Sebiew the planters put in a lot of hard work on their new rubber gardens and were greatly encouraged by the excellent budding results.
At long last the Chinese Community at Tatau reached agreement about the site for the new Chinese School.
A census done at Sebauh shows that between thirty and forty families will move from Sebauh to their new rubber gardens at Sebiew in 1962. After asking for two schools at Sebiew the applicants decided to postpone the idea for a year or two.
Trade and Customs
Trade was generally slack and had repurcussions on labour.
Labour
The Bintulu Wharf Labourers Union complained in March that they were not being given enough cargo off-loading work to do. Direct transhipment cargoes from Singapore via Kuching which they always handle fell off a lot during the half year and their services were not required for local cargoes. There was too little work for too many labourers.
Other labour was always easy to get at $3.40 per day.
There were many enquiries from Dayaks seeking work in the oilfields.
Shippping and Transport
m.l. Ruai went to Kuching in early January and returned from dock on 9th February. She was used continually during the next five months and her crew worked hard but happily. She made eighty trips and carried three hundred and fifty-three passengers plus cargo.
Two boats went down between Bintulu and Tatau during the landas but there was no loss of life. Also a young man from Tatau who missed the river entrance lost his outboard just off Kedurong. He was carrying a coffin which also sank.
Three fishermen from Bintulu and one from Kuala Tatau received loans for inboard engines from the Agricultural Department in June and started work straight away installing the engines.
Borneo Airways opened a new feeder service on 27th May using Twin Pioneer aircraft. There were two flights a week each way which was not as convenient as previously from the point of view of mails though passenger booking was easier. A stopover means at least two nights.
Travelling
Several unanticipated but heavy items of expenditure during the first few months necessitated a very careful watch being kept on travelling expenditure but as much as could be done was done. Nevertheless experience has shown that for the district to be properly travelled a bigger vote is very necessary.
Owing to five dry months rivers such as the Jelalong and Binyio were most difficult of access.
Agriculture
A new buffalo was supplied to Senga Station and a "sponsored" stud boar sent to T.R. Saban's house at Sebauh.
T.R. Encharang’s farming methods in the Sg. San block were very haphazard and in order to get him to farm there properly this season he was refused permission to borrow Punan land.
Rubber Development
During the first six months of the year approval was given for 956 acres to be planted under rubber subsidy.
Of the above it is estimated that 739 acres were actually planted.
The estimated total acres under rubber in the district is 3,286 acres, mostly concentrated around Sg. Sebiew.
Budgrafting started in March and by the end of June over ninety thousand seedlings had been budgrafted.
The Senga budwood nursery supplied 154 yards of budwood, the rest coming from Sibu, Sarikei and Malaya.
Mr. Wong Kim Fah and his budders did excellent work and the high percentage of successes gave untold encouragement to those who had put in so much hard work on their gardens.
The inspiring and untiring efforts of all the Rubber Planting Staff have contributed enormously to the success of the scheme so far.
Lawas District
District Officer—J. T. Weekes
Court
Court work has been light during the half year and there have been no cases which presented difficulty. A total number of civil cases was twenty-four and of Native Court cases fourteen.
Land
The Foochow area: This was laid out early in the year to a most satisfactory plan, which ensured a Reserve for the Murut inhabitants in part of the area, and also sufficient land to satisfy the wants of the local Chinese and others for some time to come. Applications from the Foochow were then called for, but not one was received in spite of the fact that the premium on this valuable land was subsidised by Government
248
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, DECEMBER 31, 1958
at the rate of $10 per acre. However, the land remains available for Foochows or others and there is little doubt that it will be taken up rapidly. A premium of $5 an acre for excellent rubber land by the side of a main road only a few miles from Lawas must be tempting.
Merapok: Little progress has been made in developing the valuable swamp at Merapok. This swamp is particularly fertile even by Lawas District standards and there is unlimited hill land about a mile away which is suitable for budded rubber. Water for the irrigation of this swamp must be obtained from the Mengalong river in the North Borneo and accordingly an approach was made to the District Officer in Beaufort for permission to canalise water from the Mengalong through some ten chains of his District into Sarawak. The District Officer, Beaufort, showed considerable interest in the project, as he saw the possibilities of developing his side of the swamp under a parallel scheme.
Permission for Sarawak to use this water was therefore not long in coming. However, no further progress was made as money has not been forthcoming to dig the necessary irrigation ditch. A sum of $6,000 would have been enough. Without these funds being made available it was considered inadvisable to look for settlers, as they would have no water when they arrived.
North Borneo in the meantime have pressed on with their side of the scheme and have dug some extremely satisfactory irrigation ditches on their side of the border which will be of great value to their people for this year's crop. It would appear to be a pity that the Sarawak part of the swamp cannot be developed if only from the point of view that our neighbours pest control difficulties will be enhanced by a lack of cultivation and control on their boundary.
It is understood that the District Officer, Beaufort, has been kind enough to arrange that one of their irrigation ditches will be taken to within a few yards of the boundary in order that it can be tapped by Sarawak Kampong Paterikan. This is very satisfactory as Paterikan is a most progressive kampong from an agriculture point of view and may be expected to make good use of the water.
It has been suggested that this swamp might be satisfactory for Iban migration; it does not seem likely North Borneo will view with favour their water being used to enable Ibans to learn how to plant swamp padi.
Agriculture
Padi: The harvest was severely affected by drought in all areas of hill padi cultivation. Murut cultivators around Lawas were only able to glean sufficient for seed. Long Semadoh and the ulu areas did somewhat better, and Bah Kelalan obtained its usual magnificent yield from swamp padi.
Il is a great pity that Malay and Kedayan cultivators abandoned their swamp for the hills. There are welcome signs that a number of them are returning to their swamps this year; particular interest has been shown by Malay cultivators in the excellent swamp across river from Sundar, and those at Merapok will probably be better used this year.
The Borneo Evangelical Mission made full use of a small Japanese tractor, costing about $1,000 and obtained remarkable results. This has stimulated considerable interest in Lawas District and several applica
tions have been received from persons who wish to borrow money from Government to purchase similar tractors on good security. No definite reply has yet been received to their requests.
Rubber: The low price of rubber particularly during the early part of the year resulted in a decrease of tapping. The increased price of the rubber dealer's licence, taken in conjunction with the low price of rubber, put four rubber dealers out of business.
Very great disappointment was felt by the majority of planters in the rubber subsidy scheme in the seedlings were not supplied in anything like adequate quantities.
Coffee: The interest formerly shown in budded rubber has switched to coffee, particularly among the Muruts. This is understandable, as coffee was introduced in a large scale to Mengalong some ten years ago, where it has proved very successful and has provided the North Borneo Muruts and Tagals with a steady and adequate income. Some of the best coffee is grown in the ulu areas without supervision. For this reason it was recommended that coffee seeds should be distributed to the ulu Trusan areas of this district. An attempt to solve the knotty question of husbandry is being made by propaganda; but the North Borneo Muruts do well on their own, and there is no reason why Sarawak Muruts should not succeed equally.
Coconuts: Malays are showing enthusiasm for the proposed coconut subsidy. There is little doubt that such a subsidy will considerably increase the area under this valuable crop.
General: As a result of intensive propaganda by the Department of Agriculture and the Administration, considerable enthusiasm has been aroused among the Kedayans and Tagals in the Merapok area. This has shown itself in very greatly increased planting of bananas, groundnuts, vegetables and other crops. Indeed, this is the first year that any considerable number of Tagals have planted anything but padi. This is a welcome trend among what must be the most poor, distressed and backward people in Sarawak.
Livestock: In 1956 an Assistant Veterinary Officer noted extremely high mortality in buffalo, cattle and pigs throughout the district but particularly in the ulu area. The upriver areas of this district contain sufficient pasture for perhaps ten or twenty times the present livestock population. It could supply meat sufficient for the needs of most of Sarawak. If sufficient encouragement and a guaranteed price was given to the stock owners in these areas, they would be prepared to utilise to the full their grazing lands and import additional stock from Indonesia.
Chickens: A severe outbreak of ranikhet disease occurred early in the year and ranikhet vaccine was distributed too late to assist infected flocks, though it may have contained the epidemic to some extent. One of the most progressive chicken farmers near Lawas lost the whole of his stock.
Education
Existing Schools: With one or two exceptions school attendance has increased satisfactorily throughout the district. Of eleven Local Authority schools only three have less than seventy students, and three have over one hundred. Attendance has also improved throughout though a fallng off among Malay schools was noted at the beginning of the new padi season. The Local Authority Education Committee has done much to promote interest and to improve standards. Standing Instructions for teachers and for
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, DECEMBER 31, 1958
249
School Committees have been issued, sports gear, tables and chairs for teachers, blackboards and various other apparatus, clocks and bells have been distributed throughout. New desks have been distributed to two schools. Afternoon classes as well as morning classes are now compulsory. Timetables have everywhere been revised and standardised. Scouting and other extra-curricular activities have been encouraged, as well as handwork, singing, etc. Although much remains to be desired in regard to improving the standard of untrained teachers, there is at least one qualified trained teacher to every large school; one school has two trained teachers.
New Schools: New schools were opened at Long Lutok and ulu Merapok. Buildings teachers' quartets and dormitories were provided by the people themselves to the required standard. Both these new schools have every prospect of success although that in the ulu Melapok was a doubtful experiment. This is the first school to be opened for the Tagals, who are extremely backward and who do not possess the population sufficient to feed the school adequately. It will remain a one teacher school; but at least it represents the first real attempt of the Tagals to better themselves.
Text books: Considerable difficulty has been experienced in providing the schools with adequate text books. The only supplier to be found by the Local Authority who has at all satisfactory was the Malayan Publishing House in Singapore. But even from there a number of text books were out of stock; other recommended text books were out of print and the district supply remains inadequate although some $2,500 has been spent.
With large numbers of school children and youths now emerging from primary IV, Lawas District particularly feels the dearth of suitable reading material to interest boys of this type. It is a problem which demands an early solution.
Two new schools have been recommended by the School Committee for opening next year, these are at Long Tengoa and Long Luping. When these schools have been opened every child will have a school within reasonable distance and there will remain no reason why compulsory education should not be brought in. As it is, it is estimated that about 70 per cent of the Murut children of school age are already in school; a census is being undertaken to confirm this estimate or otherwise.
Medical
Dispensaries: The two dispensaries at Sundar and Lawas have functioned adequately; no serious epidemics have been reported. The Sundar dispensary has treated 710 patients and the Lawas 3,489.
Midwives: Two trainee midwives have qualified during the half-year. One has been paid a retainer by the local authority and is practising in Lawas. She had only a disappointing number of deliveries to her credit, but no doubt these will increase in the course of time. One of the reasons for this is that the neighbouring kampongs are Malay or Chinese with their own so-called midwives, and they are reluctant to put their trust in so young a girl.
The other got off to a slow start owing to domestic difficulties, but she has now settled down to a job or work in Long Semadoh. She is not receiving assistance from the Local Authority, but is charging the women whom she assists $10 a confinement. This is not entirely satisfactory but lack of funds preclude a salary for both midwives; and adequate supervision is difficult in Long Semadoh.
Ulu Dressers: Three Ulu Dressers have returned to the district during the half-year and have been posted to Bah Kelalan, Long Semadoh and Long Luping. In the case of Long Semadoh and Long Luping, the
local people have put up, free of charge, a building adequate for use as a treatment centre. Long Semadoh has already a dispensary building put up by Government. Reports from the local people are entirely satisfactory and they appear to be providing excellent service. The ulu Dresser at Bah Kelalan, is, inter alia, providing a serivce for a large Indonesian population.
Epidemics: Nothing further has been heard of the rumoured diphtheria epidemic in the Kelabit plateau. A painful eye infection around Lawas refused to yield to other treatment than cortisone.
Travelling Dispensary: A Travelling Dispensary Service was inaugurated shortly before the arrival of the Ulu Dressers, who rendered dispensary visits to the ulu unnecessary. Jambol, an old style and knowledgable Medical Attendant, runs a weekly service to Pengaleh, Long Tuma, Merapok, Kuala Lawas, Punang and Awat-Awat. All these are places accessible by perahu, and have large schools. Jambol lectures in the schools, inspects the kampongs and bazaars, treats slightly sick and brings back the seriously sick for further treatment. He is approaching his various tasks intelligently, and has been responsible for a considerable improvement in general health. It is probably even more valuable that he has been able to disseminate a modicum of medical knowledge in these areas and therefore publicised the Government Medical Services.
Long Semadoh Dispensary: This was completed during the half-year.
Brunei Hospital and its many facilities have been very much at the disposal of the Lawas District during the half-year. X-ray and early treatment of tuberculosis has been particularly valuable.
Chinese Affairs
The prevailing mood in Lawas and Trusan bazaars is one of optimism in spite of the decline in rubber exports. The new bazaar site is nearly filled, and is ready for the commencement of the construction of the new bazaar. Traders are pleased with the layout and have agreed to build shophouses to a reasonably good standard on the lines of those in Simanggang. An increasing interest has been shown in land along the Trusan road. The airstrip is ready. In general the Chinese feel that Lawas is a developing area and that in ten or fifteen years Lawas may become a rich bazaar.
The failure of the Foochow to arrive has been the only set-back. But on the brighter side of the picture the Chinese realise that this means that a considerable acreage of very valuable land may be opened to their own occupation.
Lots in the new bazaar area have largely changed hands at as much as $4,200. More remarkably there has been competition between the Club and a Chinese trader to build on the extremely large and expensive cinema site. A building to an approved plan on this site would probably cost in the nature of $80,000.
There has been no decrease in the number of closed shophouses at Trusan but their owners are showing interest in reopening when the road is through. Merapok has completed four new and well-constructed shophouses. The traders there manage to keep remarkably cheerful in spite of having very little trade.
The Chinese in Sundar are building their hopes on the possibility that Government may eventually build a road to Trusan. If Sundar and Trusan are not linked, the Chinese there have very little hope for a prosperous future.
Land prices provide an interesting barometer of Chinese opinion. They are soaring at Lawas and Trusan. Sundar, Merapok and Punang remain low.
250
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, DECEMBER 31, 1958
Native Affairs
One of the most important events was the approval for the appointment of an Upriver Agent at Long Semadoh. This is a difficult and busy area capable of great development and a government representative there is assential.
At the beginning of the year all the leading Muruts met to discuss the formulation of a simple Murut code suitable for the changing conditions under which they are now living. This discussion forcefully indicated the immense difference between customs and punishments imposed by Native Chiefs even in nearby kampongs; it served to indicate the urgent need for some kind of guide for practical use by Chiefs. After considerable discussions a Draft Code was concocted which was unanimously accepted in all respects. This was forwarded to Kuching in February. No approval of it or otherwise is yet to hand. One valuable section, agreed to by all, was to control the sale price of Murut customary land to $15 per acre. This ruling, which has already been followed, has so far effectively controlled land speculation at which the Muruts were learning to be adept, chiefly at the expense of the Malays but also at the expense of Chinese. It speaks well of the fair mindedness of the Murut leaders that they agreed to this clause.
The position of Murut Wakil Penghulu remains invidious. They have but a small allowance, far insufficent to allow them to tour their areas, hence the majority of kampongs seldom see their chief, Control is therefore vested in Tua Kampongs who are inadequate for the task. Simple administration is rendered extraordinary difficult. In point of fact much of the authority for hearing cases and generally managing the affairs of the kampongs has, faux de mieux developed on the pastors of the Borneo Evangelical Mission. Repeated requests have not as yet resulted in the upgrading of their salaries or allowances, although some have far more difficult and extensive areas than the ordinary Iban Penghulu.
The Muruts continue to be progressive and very willing to learn. They are a most rewarding people to work with. Their one blind-spot is in the matter of hygiene. Even this is gradually improving.
In order to repopulate some of the under-populated Murut areas, a party of leading Muruts was sent to the Limbang in order to persuade the minority group of the Muruts there to move to Lawas or Trusan. Though it is believed that the majority of Limbang Muruts are willing to move, the mission failed, partly because of the opposition of a self-styled Murut leader in the Limbang, a Tabun, named Tua Kampong Bayong Palong, and partly because of a death in a Trusan Murut house at the time the Murut pagans from Limbang were visiting the Trusan. This was regarded as a bad omen. It is inevitable, however, that they will move sooner or later.
The most pressing Malay problem remains at Kuala Lawas where the heirs of the late Dato Pengiran Haji Matussein still retain rights to the land, although they have surrendered to Government certain other rights. They steadfastly refuse to permit any progress in their area, including a total prohibition for their people to use land for the cococunt or rubber subsidy scheme. This is resulting in increased hostility towards the heirs, who have neither the brains, nor the breadth of character, nor the compassion of the late Dato.
Educationally the Malays are unfortunately still lagging behind the more progressive Muruts, except in the main centres and larger kampongs. However, limited progress has been achieved.
There has been little political activity in the last six months. The Awat-Awat people have made it abundantly clear that their allegiance remains with Brunei. This is hardly surprising since they are always in contact with the Bruneis, fish in Brunei waters, and market their fish there; they are also Brunei by origin.
One of the most depressing Malay problems is the absence of so many young men from their kampongs who seek work in Brunei. The development that is going on may bring about the return of some, but it will be a slow process. This is the more unfortunate in that Lawas is already so under-populated and yet has such an abundance of rich land which could be used profitably.
Kedayans complaints that Muruts from North Borneo are coming across the border and using up their little remaining hill padi land in Merapok were settled at a border conference. The District Officer, Beaufort agreed to a total ban on their entry into Sarawak for farming.
Communications
Trusan Road: After a shaky start, when it was uncertain whether sufficient money was available to carry out this project satisfactorily, the Trusan Road has progressed very well. At the time of writing it has been levelled and graded very nearly to mile nine at Siang-Siang.
Ulu Trusan track: All work on this project other than maintenance has been discontinued.
Telecommunications: The V.H.F. telephone service has been improved during the half-year and it is now possible to reach Brunei and Labuan without undue difficulty. However, Miri and Kuching are usually only obtainable in the evenings and often not then.
An H.F. aerial has been erected in Lawas and has enabled communications with Barco. However, an H.F. set has not yet been installed in Long Semadoh. The land line between Trusan and Sundar has been discontinued to the great regret of the communities concerned.
Air services: A very fine airstrip at Lawas was completed except for terminal buildings. These last were delayed owing to the difficulty of obtaining a reasonable tender price for them. The strip was delayed slightly as a prolonged drought early in the year militated against the growth of grass. However, it was completed by the end of the half-year.
The improvement of the airstrip at Bah Kelalan (as at Bareo) raised high hopes among the ulu Muruts that they would be given an ulu air service, and indeed, it was thought that the Twin Pioneers had been purchased by Government for that very purpose. The disappointment was extreme when the Muruts were told that the Government had no such immediate intentions—the more so as the ulu Trusan track was abandoned and hopes of pony transport crumbled.
The Mission Auster continues to render these people valuable service.
A suitable site for an airstrip was found at Long Sukang where a strip could be completed for $11,000. It was at that time hoped that an air service, fortnightly or monthly, could be put into all these airstrips and render the further maintenance of the ulu Trusan track unnecessary, a saving of $6,000 annually in addition to a saving on capital expenditure of $30,000. However, any such project must remain dependent upon the Twin Pioneer being able to land on ulu airstrips and a service being inaugurated.
The APOH has plied continually twice and three times a week between Brunei, Limbang and Lawas. It always takes a full load.
Works
Apart from other items already mentioned the Public Works Department has undertaken a new pontoon wharf at Lawas and a new wharf at Trusan. These were satisfactorily approaching completion by the half-year.
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, DECEMBER 31, 1958
251
The new Government office at Sundar was completed during the first-half of the year and was opened by the late Mr. John Barcroft shortly before his death.
Miscellaneous
All other events were over-shadowed by the tragic death of Mr. John Barcroft in Lawas on the 6th June.
Kuching Letter
Recently there was in the vicinity of the Police Training School a storm of brief duration but astonishing violence, in the course of which considerable damage was done by falling trees and branches. An odd consequence was that when I used my telephone, dial what number I would, all that I got was the radio in the police canteen. Nowadays, with the automatic exchange, telephoning has lost its interest and is all too rarely enlivened by some aberration. In the old days, making a call was in itself a pastime, if not an adventure. One asked for people by name and not number, and very good service was given, for the operators could nearly always locate the desired person, though he were far from his normal telephone. One asked for “Tuan X”; the operator would reply "Sekarang di-Sylvia Bar”, and would connect with the bar accordingly; or he would reply "Sekarang sama Mem Y" and so one would cancel the call; occasionally one reached an impasse, as when the operator replied "Ta’ usah, sudah mabok". The boys who operated the switchboard were an intelligent body and would go to great lengths to locate the desired person, for this reason their occasional shortcomings were overlooked, though these could provoke passing irritation; as when a certain official, having vainly wound the handle of his telephone for a long time without effect, left his office and walked over to the exchange, where he disentangled the operator from a young woman and bade him connect as requested.
After the war the late William Gladstone Tait, then Postmaster-General, produced a telephone directory in which people and offices were given numbers. Many thought this both pretentious and unnecessary. In fact, it caused only delay and confusion, for certain officials newly arrived from Africa insisted upon asking for persons by number and not by name, so that the operator was compelled to refer to the directory to ascertain who was intended. I myself was strongly opposed to the directory; its futility was manifest when on one occasion I rang up and asked for my own telephone number. There followed a pause as the operator referred to his book, and then the reply "Tuan Nicholl sudah engaged." Which was, of course, perfectly true. The late Mr. Tait was himself something of a character. He used to relate that on one occasion while on leave, finding himself in London and in liquor, he was accosted by a constable who enquired “Who are you?", to which he replied expansively “I am the Postmaster-General of Sarawak”. "And I", said the constable, “am the King of England. Come inside.”
I noted with interest that the recent Sale of Work at the Kampong Lomba Kuda School coincided with the Landas Race Meeting. I have never known a Sale of Work concluded with such expedition, and by the third race practically the entire clientele had migrated to the Popular Enclosure, so that many who came expecting to return the poorer, in fact went home enriched. The value of such an occasion is that it enables wealthy spinsters and others forbidden by conscience or convention to gamble, to indulge without offence, for they can plead that they have lost their way and were under the impression that the Tote was part of the Sale of Work. The school could, in fact, acquire no small revenue by hiring out its premises on
race days to various charitable causes such as "The Naked Heathen,” “The Deserving Inebriates," "The Fallen Gentlewomen," "The Destitute Profligates," and so forth. Thus would charity be promoted, pleasure increased and the urchins profited.
Many of the tribulations which today beset the urchinry of Sarawak would be averted if the various religious bodies would devote some of their resources to the endowment of choirs. It is seldom remembered how many eminent Englishmen from Pope Adrian IV to Sir Arthur Sullivan (albeit he was really Irish) owed their education to choral endowments. The penurious urchin who could sing, or be made to sing, got a place in a choir which paid for his education. Thus the great tradition of choral music was maintained and countless deserving urchins educated. Today, alas, choral music is no more, having been killed by the improprieties of congregational singing, ecclesiastical wealth is misapplied, and deserving urchins perish in the gutter.
Similarly many a youth when his voice had broken secured his education by the higher mathematical pursuit of change ringing, which was also well endowed. Perhaps the only thing, apart from the weather, which can garnish a beautiful countryside is a well-rung peal of bells. Although in the less reputable parishes the ringers may be largely drawn from the village drunks (yet even here there is a saving in the rates), the more notable and better endowed teams of ringers always embrace a number of teen-agers, who thus ensure their sustenance. In such times as these might not the arts be promoted and education fostered by a better use of ecclesiastical wealth on traditional lines.
One can but note and deplore the cult of carols at Christmastide in Kuching; all that is worst in English tradition is foisted upon an unsuspecting populace. The carols, as their name implies, are the primative chorales and embody a tradition of folk song whose origins are lost in obscurity. They were not essentially limited to Christmas, though some of the most beautiful were associated with this season. In England they perished almost entirely during the two centuries following the Reformation; “God rest ye merry, Gentlemen,” (the position of the comma should be noted), is a mediaeval survival adapted in the seventeenth century. With the Oxford Movement, neogothic, and St. Pancras, there came a revived interest in carols and those which are current today were composed or adapted to suit Victorian taste. The infamous “While Shepherds swotch their flocks by night" is an Italian carol with English words. “Good King Wenceslaus" is the tune of the beautiful mediaeval song "Adsit jubilatio removens moerorem" put to words which only Victorian romantics could have devised. "Adeste Fideles" is of reputable age, being sixteenth century Portuguese. "Hark the herald Angels Sing" is an invention of the Devil. But the really beautiful English traditional carols such as "Sing we to this merry company, Regina Coeli Laetare", or "Noel sing we both all and some, for Rex Pacificus is y—come", are today seldom heard outside the Cathedrals or the Benedictine Abbeys, where the beauties of tradition are valued. If carols are to be introduced into Sarawak, let them be the best and not the trash.
Christmas in Kuching has been signalized by a reunion of former Private Secretaries. As some of these are now married, and many have become pillars of respectability, one wonders what was the tenor of the feast. Gatherings of reformed persons are always embarrassing: should the theme be the blessings of the virtuous estate, or a nostalgic reminiscing of the good old days of licence?
Robert Nicholl.
252
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, DECEMBER 31, 1958
Water Sport
The Kuching Boat Club seems to be fairly well established after over four years of constant effort. The small band of enthusiasts who gathered together in 1954 really meant what they said when they agreed that the objects of the proposed club would be to "encourage and develop water sports of all kinds" and they have always worked along those lines.
The first two, and always difficult, problems were to arouse interest and raise money. Both aims were achieved by means of outboard race meetings. The first meeting aroused much interest and subsequent meetings, a certain amount of money. This money was used to provide prizes and trophies, in which the club was greatly helped by many generous donors, and to improve the meetings.
In a river with the current, and rise and fall, of the Sarawak River at Kuching, things would be difficult in any case but when are added such hazards as floating debris of all kinds, half submerged nipah fronds, and even whole nipah palms like floating islands, to say nothing of ocean-going ships leaving on the tide, the difficulties can well be imagined. However, despite course marker-buoys departing rapidly seawards with the current, or simply disappearing below the surface with the rush of water, and anchors dragging and picking up the main electric cable, the races have always been run on time before a large and enthusiastic-crowd.
The technique of running such meetings has greatly improved since the first efforts with their flag waving and false starts, through the boy-scout-bicycle-chain operated starting clock to the present system where the electric clock, starter and judges are all mounted, with unobstructed view, on the top of the Chinese Chamber of Commerce. Much interest, too, has been aroused, and improvements made, in the technique and practice of boat-building and engine maintenance. Both of which must be greatly to the general good.
The Club has not rested here, though, but has pushed ahead with its aim of encouraging and developing water sports of all kinds. During the year 1958, with some of the money raised at outboard race meetings, the Club started on a bold scheme of expansion. A large outboard-motor launch was purchased, together with an engine, as were also two pairs of water skis, one pair most excellently made by a local firm of carpenters. These all have seen much service at Santubong and many people have used them to learn the pleasure and thrill of skimming along over the water's surface. Many members too have taken advantage of the twice monthly trips to Santubong (or elsewhere) to swim and others have recaptured the somewhat less energetic pleasure of an afternoon nap in a deck chair by the sea. Still others, exercising that old English sport of progressing from bar to bar, have occasionally given a shophouse at Santubong a certain resemblance to an English country pub.
The section which deserves a very large measure of support, but which is as yet still on its baby legs, is the sailing section. The boys at the Sarawak Boys' Home, in 1957, made a fifteen-foot, centre-board sailing dinghy, to a nondescript American design and this the Boat Club bought as its first sailing boat. And an excellent sailer for beginners Burong Madu turned out to be—as steady as a rock and almost impossible to capsize. At about the same time, early 1958, the club also acquired two old Snipe class dinghies from the Royal Brunei Yacht Club. Although these have required a great deal of maintenance to keep them going yet the three together have formed a useful nucleus for a sailing group. With this little experience in sail boats the club has finally decided to concentrate on the Enterprise class which would seem most suitable for the
purpose here. An appeal was launched for funds to purchase two of these thirteen-foot dinghies (to be built in Kuching) but, inspite of a very generous contribution from the President of the Club, Sir Ernest Williams, enough money to buy these two craft has not yet materialised. However, the Club still presses on and it is doubtless that the boats will appear during 1959.
With two Snipe and two Enterprise it will be possible to form two equal, if very small, teams so that visiting sailors from, say, Brunei or North Borneo, could be invited down to compete against Kuching sailors. Such an event would be sure to arouse a very great deal of interest and would materially help to get things going.
Snoozing, swimming, ski-ing, outboarding, and sailing are, together, a fair contribution to the encouragement and development of all forms of water sport! The Kuching Boat Club has them all. And what next? Some people are said to be interested in goggle and aqua-lung diving. . . .
Problems of English in Chinese Schools
The problems confronting Chinese schools are many, but the most important and pressing one is, “How to raise the standard of English there?”
At present, due to the prevalent low standard of English, many students are obliged to leave after completing either primary, or junior middle school. In the process of switching from Chinese schools to English schools, difficulties and complications in admission are more the rule than exception.
It may be asked, of course, that, since the parents of these students, or the students themselves, are so keen on a Chinese education, why don't they stick on? Conversely, if they are so desirous of an English education, why don't they send their children to the English schools in the first place?
This seeming paradox may not be appreciated by Europeans, though most Chinese will readily see the point. When parents send their children to school, their primary aim is to get them educated. Education, being tied up with language, customs and culture, remains a very delicate matter. Hence, most English parents would prefer to send their children to be educated "at home". Malays would like their children learn a workable Jawi, and the Chinese their children to have a primary Chinese education.
This aspiration does not necessarily symbolise nationalism, nor should it be interpreted as such, for the simple reason that every people must take root on something, such as traditions, customs, language and culture which, as they must appear to them, are essential and vital.
Most Chinese parents realise and agree with the popular argument that it is a poor financial investment to send their children to Chinese schools which will lead to a “dead end”, yet they continue to do it. There must be very compelling reasons to do so from their point of view. They argue, inter alia, that if their children are exclusively English-educated, they will be having total strangers in their house; very probably, they will not even be able to speak their mother tongue correctly.
Then come the problems of morals. Whatever their shortcomings, the Chinese are convinced that their conceptions of morals are superior. They are convinced that by sending their children to Chinese schools, they will also learn to be guided by a standard of morals that they know and understand. Therefore, when a Chinese hears of something being committed or certain moral acts not committed, he does not hesitate to exclaim: "Ah! He has not been educated in a Chinese school", which implies, of course, that a different
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, DECEMBER 31, 1958
253
standard of morals has been taught there. This may be prejudice pure and simple, but it is their conviction nonetheless.
There is no intention to probe into or criticise the merits or demerits of the Chinese versus the English schools, or between Occidental and Oriental morals and culture. The point stressed is, this is their conviction. While they do not dispute that an English education would pave the way for Government scholarships, professional training and white-collar jobs for their children, they find it difficult to forsake that conviction, viz: their children would be more Chinese in every aspect if they had attended Chinese schools for sometime than otherwise.
The dilemma that confronts the Chinese parents may be real or imaginary. However their aspiration should not be viewed as either a discrimination against, or opposition to, their children receiving an English education. On the contrary, while convinced that a Chinese education would give their children a more solid Chinese character, they are equally aware of the glaring fact that a technical or professional training will promise their children a better and brighter future. And the most practical and convenient approach to attain this is via an English education.
The solution lies not in depriving the Chinese school students of an opportunity to be Chinese-educated but to remedy that paradoxical situation whereby they should be given more time and opportunity for the study of English in the Chinese schools.
That a higher standard of English may be attained by Chinese students studying in Chinese middle schools is not mere conjecture or innovation, for such had already been experimented and practised with considerable success by such well-known institutions as the Pui Cheng, Pui Ying, Lingnan Middle School, True Light, Pui Tao and many other middle schools of Canton before 1950. The same may be said of middle schools in Hong Kong today. There, in addition to Chinese and English, science and mathematical subjects were taught in English. As a result graduates of these middle schools were eligible for admission into such universities as St. John's, Shanghai University, Yenching, Lingnan and other American Universities where English was the only medium of instruction.
Assuming that the standard of English could and should be raised in Chinese schools, it would be preferable to appoint principals or headmasters who have been educated in both Chinese and English. More experienced English teachers will have to be produced from somewhere and, considering that only degreed men are accorded attractive salaries, the prospect of enlisting local talent is none too bright, for the simple reason that neither Batu Lintang nor the Higher School graduates would be too anxious to cast in their lot with Chinese schools where, in some at least, conditions and developments can be such as to render a serene teaching atmosphere almost impossible. Therefore, in considering the raising of English standards in Chinese schools, the procurement of suitable English teachers remains insurmountable, unless Higher School graduates and experienced English teachers can be induced to come and stay on.
Like many parts of the world, this country is combating the infiltration and spread of subversive ideologies. In Singapore there is a marked division of the English-educated and the Chinese-educated. Language barriers can cause misunderstandings and even create havoc in spite of the fact that language is no determinator of any ideology. The popularising and raising of the standard of English in Chinese schools should, to a certain extent, solve some of the problems, such as sweeping off language barriers, giving the students more opportunities to study and thus obtain a technical education, and levelling out the division between the Chinese-educated and the English-educated, that may become more marked as time progresses and if allowed to continue. The Chinese may be good linguists, in the
sense that they readily pick up "Bazaar Malay" or a workable Iban, but not so in picking up English. And the only place where they can learn it is still in the class-rooms be they of the regular or night school.
Disregarding what the nationalists or the philologists have got to say, it is folly to attempt to introduce or enforce any language as a unifying national language in this country. In the struggles of languages, some will dominate the world scene, no matter whether one likes it or not. Of these English will be the major one, and no matter how prejudicial or discriminating one may be, it is hard not to see that English will command that ascendancy for at least another century.
While it is not disputed that every nation or people on earth should enjoy the inalienable right of speaking and using their own mother tongue, the grim fact that certain languages do and will dominate the changing world scene must not be ignored. In the case of the Chinese, Mandarin has been forging ahead to the exclusion of the other Chinese dialects because more and more Chinese schools have adopted it as the medium of instruction.
The English language has been “sold” in this country during the past century, therefore, it is deep-rooted. However, this is no ground to conclude that a superior commodity needs nothing more than just itself in order to keep selling well. More English must be "sold" to the Chinese schools and the younger generations in general. There is little doubt that Chinese leaders, such as members of the Boards of Management, will readily see the point and the issues involved. The allegation that a Chinese education would lead to a “dead end” may be debatable but a strong infusion of English into Chinese schools will, without the least shadow of doubt, prove to be most desirable and beneficial for all concerned.
Diary of a Sedentary Officer Holiday Extracts — I
Edited by
J. P. Rull
23rd. To start off the round of Christmas Festivities Eva and I went to the Radio Sarawak All Star Variety Show. We found it most enjoyable, especially the carols. Only one item I thought in rather bad taste was the scene put on by the dramatic club. It had been very under-rehearsed, moustaches kept falling off. cues were missed, properties came to pieces, and the whole thing was laughed off the stage. Cardby took a leading part in it. As I used to be in the dramatic club, I took the producer, Bairstow, to task. He tried to make out that all the contretemps were part of the act. “If that is so,” I said "It makes it worse. To get up and play the fool, and ridicule the Royal Navy, in front of the whole town, and His Excellency too, shows a very poor sense of propriety.” Bairstow muttered something about the ability to laugh at himself being the Englishman’s sole redeeming virtue.
I’m glad to say that both Claverton, of Pacific Insurance and Investment Trusts, and Gresham of the Treasury (both very senior men) agreed with my view. There are so many good, suitable works from the great heritage of English drama they could have done instead. I have a book of short dramatized excerpts from Sir Walter Scott’s historical novels which I should have been only too pleased to have lent to the club. Something of Kipling’s, too, would have been most appropriate.
24th. Busy preparing for Christmas. Left office early to buy Eva's present. Eventually went to the record shop and bought her a record I have long had my eye on: Immortal Melodies from the Masters, rendered by Liberace and the Detroit Philharmonia
254
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, DECEMBER 31, 1958
Orchestra. Although Eva does not greatly care for what she laughingly calls the "more stodgy" classics, I feel sure she will enjoy this.
25th. Christmas Day. Church and carols in the morning, then quickly back to put the turkey in. The Waters’s and Page-Whitely’s came to Christmas lunch, Eva's usual wonderful spread, with two bottles of Rhinegold (served chilled, of course—I know my Raymond Postgate!). Could not get the pudding to light—in spite of pouring almost a quarter of a bottle
of brandy on it. Eventually Eva added some surgical spirit from her medicine chest, and just as we were dispairing, the whole lot went off Whoof! and set fire to my paper hat. Page-Whitely was rather too uproariously amused for my liking, as I only just escaped being badly burned. Then he was rather offensive about the pudding—"Like eating Elastoplast," he said. Eva put out. There was only a slight flavour of surgical spirit, and any comment was quite uncalled for. Page-Whitely kept going on over coffee about his new Vauxhall, trotting out a lot of statistics about compression ratios, torque, and I don’t know what. Personally, I don't like the look of it, and as I said to Eva (privately, of course) the rear lights remind me of nothing so much as a pair of w.c. seats. I must say I was rather pleased when Page-Whitely (showing off by reversing furiously) badly scraped the rear mudguard while leaving. But then felt rather ashamed of such a mean feeling at Christmas time.
Children's Party in the afternoon. P.-W.'s. Waters's. Thwaites's, etc. A great success on the whole. Again slightly marred by Page-Whitely, who insisted on being Father Christmas (though I have always considered that to be my prerogative) and appropriated my new Father Christmas mask and beard that I had sent out from England. Of course it was an entirely trivial incident, and I was not in the slightest concerned, but I record it here because it does show light on P.-W.'s character, and his way of pushing himself into the lime-light.
Adrian Thwaites was a perfect pest, showing off, teasing the girls, and punching our Christopher; later he smeared ice cream all over Eva's new cushion covers. His mother made no attempt to suppress him. I felt like boxing his ears, and in fact I did box his ears while his mother was out of the room, with a very salutary effect. The Christmas tree looked quite nice, although half of the lights went out at one stage, and I got a nasty shock trying to repair them. It was only a Casuarina tree, of course, and had been cut too soon, with the result that most of the leaves had fallen off. After "The tumult and the shouting” had died, I sat and looked at the tree and could not suppress a pang of regret when thinking of the good old Christmasses in Purley. It's not the same out here somehow. The climate is, of course, different.
Christmas Dinner at the Waters's. Page-Whitely's were there, and he continued talking loudly all through the messages coming in from all over the Commonwealth. I was most annoyed, especially as one of the speakers, an old man of 100, lives not far from where my sister used to live in Pembrokeshire. How Page-Whitely manages to eat and drink so much is a mystery.
26th. Boxing Day. Stayed in bed until 11.30, as not feeling very well. Perhaps a touch of gastric influenza. Read Courier—a very well-illustrated and politically sound magazine. A quiet lunch. Elvin Waters dropped in at tea time, with the news that Page-Whitely is unwell—says he "thinks it's a touch of the old malaria coming back". I am not surprised— malaria, indeed! It is purely the result of self-indulgence, as I did not hesitate to inform Elvin.
27th. Back at work to-day, but difficult to buckle down to routine. Putting finishing touches to draft estimates. I have invented some new sub-heads of quite brilliant comprehensive vagueness. Director impressed.
Cocktail party at the Clavertons (Pacific Insurance) to-night. I must say their house is much better furnished that the Government ones. Young Bairstow, the new etymologist, was complaining bitterly that the government would not let him import an air pistol. I'm not surprised at the decision, and consider it very prudent. I have been at Bairstow’s flat, and there were left-wing publications lying around (Manchester Guardian Weekly, New Statesman, and such), and books about politics quite openly displayed on the shelves. Again, he frequently expresses very radical opinions, such as at the time of the Suez Police Action, when he was openly critical of Sir Anthony Eden, and he is known to be against H-bombs, and so on. As I said to him. "The difference between an H-bomb and an air pistol is only one of degree, after all, so you should be the first to submit to the unilateral disarmament you’re always advocating." This sally went down quite well.
28th. Cardby’s wife arrived to-day. I must say I was most surprised to learn that he even had a wife; there is certainly nothing in his mien or conduct to suggest it. Although we heartily detest Cardby (especially since that incident with the satays) Eva and I went down to meet her on the Rajah Brooke, in the interest of office solidarity (and perhaps feminine curiosity on the part of Eva), Mrs. Cardby (he calls her “Lolo”) turned out to be a very personable young lady, in spite of a tendency to flightiness and a dress which was much too fashionable for Kuching. Cardby insisted on opening up the bar and made us all drink Champagne (at 9 o'clock in the morning!).
29th. Uneventful.
30th. There's no accounting for women. Eva insists that we invite the Cardby's to our table at the club for New Year's Eve, and what is more they are coming. I should have thought that after all the insults, annoyances, and embarrassments we have had to bear from that man, she would have learnt her lesson. I can only hope that the presence of his wife will act as a restraining influence.
31st. Putting finishing touches to our costumes for the Gala Fancy Dress Ball to-night.
(To be continued)
CORRESPONDENCE
The Editor,
Sarawak Gazette,
Kuching.
12th December, 1958.
Sir,
Your editorial comment on the passing of the Museum Zoo is to the point and as the person who had much to do with the day-to-day supervision of it in recent years, I should like to put in the Gazette a record of why it went, which is certainly sad.
Before the Japanese Occupation the then Curator, Mr. E. Banks, ran a small Zoo in the Museum Gardens, which were actually part of the Museum then. After the war, these gardens were taken over by the Municipal Board. But the interest was all in plants and none in animals. All the same, animals kept on coming in, some of them confiscated as illegally owned, others injured or astray. So the present Curator gradually found a Zoo growing on him, but in the very small space, still left under Museum jurisdiction behind the Library and where the new museum building is now.
This Zoo got bigger and bigger. The price of foodstuff has also increased, as we all too well know. Then the available space was cut further by the erection of the new building.
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, DECEMBER 31, 1958
255
What with one thing and another, it gradually became more and more difficult to run the Zoo properly. Most of the public loved the monkeys and maias, storks and cassowary and squirrels and the crocodile we had from the egg. But the more educated quite naturally noticed that as the Zoo got more and more animals, and more and more expensive, and also more and more popular too, the standards of caging and hygiene were not really up to modern standards. It was a constant battle to make ends meet. I mean ends of wire and planks as well as raw meat for the crocodile and fresh egg for the orang utan. Also, we had a lot of trouble with the new generation, more and more teasing and barking the animals. We have not enough staff to check that all day and everyday.
Things came to a head last year when it was decided that it was unsafe to go on housing the valuable but highly inflammable spirit collections of fish, frogs, snakes, etc. in the Old Building. A new separate quarter had to be built for them. The only place for it was where the Zoo was.
At this stage the Curator and I felt a bit badly. We wanted the public to enjoy seeing Sarawak animals most of them could never hope to see wild. We also felt we did a little good by caring for rare animals no longer able to fend for themselves. But what could we do? More funds were not available. Unless we were to put in for a whole new big section of the Museum and get the Zoo on to a really decent basis for all to see. But this would be more of a job for someone else, not the Museum, surely.
Approaches to other bodies did not have any success. No one was interested and there was even long delay in acknowledging our letters at all! So H. E. ruled that the best thing was to disband the Zoo, nothing else to be done. Which was done, the whole collection behind the Library going to the Taronga National Park at Sydney, Australia, all expenses paid by Sir Edward Hallstrom, kindly arranged by Mr. L. H. Minchin of Colonial Timber Company, Sarikei, except for two adult storks to Bako. The Zoo orang, Charlie, is now flourishing in Sydney, as are all the others. Two other maias, which Mrs. Harrisson nursed back to life in Pig Lane, have gone separately by air to the very famous ape houses at San Diego, in U.S.A., and Berlin, Germany.
We still are nursing three more maias at present. One more just died inspite of treatment received from the veterinary clinic and special care given by us; it never recovered from its cruel treatment as a tiny baby. Otherwise we no longer can accept animals except on the instructions of the Game Warden or temporarily to help out in an emergency.
But we all feel quite sorry not to have a Zoo any longer. It kept sometimes the day museum work alive somehow. So we should be very glad at any time to help any organisation set up to start a proper Zoo in Sarawak. We know about treatment, feeding and all that. Wasli, Ina and Bidai are Museum attendants with a knowledge of care for wild animals.
It actually seems a pity that the ordinary townsfolk of Sarawak, and the many others who can never travel far inland, may not see the many exciting birds and animals of their country. But it has to be done properly, which is quite expensive. But certain it is that a good Zoo would attract very many visitors from far and near who would for sure be ready to PAY TO GO IN and make it self-supporting.
Yours faithfully,
George Jamuh,
Assistant Curator,
Sarawak Museum.
23rd December, 1958.
The Editor,
Sarawak Gazette,
Kuching.
Sir,
I am writing to answer Mr. Urquhart. First of all Mr. Urquhart must know that never for a moment have I ever considered that Saribas is standard Iban. The Scott Dictionary came to be reviewed and I feel that most of the words which have unsteady spellings should have proper spellings, so as to be easily understood not only by the Saribas themselves but by people all over Sarawak.
Scott's Dictionary, has produced a disturbing controversy, still going on till this day. The author, who never set foot on Sarawak soil, had apparently everything quietly in his hands before a Sea Dayak Language Exploratory Committee in Sarawak was formed, to advise Government on this very subject. It was formed and in the middle of its meetings and recommendations there arrived, finished, Scott's Dictionary. Just think of that.
Of course the Dictionary never came from Saribas. It was purely done in London. But the main informant, the only informant actually, was a Saribas Dayak. If Mr. Urquhart is right in his remarks, how does he explain that Mr. Gerunsin provided the words which Mr. Scott wrote down.
Complaints from Ibans about the language used in Radio Sarawak, in Pembrita and elsewhere are not my business. As Mr. Urquhart is a District Officer himself, full of Native studies, he should know why the Saribas variety of language is used. Do we have enough of Undups, Ulu Ais and Lemanaks in Kuching, who could have started like the Saribas varieties have done?
I respect Mr. Urquhart's guess. But the lower Skrang or lower Undup does not differ from the Saribas to any extent. So we who are Dayaks, needn't worry over that matter.
Benedict Sandin,
Kuching.
From Kuching to United Kingdom
With the best wishes of my family and friends, I proceeded to Singapore in a Malayan Airways Dakota on 9th September, 1958. It was not a good day for air travel. Clouds were thickly patched on the way. Air pockets caused the plane to sink and rise constantly. The sign “fasten your straps” was shown several times. Fortunately, there was no air sickness among the passengers. In spite of the bad weather, the skilful aviators brought us safely to Singapore at the end of the day.
On the 11th September, 1958, I and thirty people seated ourselves in reclinable armchairs in a giant Britannia—B.O.A.C. plane, which was on its way from Singapore to London. Throughout the flight, the cabin staff were always at hand to give us every attention. Frequent announcements were made through the loudspeaker to tell the passengers times of take off, places to land, height of flying and the necessary documents for inspection. For safety, passengers were shown how to wear a life jacket and where to find the emergency exits. Every service was given to satisfy the requirements of passengers. When we were leaving Teheran Airport at midnight, everybody slept soundly. I felt very cold and pressed the call button. The stewardess came at once and brought me a blanket. She gave me a cup of hot water and said, "You will be
256
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, DECEMBER 31, 1958
better after drinking." I was so delighted with the excellent service. Because the journey was too long, the crews and the cabin staff had their service in turn. While we stopped at Delhi, Beirut and Frankfurt-on-Main, new crews and cabin staff took over the duty from the old ones.
The plane flew on as if to chase after the sun. Some passengers adjusted their time according to the announcement, but I purposely kept my watch to Sarawak time just to experience the interesting changes in various places.
Our first stop was Kuala Lumpur (local time 9.45 a m. Sarawak time 10.15 a.m.) where a number of Malayan students came in the plane for United Kingdom. 1.10 p.m. (Sarawak time 2.55 p.m.) we were in Rangoon Air Port, where a big wall picture of a Buddhist legend was displayed. The signature of the artist was Ba Kyi, whose painting had a strong Indian flavour. We flew over the padi fields of Rangoon and the Bay of Bengal and we then came to a big city at which we did not stop. We presumed it was Calcutta, from which a big area of arable land stretched to Delhi. It was a very fine evening. We landed at the airport at 6.15 p.m. (Sarawak time 8.30 p.m.) There was a stall offering for sale fine Indian handicrafts. Some of us bought quite a number of them.
When we were going to land at Karachi (9.15 local time, Sarawak time 12 p.m.) a wonderful view was sighted. Lights of all kinds glittered as if of diamonds scattered on the ground. Not very far from the airfield, there was a B.O.A.C. hostel, where we enjoyed bathing and an hour rest. The waiters wore their traditional costumes, which were delightful to look at.
The next stop was Teheran (local time 1.40 p.m., Sarawak time 6.10 a.m. 12/9/1958). Health officers came to the plane and inspected the health certificates with a view to avoiding some passengers, who came from cholera epidemic countries, to step out off the aircraft. Owing to too much time taken for checking, the plane had to fly at the scheduled time. None of us could leave it.
Early in the morning (local time 5.30 a.m., Sarawak time 11.45 a.m.) we walked to the transit restaurant of Beruit for our tea. There were tanks, camps and military airplanes on the airfield. American soldiers were working on a trench. Two planes were dropping parachute troops. It was so attractive that we walked to the veranda to have a good look. Suddenly an Arabic waitress came to stop us saying "soo, soo." After some interpretation, we knew that we were not allowed to expose ourselves in a big group, because there had been shooting recently. Some naughty passengers repeated "soo, soo" which meant “shoot, shoot" and made the crowd laugh. When we left Beirut, we saw five battleships cruising in the sea.
Having passed Cyprus, our plane turned to Austria, and enabled us to view the famous snow-capped Alps. An English woman showed me several peculiar peaks and a glacier, which were just like a geographic model in our schools.
We arrived at Frankfurt-on-Main at 12.40 p.m. (Sarawak time 7.40 p.m.) Passengers began to feel cold. Another three hours flying and we reached our last destination—London. It was, local time, 3.45 p.m. (Sarawak time 10.45 p.m.) I should confess that I had the most pleasant and comfortable journey I had ever had.
On my arrival at London Airport, a British Council representative met me at "Airways Terminal". He sent me to the British Council Residence, Queen's Garden, London, where I stayed for two weeks in transit to Winchester.
I attended a three-day introduction course sponsored by the British Council. A party of thirty overseas students from various parts of the British Commonwealth, we learned how to adapt ourselves to our new environment. Among the group, four of us came from
Sarawak: Mr. T. M. Chin, Mr. W. T. K. Tang, two administrative officers, S. B. Hon of P. W D. and myself. Under the representatives of the British Council, we visited London Zoo, Westminster Abbey and the Tower of London. All were attractive and impressive objects, each of which has a long history itself.
The first thing to bother me was the weather, which made me feel a sudden chill. I had to wear more clothes to keep myself warm. The other was the food, in which the flavour and style of cooking were entirely different from ours. It upset my stomach for a few days. Whenever I seated myself in dining hall, I thought of home.
Being a stranger, I tried to go round the city as far as I could. I did not lose myself in this nine millions people's city, for the helpful policemen always guided me to the right destination. One afternoon, Mr. Tang, Mr. Chin and I were very hungry. We could see no snack bar in Regent Street. We went to a policeman, who showed us the places where we could have our lunch.
London appeared to be a mixture of innumerable streets, which were side by side with mass buildings, narrow courts, alleys and historical monuments. When I walked out from the Tower of London to Westminster Abbey and then to Oxford Street, I found almost every variety of architecture ranging from a piece of old Roman wall to the most modern building. London itself was really a huge gallery.
Everything in London seemed to be moving. Cars, taxis, buses and pedestrians were always rushing madly in the streets. One day, when I was in the tube on my way to the platform, hundreds of people, both men and women, walked at a high speed. In order to avoid the pushing from the back, I too had to follow their steps. I asked a Londoner why they were always in a hurry. Two reasons were given: one was the cold weather which forced them to walk fast to keep themselves warm, and the other was that they had to finish many things in a very short time.
In the train, many people read newspapers and seldom talked to each other. But they argued strongly at Hyde Park Corner, where people often conducted speeches on all subjects on whatever they liked to speak in the public. Policemen were standing nearby and no interference was taken against any speaker, who might sometimes talk beyond the point of view in certain cases. Freedom of speech in London was deserving of hearty praise in many countries.
Automatic sales were very popular in this country. One could get his train tickets, cigarettes, chocolate or stamp any time he wished provided he put a sufficient amount of money into the machines. In some parts of London there were heaps of newspapers of different kinds exposed at certain baskets or stalls on sale. Each paper had its fixed price. No seller attended the business. Those who wished to buy a copy, would pay the exact value for it. No person would take more papers than he had paid for. Such a system could rarely be seen in other countries.
Parks were another distinguished master-piece of the British people. Beautiful flowers, paths and trees were so naturally and skillfuly planned that you would forget all about your fatigue and worry. Without parks, London would lose half of her beauty.
Time seemed to be very short. I had to step into a train at Waterloo station and say good-bye to the World's greatest city—London.
After one-and-half-hours journey, I was in Winchester, the old capital of England, where I was admitted in King Alfred's College on an in-service training course. I am a boarding student and live in the College hostel, where most European students are. Good relations and co-operation are closely secured. We study together in a harmonious way as if we were a big family so that it makes my life happier despite the severe cold weather which attacks me.
LEE KOK YIN.
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, DECEMBER 31, 1958
257
“Five Hundred Centuries of Borneo Man”
A Review
Mr. Peter Davies' first public act since his return from leave was to introduce the production team of this wholly Sarawak film at its Sarawak premiere on Thursday night, 18th December.
Presented jointly by the British Council and the Sarawak Museum to a full house in the William Tan Auditorium of St. Joseph's School, the film was shot in Kodachrome by Mr. K. F. Wong, A.R.P.S. in the Niah River and Caves, produced and edited by Barbara Harrisson, under the scientific direction of Tom Harrisson who gave a live commentary throughout its forty minutes running time. The film is at present silent, 16 mm. Eastmancolor, and the only copy yet printed.
While Boy Scouts took a collection for the Mental Hospital Christmas Fund, Mr. Harrisson prefaced the film with credits to all concerned (which include Sarawak Shell Oilfields Ltd. and Henry Waugh & Co., Ltd.) and an elaboration of the techniques, problems and costs of the film's production.
The film's location is strictly Niah; its time range is (with scant apology to its Catholic hosts) from anthropoid ape to anthropos var. Harrissoni. A scene illustrating the shambling gait (rear view) of its scientific adviser disappearing into the darkness of the cave tends to support the unequivocally evolutionary premiss of the film.
The film opens with shots of orang utan and loris and such old fashioned creatures as scaly anteater, hornbill and adjutant storks, the bones of which have been identified and are numerous in the archaeological diggings of the Niah caves which honeycomb Gunong Subis, to which the camera now turns.
I wish the commentary had drawn attention earlier to the size of the Great Cave mouth in relation to human figures. Its dimensions do not automatically strike home from the several, nevertheless very impressive, shots of, and through, it.
Film and narrative here concentrate upon Niah man; his environment, the cave and its surrounding; his food, the birds, bats, shellfish and terrestrial and arboreal creatures whose remains abound. We are shown how bats were caught by fire, cooked and eaten. I did not find Mr. Wong's standard of acting at the bat banquet very convincing!
Down in the diggings the archaeological team are shown at work. Finds are seen in situ and in various stages of collection. The Curator is seen working on a theory of major, ancient human disturbance of the deposits. His experienced Santubong Malay diggers receive high praise and obviously enjoy their life and work unearthing the unknown.
A short sequence splendidly illustrates the high-level pole-climbing techniques of edible birds'-nesting.
From cave man to a more recent society, presumed to have lived in houses but who put their dead to rest in high caverns with local and imported China pottery, and so to modern Iban, is a long transition covered in a few short sequences prompting many questions. I thought it a pity the local Penan did not enter the picture here, but appreciate the difficulties of persuading “Penan masok Melayu" to act primitive.
The Iban, however, who settled in Niah first in 1934 (S.M.J. No. 10, N.S., p. 133), served well to point the survival or slow evolution of some primitive techniques: his use of the prehensile toe in paring cane; his adze, now iron replacing stone, lashed in an aboriginal shaft, etc.
An attempt to make fire by wood friction was less successful. I wonder if this was in fact done by
Niah man? Fire making by flint on bamboo and on metal, and by percussion arc variously known in parts of Borneo, but not apparently at Niah.
The sequence on making a blowpipe is almost certainly unique and it is surprising to find this still done in Niah today. Not having seen the operation myself I was surprised to hear that water was used to control heat at the drill point. I would not have thought such pressure and speed possible by the primitive hand methods illustrated. Water does also serve to float the chips out.
There is humour in the film, and one feels sure that this will be exploited when a sound version is produced. Tom's running commentaries give opportunity to try out various treatments of these situations: the handshake of a caver up from the underworld; Barbara disappearing head first into a cliff-face catacomb, and many more which elicited laughs from the audience.
The incidental animals add interest: civet cat marauding, binturong up a tree, cave centipede, "kachau-ing” porcupine, clouded leopard, and a perky little unnamed Disney creature scampering along behind a bathing party. The animals in the film, alone, could make up an educational short.
One felt that the guano industry received grudging notice. Mr. Harrisson does not even rate guano good manure. To be at once Curator of archaeological remains and Conservator of bat guano must, of course, set up conflict—especially when both occupy the same space.
Mr. Harrisson is certainly right in praising the photographer for a high-quality film of exceptional subject interest, made in most difficult lighting and working conditions. The editing has been well done but could perhaps be carried even further when commentary has been perfected for recording. The resultant production will then be an instructional and general-interest film of high merit and I see no reason why it should not make money commercially.
The promoters of this most interesting evening were probably right in not giving opportunity for questions. There would have been too many. But to try the film out on a small questioning audience would no doubt suggest points which could then he dealt with in narrative. (Mr Harrisson tells me that a series of showings with this in mind is already planned during the next month or two.)
I noticed one feature of cave-man etiquette which I would like to see spread—the way Mrs. Harrisson cared for her husband's dry speaker's throat!
R.A.B.
Book Review
Agriculture nomade, Volume I Congo beige; C te
d'Ivoire.
(FAO Rome; 10/- or $2.00 U.S.A.)
The first part of this volume deals with shifting cultivation (bush fallow) in the Equatorial Rain Forest of the Belgian Congo and is practically identical with that practised in the hill-lands of Sarawak. The second part deals with a comparable but slightly more complex system practised in the mixed Rain Forest and Savana-Woodlands of the Ivory Coast, French West Africa by a somewhat more advanced people. Shifting agriculture is not necessarily had agriculture; given the climatic circumstances of high temperature and rainfall from which follows dense primary forest and, usually, poor soils, it is probably the easiest and most economical of labour of all the possible systems of agriculture but it wastes enormous amounts of timber and, if overdone it denudes and impoverishes
258
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, DECEMBER 31, 1958
the soil. In Sarawak, the Congo, and Ivory Coast, where the people are still more interested in hunting, fishing, and food-gathering than in agriculture, this system has evolved with its ample leisure for other pursuits. There are, however, a few striking differences, one of which is so gross as to cast some doubt on the accuracy of the figures presented. In order that this point may be made clear and that the reader may compare the data for the Congo and the Ivory Coast with that of Sarawak I have tabulated and, where necessary, converted the details to similar units as follows: —
Climate
Congo
Ivory Coast
Saratok
Av. Ann. temp.	76 Fah. 80 Fah. 78.5 Fah.
Av. Ann. rainfall	73.5 ins. 47.5 ins. 120-160 ins.
Soils Few details are available but the evidence suggests that the average soils of all three areas are similar. The crop yields, however, may indicate that the African soils are poorer than those of Sarawak.
Average area cleared and burnt annually.	.9 acre	.9 acre	5.5 acres
Average area in use ann. 2 acres	3 acres 8 acres
Cycle of cultivation (very
variable and dependent on
soils)	2-3 years crop 2-4 crop 1-3 crop
16-18 years 12-17 years 5-18 years
fallow	fallow	fallow
Average area needed for complete cycle, per family 20 acres 32 acres 70-140 acres
Density of population
persons per square mile	1.3 to 10	72 to 113	13 to 44
(overall) (areas of shifting cultivation only)
Crops yields;
per acre	Hill rice 712 lbs Not given 750-2000 lbs
Tapioca 13.3 tons Not given 15 tons Maize Not given 311 lbs 1200 lbs.
From the above it will be seen that Sarawak has a similar annual temperature but a very much higher rainfall, twice that of the Congo and three times that of the Ivory Coast, and that, despite higher yields per acre the farmers in Sarawak appear to need from 2 to 4 times as much land on which to feed their families. In fact, combining the increased yield with the larger area planted it would appear that the average Sarawak family disposes of 5 to 8 times the amount of food of a comparable African family. This result does not appear entirely fanciful when one considers the amount of rice consumed at a meal in the average longhouse, about three times the amount a European can eat; the use of rice for brewing; the fact that maize is not considered a staple as in Africa but is eaten unripe as sweet corn between meals; that large numbers of fighting cocks are kept; that very few families have to eat any tapioca (if not fed to the pigs it is left in the ground as an insurance against hard times); but it becomes very difficult to believe that the Congo farmer, disposing of only one fifth or one eight of the food of the Sarawak farmer can sell half his harvest (p.42 . . . "la moitie de la recolte est vendue"). Comparison with the Ivory Coast is rendered more difficult by the fact that cattle are kept, hence the incredibly high density of population attained, (it is not possible to keep cattle in the Congo because of bovine trypanosomiasis carried by the tse-tse fly) but the same argument applies, yams, ground-nuts cotton and tobacco being sold. Leaving aside any question of the accuracy of the figures which, emanating from the FAO can be presumed to have been critically examined before publication, it immediately becomes apparent that population pressure may be a factor in increasing the range of crops grown and the tendency towards mixed farming. Crops sown and planted in the Ivory Coast (p. 148) are as follows:— “during the first rains after the burn, ground-nuts and gourds, while a little later maize is sown on the preceding year’s clearing; then early or late yams, together with okra (Hibiscus esculentus) and tapioca and either cotton, chiles or maize all in the same mound, although often the tapioca will be planted only on every other one or missing two mounds and the maize only on every 5th or 10th mound.” This description does not completely agree with that given on p. 156 but if there is as much difference between individual farmers in the Ivory Coast as there is in Sarawak, this is only to be expected. It appears likely that the use of yams instead of rice
as the major staple is more economical of ground but as yams rarely enter into commerce there are no figures available on which to base a comparison of their respective food values or their effect on the soils.
One final point of difference is that lalang (Imperata spp.) does not appear to be a pest in the Ivory Coast where it does not form a fire climax as it does in parts of Sarawak. Apparently 6 to 8 years of bush fallow suffice to exterminate it provided that fire is excluded. This indicates either that the tree growth (secondary forest) is more virile in Africa or that the lalang is not so happy under the lower rainfall regime. The first alternative seems more likely from the lists of species found in the Congo and Ivory Coast secondary forest which springs up during and after cultivation. Although the species are, naturally different, many of the genera are the same but leguminous trees are far more prominent and the total number of tree species is greater.
This is a very valuable treatise on shifting agriculture which should be required reading for all Government Officers. It is a pity, however, that more detailed figures are not given to explain the wonderful economy in the use of land.
W. Adams
SARAWAK TURF CLUB
LANDAS MEETING, 1958
First Day, Saturday, 29th November, 1958
Race 1. The Sungai Katibas Handicap
Ponies Division IIIB. 5 Furlongs.
Tickets
1.	Mr. Ong Kee Hui’s	Sold
Dondang Sayang	8.4	Samsudin	922
2.	Printers’ Error	7.7	Ek Pah	512
3.	Phoenix	7.8	(7.13)	Liben	343
1777
Won by: Distance, 4 lengths.
Time:	1 min. 27 secs.	Tote: $1.50
Race 2. The Datang Kayang Handicap
Ponies Division IIIA. 5 Furlongs.
Tickets
1.	Mr. M. C. Yeow’s	Sold
Kudat Prince	7.7	Ali I	175
2.	Brunei Beauty	8.2	Mat II	1092
3.	Seri Panggong	7.7 (7.3)	Ngot	141
4.	Cabaret	7.7	Ek Pah	353
Also run: —
Hari Raya	7.12	Samsudin	418
Kaswari	7.9	Wahab	364
Mutiara Itam	8.11	Liben	221
Boy Valiant	7.10 (7.13)	Manan	194
Happy Ending	7.13	Asing	136
3094
Scratched: Nonya Balleh 8.5.
Won by: Head. 1 lengths, 3 lengths.
Time:	1 min. 26 secs.	Tote: $14.00
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, DECEMBER 31, 1958
259
Race 3. The Sungai Samarahan Handicap
Ponies Division II. 5 Furlongs.
Tickets
1.	Madam Yap Geok Eng's	Sold
Bachelor Boy	8.7	Tau Enn	1352
2.	Atom Boy	9.5	Liben	147
3.	Bujang Bolong	7.7	Samsudin	1112
4.	Bintang Aru	9.2	Eddie	309
Also run: —
Taikong	9.8	Mat II	196
Rusty	8.13	Matnor	152
Saya Bodoh	8.13	Keram	75
Silver Star	8.0	Medin	159
3502
Won by: length, length, 1 length.
Time:	(Not taken).	Tote: $2.00
Race 4. The Batang Saribas Handicap
Ponies Division I. 5 Furlongs.
1.	Madam Yap Geok Eng,	Tickets
Mr. Tan Puay Tiang &	Sold
Mr. Choo Lee Chien's
Borneo Boy	7.7	Mat II	359
2.	Thunder Storm	7.9(7.11)	Liben	950
3.	Three Sevens	9.0	Ek Pah	68
4.	Nasib Saya	7.7	Wahed	1934
Also run: —
Bintang Kilong 9.1	Manan	379
Leelin	9.7	(9.2)	Junaidi	156
The Bat	8.8	(83)	Ngot	707
Mengalai	8.0	Keram	211
4764
Scratched: Begawai 7.7.
Won by: 1 lengths, 1 lengths, 1 lengths.
Time:	1 min. 24 secs.	Tote: $10.50
Race 5. The Batang Balleh Handicap
Horses Division II. 6 Furlongs.
Tickets
1.	"Pantad Stable's"	Sold
Carribean	8.5 (8.6)	Matnor	1153
2.	Buahati	10.4	Liben	640
3.	Avilor	8.0	Mat Ill	287
4.	Happy	Birthday 9.3	Tau Enn	1123
Also run: —
Miss Molly 8.0	Medin 449
3652
Scratched: Lighthouse 10.4, Sweet Violets 8.0.
Won by: Distance, 1 length, 3 lengths.
Time:	1 min. 23 secs.	Tote: $2.50
Race 6. The Batang Suai Handicap
Horses Division I. 6 Furlongs.
Tickets
1.	Mr. A. Chong's	Sold
K’Kasehku	8.13	Eddie	1312
2.	Fresh Boy	8.10	Medin	724
3.	Bujang Buntal	9.8	Manan	811
4.	Birthday Gift II	8.2	Samsudin	1182
Also run:—
Hattrick	8.0	Ek Pah	305
Elturius	10.2	Lundu	350
4684
Won by: Head, Head, 2 lengths.
Time:	1 min. 22 secs.	Tote: $2.50
Race 7. The Batang Igan Handicap
Ponies Division III. 6 Furlongs.
1.	The Estate of the late	Tickets
Mr. Phillip Soh Fu's	Sold
Happy Ending	8.6	(	8.0) (8.0)	Mat II	355
2.	Kaswari	9.5	(	8.13)(8.13)	Manan	468
3.	Hari Raya	8.13(	8.7) (8.7)	Samsudin	422
4.	Kudat Prince	83	(	7.13X8.6)	Ali I	995
Also run: —
Boy Valiant	9.13(	9.7) (9.2)	Putit	96
Phoenix	8.4 (	7.12)(7.13)	Liben	157
Cabaret 10.7 (10.1) (9.8) Da'an 156
Printers' Error	7.13(	7.7) (7.7)	Ek Pah	231
2880
Scratched: Tanjong Aru 7.7.
Won by: 3 lengths, Head, 4 lengths.
Time:	1 min. 47 secs.	Tote: $6.00
Race 8: The Sungai Sarawak Handicap
Ponies Division II. 6 Furlongs.
Tickets
1.	Mr. Ong Kee Hui's	Sold
Bujang Bolong	7.7	Samsudin	300
2.	Nasib Saya	9.5	Manan	275
3.	Bachelor Boy	8.8 (9.1)	Tau Enn	368
4.	Mutiara Itam	7.7	Asing	532
Also run:—
Rusty	8.9	(8.4)	Ngot	106
Bintang Aru	7.13	Wahed	631
Silver Star	7.7	(7.10)	Medin	249
Saya Bodoh	7.12(8.0)	Keram	94
Sea Dragon	8.13	Matnor	138
Taikong	7.11	Ek Pah	275
Bachelor Days	7.7	(7.8)	Bujang	377
3345
Scratched: Begawai 9.10, Brunei Beauty 8.13.
Won by: 2 lengths, 2 lengths, Distance.
Time:	1 min. 44 secs.	Tote: $8.50
Race 9. The Batang Kemena Handicap
Ponies Division I. 6 Furlongs.
Tickets
1.	Mr. Daniel Lim's	Sold
Thunder Storm	7.7 (	7.11)	Liben	1479
2.	The Bat	7.10(	7.5)	Ngot	767
3.	Borneo Boy	8.8 (	9.1)	Tau Enn	613
4.	Three Sevens	9.12	Manan	131
Also run: —
Mengalai	9.1 (	8.10)	Junaidi	444
Bintang Kilong 10.9 (10.2) Da'an 74
Leelin	8.9	Keram	383
Atom Boy	7.13	Medin	681
4572
Won by: Head, Head, 1 length.
Time:	1 min. 46 secs.	Tote: $2.00
260
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, DECEMBER 31, 1958
THE $1.00 FORECAST TOTE
Total Pool $2,089.00
1st Leg—Race 4, Winner: Borneo Boy,	195 Tickets
2nd — 6,	K'kasehku,	63	Final — 8,	Bujang Bolong, 10 Dividend $167.00 each.
Second Day, Saturday—6th December, 1958
LANDAS MEETING, 1958
Race 1. The Batang Oya Handicap
Ponies Division IIIB. 4 Furlongs.
Tickets
1.	Mr. Tan Teck Ann's	Sold
Cabaret	9.13(9.10)	(9.10)	Eddie I	354
2.	Kudat Prince	9.1 (8.12)	(8.12)	Samsudin	439
3.	Nonya Balleh	8.12(8. 9)	(8.9)	Ali I	638
4.	Printers' Error	8.12(8. 9)	(8.5)	Junaidi	98
Also run: —
Phoenix	8.1	(7.12)	(7.7)	Ngot	190
Putri Seria	7.10(7.	7)	(7.10)	Ali II	50
Suilin	8.4	(8.	1)	(8.1)	Ek Pah	60
*Richmond	River 8.3	(8.	0)	(7.7)	Bujang II	55
1884
*Left at the start.
Scratched: Jolly Boy 7.7.
Won by: 1 length, 1 lengths, 4 lengths.
Time:	1 min. 10 secs.	Tote: $4.00
Race 2. The Batang Mukah Handicap
Ponies Division IIIA. 4 Furlongs.
Tickets
1.	Mr. Ong Kee Hui's	Sold
Dondang Sayang	8.7	Samsudin	831
2.	Saya Bodoh	8.0	(8.1)	Bujang	142
3.	Seri Panggong	7.10	Wahed	809
4.	Hari Raya	9.1	(8.13)	Putit	66
Also run:—
Brunei Beauty	8.13	Mat II	378
Kaswari	8.0	Manan	524
Boy Valiant	7.7	Ali	84
Mutiara Itam	7.10(8.2)	Liben	118
Silver Star	7.10(7.11)	Medin	137
3089
Won by: 3 lengths, length, 1 length.
Time:	1 min. 08 secs.	Tote: $2.50
Race 3. The Batang Balingian Handicap
Ponies Division II. 4 Furlongs.
Tickets
1.	Mrs. Lily Goh's	Sold
Bintang Aru	9.5	Eddie I	353
2.	Rusty	8.11	(8.6)	Ngot	232
3.	Bujang Bolong	8.8	Samsudin	2626
4.	Begawai	8.13	(8.8)	Junaidi	424
Also run: —
Atom Boy 7.7 (8.2) Liben 677
4312
Won by: length, 2 lengths, 6 lengths.
Time:	1 min. 08 secs.	Tote: $9.50
Race 4. The Landas Handicap
Ponies Division I. 4 Furlongs.
Tickets
1.	The Ong Kongsi's	Sold
Nasib Saya	7.7	(7.8)	Samsudin	1156
2.	Three Sevens	9.2	Wahed	155
3.	Bachelor Boy	7.8	Mat II	1161
4.	Thunder Storm D.H.	8.9	Liben 489
Mengalai	8.1	Bujang I 189
Also run: —
Bintang Kilong	8.1	Manan	623
Leelin	9.3	(8.12)	Junaidi	304
The Bat	9.9	Matnor	218
Borneo Boy	9.4	(8.13)	Sirat	212
4507
Won by: 2 lengths, 6 lengths, Distance.
Time:	1 min. 07 secs.	Tote: $3.00
Race 5. The Batang Rejang Handicap
Horses Division II. 1 Mile.
Tickets
1.	Mr. Ong Soo Keng's	Sold
Remember Me II 9.13	Eddie I	1045
2.	Hattrick	9.9	Ek Pah	515
3.	Buahati	9.13	Liben	437
4.	Fresh Boy	9.13	Medin	548
Also run: —
Avilor	8.0 (8.3) Mat III 158
2703
Won by: 6 lengths, 1 lengths, Distance.
Time:	1 min. 57 secs.	Tote: $2.00
Race 6. The Batang Tatau Handicap
Horses Division I. 1 Mile.
Tickets
1.	Mrs. Janet Ong's	Sold
Bujang Buntal	8.0	Manan	2172
2.	Elturius	8.12	Lundu	833
3.	K'Kasehku	9.9	Eddie I	943
4.	Sarawak Ramin	8.3	Ek Pah	563
Also run: —
Birthday Gift II 10.1	Medin 610
5121
Scratched: Carribean 8.3.
Won by: 4 lengths, 5 lengths, 1 lengths.
Time:	1 min. 56 secs.	Tote: $130
Race 7. The Sungai Bakong Handicap
Ponies Division III. 1 Mile.
1.	Mr. Ong Kee Hui &	Tickets
Mrs. Janet Ong's	Sold
Hari Raya	7.7 (7.8)	Samsudin	434
2.	Cabaret	8.13(9.6)	Eddie I	775
3.	Boy Valiant	7.12(8.0)	Manan	316
4.	Saya Bodoh	8.1	Mat II	640
Also run: —
Kaswari	7.8	(7.9)	Wahed	537
Bintang Aru	8.9	(9.2)	Medin	420
Phoenix	7.12(7.7)	Ngot	193
Mutiara Itam	9.2	Liben	168
Kudat Prince	7.9	Ali I	637
Bachelor Days	9.1	Bujang I	96
4216
Won by: 2 lengths, Neck, 6 lengths.
Time:	2 mins. 32 secs.	Tote: $7.50
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, DECEMBER 31, 1958
261
Race 8. The Batang Lupar Handicap
Ponies Division II. 1 Mile.
Tickets
1.	Madam Yap Geok Eng's	Sold
Bachelor Boy	8.9	Tau Enn	516
2.	Silver Star	8.1	Mat II	958
3.	Rusty	77.	(7.4)	Ngot	476
4.	Sea Dragon	8.10	Matnor	391
Also run: —
Atom Boy 9.6	Liben 440
2781
Scratched: Nasib Saya 9.5, Begawai 9.4.
Won by: Heads, Distance, 3 lengths.
Time:	2 mins. 23 secs.	Tote: $4.00
Race 9. The Landas Handicap
Ponies Division I. 1 Mile.
1.	Mrs. Irene Nelson &	Tickets
Mrs. Janet Ong's	Sold
Three Sevens 8.3	Samsudin 1248
2.	Leelin	7.7	(7.9)	Mat II	785
3.	Bintang Kilong	8.2	Manan	429
4.	The Bat	7.8	(7.4)	Ngot	593
Also run:—
Thunder Storm	8.7	Liben	1343
Mengalai	7.9	(7.12)	Bujang	I	353
Borneo Boy	9.3	(8.12)	Sirat	327
5078
Won by: Head, Head, 2 lengths.
Time:	2 mins. 31 secs.	Tote: $3.00
THE $1.00 FORECAST TOTE
Total Pool $2,384.00
1st Leg—Race 4. Winner: Nasib Saya, 666 Tickets
2nd — 6.	Bujang Buntal, 278 Final — 9.	Three Sevens, 35 Dividend $54.00 each.
Recent Books
Additions to the Sarawak Library during the month of December, 1958.
AUTHOR	TITLE
Fiction
Andrews, Lucilla	A Hospital Summer (1958)
Balzac, Honore de Droll Stories (1958)
Baum, Vicki	Ballerina (1958)
Bentley, Phyllis	Crescendo (1958)
Bourne, Peter	The Court of Love (1958)
Boyd, Martin	The night of the Party (1940)
Braddon, Russell	Gabriel Comes to 24 (1958)
Bridge, Ann	The Portugese Escape (1958)
Bullett, Gerald	The Peacock Brides (1958)
Catto, Max	The Devil at Four O'clock (1958)
Christensen, Synnove	Lindeman's Daughters (1958)
Christopher, John	The Caves of Night (1958)
Cotterell, Geoffrey Tea at Shadow Creek (1958) Davies, Rhys	The Darling of Her Heart and
other stories (1958)
Frankau, Pamela	Ask Me No More (1958)
Gebler, Ernest	A Week in the Country (1958)
Gilbert, Jay	The Skinner (1958)
Glemser, Bernard	The Dove on His Shoulder (1953)
Glemser, Bernard	The Lieutenant	(1958)
Greene, Graham	Our Man in Havana (1958)
Gunn, Neil M.	Morning Tide (1953)
Hackforth-Jones, Gilbert Hurricane Harbour (1958)
Hastings, Phyllis	Golden Apollo	(1958)
Hyams, Edward	Taking It Easy	(1958)
Innes, Hammond	The Land God Gave to Cain
(1958)
Knight, Brigid	The Cloister and the Citadel (1958)
Lessing, Doris	A Ripple from the Storm (1958)
Lessing, Doris	The Habit of Loving (1958)
Lindsay, Philip	The Devil Comes to Winchelsea
(1958)
Linklater, Eric	Position at Noon (1958)
Maine, Charles Eric	The Tide went Out (1958)
Mittelholzer, Edgar	The Weather Family (1958)
Naughton, Bill	One Small Boy (1957)
Peyrefitte, Roger	Diplomatic Conclusions (1954)
Powys, John Cowper	Up and Out (1957)
Sackville-West, V.	The Easter Parly (1953)
Slaughter, Frank G.	Daybreak (1958)
Snow, C. P.	The Search (1958)
Stacton, David	Segaki (1958)
Strong, L. A. G.	Light Above the Lake (1958)
Tey, Josephine	The Privateer (1952)
Tranter, Nigel	The Stone (1958)
Traver, Robert	Anatomy of a Murder (1958)
White, Theodore H. The Mountain Road (1958) Williamson, Hugh Ross The Sisters (1958)
AUTHOR	TITLE
Crime & Detection
Browne, Howard	The Taste of Ashes
Eberhart, M. G.	Another Man's Murder (1958)
Gunn, Victor	The Treble Chance Murder (1958)
Howard, Hartley	The Big Snatch (1958)
Hunter, Alan	Gently Through the Mill (1958)
Procter, Maurice	Man in Ambush (1958)
Rhode, John	Death Takes a Partner (1958)
Sayers, Dorothy L. A Treasury of Sayers Stories (1958)
Non-fiction
Achilles Club	Modern Athletics: edited by H.
A. Meyer (1958)
Asimov, Isaac	The Chemicals of Life (1956)
Botting, Douglas	Island of the Dragon's Blood
(1958)
Bower, Clifford Thomas Aids to Workshop Practice (1958)
Brereton, Geoffrey A Short History of French Literature (1956)
Brereton, Geoffrey An introduction to the French Poets (1956)
Bruford, Walter Horace Anton Chekhov (1957)
Cardus, Neville	A Composers Eleven (1958)
Cecil, Henry	Brief to Counsel (1958)
Currie, Clifford	Be a Librarian (1958)
Djilas, Milovan	Land Without Justice: an autobio-
graphy of his youth (1958)
Eberhard, Wolfram Chinese Festivals (1958)
Epton, Nina	Saints and Sorcerers: a Moroccan
journey (1958)
Friang, Brigitte	Parachutes and Petticoats (1958)
Durnford, John	Branch Une to Burma (1958)
Fuchs, Sir Vivian and The Crossing of Antarctica: the
Hillary, Sir Edmund Commonwealth Trans-Antarctic Expedition 1955-1958 (1958)
Genet, Jean	The Balcony (1958)
Harbury, C. H.	Descriptive Economics (1958)
Institute of Public	A Guide to the Practice of Public
Relations	Relations (1958)
Masson, Georgina	Frederick II of Hohenstaufen
(1957)
Moorehead, Alan	The Russian Revolution (1958)
Parrinder, Geoffrey	Witchcraft (1958)
Pope, Dick	Water Skiing (1958)
Schmid, Peter	The New face of China (1958)
Slimming, John	Temiar Jungle: a Malayan journey
(1958)
Smyth, J. G.	Lawn Tennis (1953)
Starkie, Enid	Andre Gide (1953)
Van Der Post, Laurens The Lost World of the Kalahari (1958)
Vevers, Henry G.	Tropical Aquarium Fishes in
colour (1957)
Wheeler-Bennett,	King George VI: his life and reign
John W.	(1958)
262
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE. DECEMBER 31, 1958
Kuching Market Price List
December, 1958
RICE—(per gantang)
Average
Local White Government Milled ... ... 1.62
Local Whit. Milled ... ... ... 1.75
Siam "A" 5% ... ... ... ...	2.00
Siam "B"	...	...	...	... —
Siam "C"	... ...	...	...	—
Siam Broken Rice A1 Super ...	... 1.65
China Broken Rice ...	... ... 1.50
SUGAR—(per kati)
White Sugar ... ... ... ... .30
Brown Sugar ...	...	... ...	.40
Nipah Sugar ...	...	...	...	.25
FLOUR/AND BREAD—
Wheat Flour per kati	...	...	...	.25
Bread per small loaf	...	...	...	.25
Bread per large loaf	...	...	...	.50
MILK—(per tin)
(a)	Nestl s ... ... ... ... .65
Liberty Brand ...	...	...	.55
Golden Wheel ...	...	...	.50
Milk Maid ... ... ... ...	.65
(b)	Local Fresh Milk per pint ...	...	.80
EGGS—(each)
Turtle ... ... ... ... .08
Duck, fresh ... ... ... ... .15
Duck, salted ...	...	...	...	.15
Fowl ... ... ... ... .15
EDIBLE FATS—(per kati)
Buller per lb. ...	...	...	...	2.00
Coconut Oil ...	...	... ... .70
Peanut Oil ... ... ... ... 1.10
Lard No. 1 ... ... ... ... 1.40
Lard No. 2 ... ... ... ... 1.20
Ghee ... ... ... ...	2.20
Dripping ...	...	...	... .80
PORK—(per kati)
Lean No. 1 ...	...	...	...	2.80
Lean with Fat No. 2 ...	...	...	1.40
Fat	... ... ... ... 1.00
Ribs	... ... ... ...	2.00
BEEF—(per kati)
Beef, steak	... ... ... 3.00
Beef, Curry meat	...	...	...	1.60
Buffalo No. 1 ... ... ... ... 3.00
Buffalo curry meat	...	...	...	1.60
Mutton (Australian)	...	...	...	2.80
Mutton (Local) ...	... ... 3.00
POULTRY—(per kati)
Capons ...	...	...	...	2.10
Chinese Cocks ...	...	...	1.72
Pullets ... ... ... ... 2.05
Chinese Hens	... ... ... 1.42
Dayak Fowl ... ... ... ...	1.55
Ducks ... ... ... ...	1.75
Muscovy ...	...	...	...	1.57
Cross-Breed	... ... ... 1.57
Geese ... ... ... ... 1.45
FISH—(per kati)
Fresh Fish No. 1	...	...	...	1.40
Fresh Fish No. 2	...	...	...	.80
Fresh Fish No. 3	...	...	...	.40
Prawns No. 1	...	...	...	1.66
Prawns No. 2	...	...	...	.80
Crab No. 1	...	...	...	...	1.00
Crab No. 2	...	...	...	...	.70
Salted Fish No. 1	... ... ... 2.40
Salted Fish	No.	2	...	...	...	1.10
Salted Fish No. 3	... ... ... .80
Average
SALT—(per kati)
Coarse ... ... ... ... .10
Fine	...	...	...	...	.10
Nipah ... ... ... ... .80
VEGETABLES—(per kati)
Bamboo Shoots (salted) ... ...	... .40
Bandong (Ubikayu)	...	...	...	.10
Bangkuang	...	...	...	...	.10
Bayam	...	...	...	...	.32
Bean Sprouts	...	...	...	.30
Cabbage	...	...	...	...	.70
Changkok Mania	...	...	...	.31
Cucumber (Timun)	...	...	...	.23
Chillies (Red)	...	...	...	.90
Chillies (Green)	...	...	...	.40
Daun Bawang	...	...	...	.95
Ensahi Puteh ...	...	... .57
Ensahi Besar ...	...	...	...	.52
Ensahi Bunga	...	...	...	.52
French beans	...	...	...	.50
Garlic, fresh	...	...	...	1.00
Ginger ... ... ... ... .80
Kachang Panjang	...	...	...	.32
Kangkong Ayer	...	...	...	.25
Kangkong Roots	...	...	...	.40
Keladi Batawi	...	...	...	.15
Keladi China	...	...	...	.30
Ketola	...	...	...	... .30
Keribang	...	...	...	... .10
Kundor ...	... ... ... .15
Labu ...	...	... ... .10
Labu Duri ...	...	...	...	.31
Ladies Fingers ... ... ... ... .42
Lettuce ...	...	...	...	1.05
Lobak (Chinese Radish) ...	... .80
Lobak, salted	...	...	...	.60
Onions, Bombay	...	...	...	.25
Onions, small	... ... ... .50
Potatoes, Imported	...	...	...	.30
Priak (Bitter Gourd)	...	... .55
Sauerkraut, Imported	...	...	...	.90
Sauerkraut, Local	...	...	...	.70
Tamarind (Buah Assam) ...	... .40
Tomatoes ...	...	...	...	.77
Trong (Brinjals)	...	...	...	.32
Sauce per bottle No. 1	...	...	...	1.10
Sauce per bottle No. 2	...	...	...	.90
Sauce per bottle No. 3	...	...	...	.40
TEA—(per lb)
Tea, Ceylon	...	... ... 4.80
Tea, Chinese ...	...	...	...	1.80
COFFEE—(per kati)
Raw. Java No. 1. Local ... ...	3.00
Raw. No. 2 ... ... ...	...	1.80
Powder ...	...	...	...	1.00
FRUITS—(each)
Pisang Umbun per kati ...	...	.12
Pisang Tandok ...	... ...	.20
Nanas ...	...	...	...	.20 to .80
Buah Betek per kati ...	...	...	.20
SUNDRIES—
Bean curd per piece ...	...	...	.15
Bean cake white per piece ...	...	.15
Bean cake yellow per	piece	...	...	25
Blachan per kati	...	...	...	.70
Charcoal per picul ... ... ...	7.50
Coconut, fresh each	...	...	...	.20
Corned Beef per tin ...	... ...	1.20
Dried Prawn per kati ... ... ...	1.80 to 2.40
Kerosene Oil per tin ...	...	...	5.30
Kerosene Oil per bottle	...	...	.25
Matches Local per box ... ... ... .05
Matches imported per box ...	...	.05
Soap, washing local per bar	...	...	.60
Soap, washing imported per bar ... ...	.90
Salmon per tin	...	...	...	1.50
Sardines per tin	...	...	...	.60
Bako Wood, per panchang ... ...	28.00
CIGARETTES—
Players per packet of 10 ... ... .45
Rough Rider per packet of 10 ...	...	.35
Craven "A" ...	...	...	...	.45
Torch Light	... ...	...	.35
Stale Express	...	...	...	2.60
Capsun per packet of 20 ... ...	.75
INDEX
A
Page
Arrivals and Departures 2, 15, 24, 54, 82, 103, 118, 140, 157, 184, 204, 234
Architecture and Kuching	...	...	5
Atmosphere of the Bornean Forest ...	18
At the Reception of Customs ...	...	21
Agriculture, Closer Associations and
Education	...	...	85
A Nutty Problem	...	...	145
B
Births : —
Young	...	...	1
Gwilliam	...	...	13
Urquhart	...	...	81
Wood	...	...	81
Davies	...	...	101
FitzGibbon	...	...	101
Griffin	...	...	117
Wilkinson	...	...	117
Rawlins	...	...	117
Steele	...	...	139
Kraal	...	...	155
Bomphrey	...	...	155
Parsons	...	...	231
Scanlon	...	...	231
Kirk	...	...	231
Borneo Reunion	...	...	7
Book Reviews ...	7, 46, 78
Book Numbers of the Gazette ...	...	78
Barcroft. John Coleraine Hanbury, c.m.g., o.s.s.	...	...	101
Belaga	...	...	114
Brazil Nut, The	...	...	119
Birthday—Sir Charles Vyner Brooke	155
Bornean Hospitality ...	...	164
Book Review—"Under Chartered	Company
Rule”	...	...	176
Book Review—“Various Shepherds"	...	227
Book Review—"l'griculture Nomade ...	257
c
Civil Service	...	...	1
Correspondence 4, 21, 78, 111, 151, 175, 193,
227, 254
Closer Association	...	23, 83, 157
Chinese New Year in Hong Kong	...	28
Community Development with Land Dayak
Women	...	...	59
Council Negri	...	...	81, 155
Colonialism	...	...	112
Choose Your Weapons	...	...	130
Commonwealth Games, The	...	...	131
Celebrations at opening of Mosque at Brunei 186
Cheshires in Sarawak, The	...	...	193
D
Delegation of Authority with Emphasis on
District Office Administrations	...	19
Dairy of a Sedentary Officer ...	30,	61, 253
Development	...	...	117
E
Excerpts from Reports of Administrative
Officers for the Second Half of 1957	31, 62, 89
Education and the Economic Realities of
Sarawak	...	...	55
Excerpts from a Report on the Mass Yaws
Campaign in Ulu Bau and Lundu District 88
Extracts from a Report on British Borneo
Petroleum Production, Resources and
Industry	...	...	120
Excerpts from Report of Administrative
Officers for the First Half 1958	165, 209, 243
F
Page
Film Reviews	...	...	4
From Kuching to the United Kingdom ...	255
Five Hundred Centuries of Borneo Man 257
H
His Excellency the Governor's Hari Raya Broadcast	...	...	53
His Excellency the Governor's Visit to Baram and Miri	...	...	110
His Excellency the Governor's Visit to Bintulu and Sibuti—August 1958	...	...	150
His Excellency the Governor’s Speech to
Council Negri	...	...	234
Happy and Glorious	...	...	204
I
In the Footsteps of Tamerlane	2, 16, 26
Inter-Territorial Athletic Meeting	...	109
Iban Tales—Adat Buaya	...	...	129
In reply to—"Choose Your Weapons"	...	144
Illipe Nut, The	...	...	146
Intelligence—Late or Early	...	...	183
J
Jubilee Recreation Ground Fund	...	137
K
Kuching Market Price List 12, 13, 52, 99, 114, 138
153, 181, 201, 203, 262
Kuching Letter	56, 124, 144, 191, 208, 251
Kuching Athletics	...	...	108
L
Local Authority Taxation ...	...	241
M
Marriage	...	...	101
Medical Report from Lawas ...	...	192
N
Notes and Comments 1, 13, 23, 54, 82, 102, 118,
139, 183, 203, 232
Nutty Problem, A	...	...	145
Niah Excavations,	1958	...	...	148
New Year Honours	...	...	231
o
Other Voices	...	45,	77, 113
Origin of Headhunting	...	...	89
Obituaries: —
Barcroft, J. C. H.	...	...	101
Tait, W. G.	...	...	101
Carson, T.	...	...	117
Edwards, R. E.	...	...	117
Wright, F.	...	...	139
P
Peoples of Sarawak, The 104, 125, 141, 160, 187,
205, 237
Philology and History ...	...	185
Problems of English in Chinese Schools ...	252
Q
Queen's Birthday Honours	...	...	103
Queen's Birthday, Kuching	...	...	104
INDEX—( Continued)
Page
R
Rajah Brooke Memorial Settlement, Kuching
7, 60, 107 Recent Books 8, 22, 47, 79, 95, 115, 136, 152, ... 180, 196, 229, 261 Recital, A	...	...	13
Regatta in Retrospect	...	...	107
Radiation and the Bomb	...	...	173
s
Sarawak Turf Club 9, 48, 96, 132, 177, 197, 258
Sorob Cattle Farm	...	...	25
Sarawak Association	...	...	107
Sport in Sarawak	...	...	108
Sematan Bauxite	...	...	119
Selling	...	...	139
Shadow of Apartheid, The	...	...	231
T
Text of a Broadcast by His Excellency the Governor	...	...	15, 102
The Illipe Nut	...	...	146
The World Beyond the Rivers	...	...	149
The Cheshires in Sarawak	...	...	193
The Shadow of Apartheid	...	...	231
The Peoples of Sarawak 104, 125, 141, 160, 187, 205, 237
Page
U
Upriver Agriculture	...	...	96
Unlicences Unlimited	...	...	236
V
Visits by His Excellency the Governor—
Second Division	...	...	57
Padawan	...	...	58
Virgin of Borneo, The	...	...	132
W
Water Village	...	...	30
World Beyond the Rivers, The ...	...	149
What Price Nationalism	...	...	172
Work Break?	...	...	226
Water Sport	...	...	252
Y
Young Wives Tale	...	...	195