 Vol. LXXXIV
No. 1200
PRICE
KUCHING, Friday, February 28th, 1958
$1.00
Contents
Page
Birth ... ...	... ... ... 13
A Recital ... ... ... ...	... 13
Notes and Comments ... ... ...	...	13
Arrivals and Departures ...	...	... ...	15
Text of a Broadcast by His Excellency the Governor on
February 7th, 1958	... ... ... ...	15
In the Footsteps of Tamerlane—II ... ...	...	16
The Atmosphere of the Bornean Forest ...	...	18
Delegation of Authority with Emphasis on District
Office Administration	...	...	...	...	19
Correspondence	...	...	...	...	21
At the Receipt of Custom	...	...	... 21
Recent Books	...	...	... ...	22
Kuching Market Price List ... ... ... ii
The Sarawak Gazette
FRIDAY, FEBRUARY 28th, 1958
Birth
GWILLIAM. On 23rd January, 1958, at Miri Hospital to Gillian and Russell Gwilliam, a daughter.
A Recital
(Sponsored by the Sarawak Arts Council)
The Paris Conservatoire, the first amongst Europe’s great schools of music, has produced many fine musicians and amongst the most distinguished of the present time are Jean Fournier and Ginette Doyen whom we were privileged to hear in Kuching recently. It was an evening of good music interpreted with line restraint and executed with superb technique.
M. Fournier met the exacting demands of the Bach Chaconne, the violinist’s Everest, with complete satisfaction. Its immense technical difficulties disappeared under his bow and the formal beauty of the music was displayed. In lighter vein with Mlle. Doyen— surely the perfect accompanist—he gave us the Tartini-Kreisler Variations on a Theme of Corelli, Kreisler’s romantic Caprice Viennoise, a melodious Improvisation of Bloch, which was probably new to most listeners, and the light-hearted Rondo Capriccioso of Saint-Saens.
Mlle. Doyen's pedalling and keyboard control are masterly. The Chopin Fantaisie Impromptu, so often marred, even on the concert platform, by excessive rubato, was played with disciplined feeling and the cantabile passages emerged with fluent elegance. The
range of her flawless technique and sympathetic interpretation were well shown in the Chopin Second Scherzo and Debussy's Pour le Piano.
The Fourniers are remarkable virtuosi. One would expect that from their record. But they are more. They are musicians of a very high order whose skill is the servant of their understanding. From the opening notes of the exquisite Mozart Sonata in A major (K526) they held their audience and if the fireworks of Chap Goh Meh were rending the night, they were not heard in the William Tan Auditorium.
Notes and Comments
Kuching and Sibu have just seen a photographic exhibition sponsored by the Sarawak Photographic Society. The photographs were all interesting and of a very high standard, as was to be expected. Many of them were marked by a studied artificiality. This is greatly favoured by a large body of photographers and it is a good thing that Sarawak's photographers should be able to see it at its best and judge for themselves. The prints were technically superb and made one think ruefully of the scratched and thumb-printed negatives and muddy and badly-produced prints which one commonly receives in return for the rolls of film one hands in to local photographers' shops. If the exhibition encourages these shops to be just a little more clean and careful, it will have been worth-while.
A Borneo Publications Bureau has been set up to produce and advise on literature to serve the needs of Sarawak and Brunei.
The Papal decoration Pro Ecclesia et Pontifice has been awarded to Mr. Polycarp Sim, a teacher at Saint Joseph's School, Kuching, in recognition of his outstanding services to the Church. Mr. Sim is also the holder of a Certificate of Honour recognising his assistance to prisoners-of-war during the Japanese occupation.
Miri which has just produced a public park and will soon have a Community Hall now has a swimming-pool at Luak Bay. From all accounts it is one wellworth having. Sarikei, of course, has had one for some time. When are Kuching and Sibu going to follow this excellent example? The Councils have, no doubt, more important things to do with their money but where is private enterprise? Is there really no one willing to form a club, issue debentures and invite
14
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, FEBRUARY 28, 1958
subscriptions or float a small company and issue modestly-priced units of stock?
A new Malay Union Club has been built in Sibu at Kampong Nyabor. It was opened on 25th January by the Resident.
The Government has produced a Dayak Calendar for 1958, the first Dayak calendar ever to be produced. It is so designed that it can be used by people who cannot read. The phases of the moon are shown and there is a column each for a record of births and deaths which should be useful. The calendar is illustrated by twelve fine photographs depicting scenes of Dayak life.
During the month a meeting of all the Datus took place in Kuching, presided over by the Datu Bandar. The meeting discussed matters arising out of the death of the late Datu Hakim.
A Committee of the Baram District Council has proposed that the Annual Regatta should include amongst its attractions a borak and tuak competition. The judges will require to be mighty men indeed.
Mr. Harold Bedale, Town Clerk of Hornsey, has arrived in Sarawak under the auspices of the British Council. The object of the visit is to make his experience available to District Councillors and others concerned with local government.
Amongst those leaving for courses abroad this month is Enche Mohammad Salleh of Radio Sarawak who will undergo an advanced training course with the BBC.
Mr. Yeo Cheng Hoe and Mr. H. S. Brown attended as observers from Sarawak the first International Cooperative Alliance Conference held in Kuala Lumpur from 20th to the 24th January.
The ECAFE Trade conference at Bangkok in late January was attended by the Commissioner of Trade and Customs, Mr. Song Thian Cheok and Mr. Chai Kow Lip. A further conference is to be held in March at Kuala Lumpur to discuss trade expansion and economic development.
Dr. Rodney Needham has been awarded a SEATO fellowship for research on social change in Borneo.
Kuching Municipal Council has had a lively debate on allowances for its members.
An Airfield Construction Engineer has been engaged by Government. He will mainly be concerned with
ulu airstrips. At Long Akah, Government this month has paid compensation of a pig, a gong and a parang ilang to the relatives of persons buried in a Kenyah graveyard. The compensation was for four trees in the graveyard which had to be cut down to safeguard the safety of the approach to the Long Akah airstrip.
The first Court of Appeal sitting for the year took place on February 11th. The Chief Justice, Mr. Justice Smith, Mr. Justice Rogers and Mr. Justice Lascelles were present. A Guard of Honour was inspected before the Judges took their seats in the Court. After addresses from the Bar and a reply from the Bench, the Chief Justice received in Chambers. In his address
the Chief Justice mentioned that there had been no decline in the number of shooting accidents during the past year. A large proportion of these accidents result in death and nearly all of them arise out of the practice of shooting first and looking at what is being shot at afterwards. Heavy penalties do not seem to be a de-terrent. Possibly a tighter control of arms and ammunition is the answer. At present one able-bodied man in three has a gun. It is quite evident that many of them are not sufficiently responsible to have licences.
Forest officers from all over Sarawak were in Kuching this month for the Departmental Annual Conference. SESCO selected this moment to indulge in some wholesale slaughtering of trees along Astana Road. What was once a pleasant shady stretch is now bare and sunbeaten. The swathe cut might have served for a grand trunk road but all that was put up was a line of poles. It is difficult to believe that destruction on this scale was necessary. Trees do not grow in a day and they should not be cut down unless there is no practical alternative. This is particularly so in a town like Kuching, a substantial part of the charm of which derives from its trees.
The Bronze Medal of the Royal Humane Society has been awarded to Mari anak Pirang, a young Iban, member of one of the anti-malarial teams in the Balui who, in the face of great danger, rescued a woman from the river when the boat in which she was travelling capsized in the rapids at Long Han.
The Kuching Chinese General Chamber of Commerce celebrated its thirtieth anniversary on the 16th February and took advantage of the occasion to unveil portraits of the past Chairmen of the Chamber, namely, the late Mr. Ong Tiang Swee, o.b.e., o.s.s., Mr. Wee Kheng Chiang, o.s.s., the late Mr. Tan Sum Guan and Mr. Tan Bak Lim. o.b.e., o.s.s. His Excellency the Governor and other distinguished guests were present.
The year of the Dog commenced on the 18th February amidst the customary staccato barrage of firecrackers. Shops did a roaring trade in traditional delicacies on the Eve before closing down early. The first day of the holiday was marred in Kuching by unceasing, heavy rain but the second day was fine and the streets were busy with people on their way to pay their respects to relations and friends while gorgeous lions pranced and curvetted through the bazaar to the sound of drums and gongs. His Excellency the Governor broadcast a New Year message calling on Chinese parents to bring up their families according to the fine, old tradition of China. Quoting Confucius, he said "Filial piety and service to elders are the basis of all virtues", and "The state is well-ruled when the family is well-disciplined".
The Director of the Commonwealth Society for the Blind, Mr. John Wilson, paid an official visit to Sarawak in the course of a world tour. Mr. Wilson, himself, is a fine example of how this terrible handicap can be overcome. It is hoped that a society to help the blind will now be formed here. The Red Cross has done much in the past but more can be done by a specialised society catering for the particular needs of the blind. Mr. Wilson has promised the assistance of his society.
Sarawak was privileged to have a visit from Dr. Koenigswald, the distinguished geologist, who paid a visit to Niah. Dr. Koenigswald is well-known in connection with studies regarding what used to be called the Missing Link—Java Man. Java Man, like Peking Man, was one of the early ancestors of mankind and the discovery was of world significance, throwing light on the nature of human evolution. Our own Niah discoveries do not compare with this in importance. What
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, FEBRUARY 28, 1958
15
has been found there are the remains of modern man similar to what has been found in many places elsewhere, often in caves. But these finds have not, in the past, been so common in South East Asia although in Malaya similar discoveries appear to have been made in Province Wellesley, Pahang and Sungei Siput. The Niah remains are, however, of considerable local interest since little is known of the history of that period— thirty to forty thousand years ago—in this part of the world.
Arrivals and Departures
Between 2.2.58 and 1.3.58
Arrivals
Mr. J. B. Wilson	By air Singapore/Brunei on
(Newly appointed Tempo- 4.2.58. rary Education Officer) On first appointment.
Miss D. M. Tyson	By air Singapore/Sibu on
(Newly appointed Nursing 4.2.58.
Sister)	On first appointment.
Mr. G. W. Deakin	By air Singapore/Kuching on
(Newly appointed Super- 4.2.58. visor of Technical Educa-	On first appointment.
tion)
Mr. R. A. Bewsher	By air Singapore/Kuching on
11.2.58.
Returning from leave.
Mr. William Lee	By air Singapore/Kuching on
12.2.58.
Returning from leave.
Dr. C. J. Cumming-Smith By air Singapore/Sibu on (Medical Officer on transfer 13.2.58.
from Tanganyika)
Mr. J. Tiernan	By air Singapore/Kuching on
14.2.58.
Returning from leave.
Mr. W. G. Morison	By air Singapore/Kuching on
18.2.58.
Returning from leave.
Mr. J. R. Blease	By air Singapore/Kuching on
20.2.58.
Returning from leave.
Mr. J. Cook	By air Singapore/Kuching
on 24.2.58.
Returning from leave.
Mr. W. I. Glass	By Rajah Brooke arriving
(Administrative Officer on Kuching on 24.2.58.
transfer from Malaya). On first appointment.
Mr. A. N. Outram	By air Singapore/Kuching
on 25.2.58.
Returning from leave.
Departures
Miss A. A. Peacock	By air Sibu/Singapore on
2.2.58.
Mr. J. C. B. Fisher, o.b.e. By Marudu sailing Miri/Sin-gapore on 11.2.58.
Proceeding on leave to the United Kingdom.
Mr. F. G. Browne	By air Kuching/Singapore on
14.2.58.
Proceeding on leave to the United Kingdom.
Mr. C. E. Sandbach	By air Lutong/Singapore on
26.2.58.
Proceeding to the United Kingdom.
Mr. M. G. Dickson	By air Kuching/Singapore
on 28.2.58.
Proceeding on leave to the United Kingdom.
Mr. D. St. J. Forrer	By Rajah Brooke leaving
Kuching/Singapore on 1.3.58.
Proceeding on leave to the United Kingdom.
Mr. R. W. Gambrill	By Rajah Brooke leaving
Kuching/Singapore on on 1.3.58.
Proceeding on leave to the United Kingdom.
Mr. E. C. R. Hennessy	By Rajah Brooke leaving
Kuching/Singapore on on 1.3.58.
Proceeding on leave to the United Kingdom.
Text of a Broadcast by His Excellency the Governor at 7 p.m. on February 7th, 1958
I am going to talk to you tonight about a matter of the greatest importance to the future of Sarawak. It is a matter which has been in the minds of many of us for some time; some of you will have seen references to it and speculation about it in the newspapers, and I have no doubt that many of you will have discussed it amongst yourselves, but this is the first time any reference has been made to the subject by any Government in the Borneo Territories. What I want to talk about tonight is the closer association of the three territories of Sarawak, Brunei and North Borneo.
First of all I would like to explain very briefly what I mean when I talk about closer association. Although these three territories are linked by the protection of the British Government and although two of them are part of Her Majesty's Territories we are, to all intents and purposes, three quite separate administrations with no real administrative or constitutional links between us; we are, in fact, three separate small units. If we entered into some kind of partnership we would form one much larger, more powerful and more influential unit. None of us, I think, would want to enter into any form of association which would destroy those traditional characteristics of which all three territories are rightly and properly proud; but we can, I think, achieve a much closer association than exists at present without any loss of our own character if we proceed on the following lines.
What we would need would be a central authority to see that the rules of the partnership were observed and that its main objective was always kept in mind. The central authority should also be made responsible for certain activities which the three partners consider could best be dealt with on a central or inter-territorial basis. We might consider such subjects to be:—
Defence and external relations
Internal security
Communications, Civil Aviation and Meteorological Services, Postal Services and Tele-communications and of course the combined departments already existing such as Judiciary and Geological Survey. We would hope that in time and with the growth of confidence it would be found both economical and advantageous to share other services such as Trade and Customs, Banking and Currency, and in the fields of Research and the specialist services required in Medical, Education, Agriculture and indeed in most departments of Government today.
The central authority's control would therefore be limited to those activities specifically allotted to it by the three Governments. The three Governments would continue as before to control their own revenue and expenditure and generally to fulfil the functions of an independent Government in their own territories.
The central authority might consist of a single Representative of the Queen for all three territories exercising the powers of the present High Commissioner in Brunei. He might be styled Governor-General or Governor and High Commissioner. His advisers might conveniently be drawn from the Executive/Legislative Councils of the three territories. He would travel as Queen's Representative throughout the three territories presiding over the Supreme Council meetings in Kuching from time to time and at the Executive Council in Jesselton. He would not sit on Council Negri in Sarawak nor in the Legislative Council in North Borneo. It should be possible for him to spend a great deal of his time visiting the people of the three territories; he would indeed be less tied to a central headquarters than is the Governor today and with the
16
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, FEBRUARY 28, 1958
vast improvements in communications which we plan he should be able to keep in very close touch with the people of all three territories. Sarawak and North Borneo will of course continue to have Officers, Governors or Lieutenant Governors in charge of the local affairs.
That is in broad outline the kind of partnership which I believe should improve our status, strengthen our position and bring us many advantages without, as I have already stated, destroying the essential characteristics of the internal Government of Sarawak, a Government which has developed on sound and steady lines since the days of the first Rajah, and which I think I can truthfully say has brought happiness and prosperity to Sarawak.
I want to emphasize the fact that what I have just said does not represent a set of firm and final proposals for closer partnership. My own personal opinion is that it can best be achieved on the lines I have indicated, but I must emphasize that what I am doing tonight is putting to you, the people of Sarawak, a number of ideas on this important subject which I want you to consider carefully, and on which I want you, in due course, and when you have fully considered them, to express your own views. I do want this to be clearly understood that the Government is not putting to you a firm plan which it has already decided in detail, it is merely outlining a series of ideas which it considers to be basically sound and good for consideration by you. My own personal view, and that of my Officers and Advisers, is that some step towards closer association and closer partnership such as is now suggested would be of great value to Sarawak, and I would like to give you, again very briefly, the reasons for this opinion.
I referred earlier to the fact that we are at present three small and, perhaps, vulnerable countries: you will have noticed that the world today does not show much consideration for small and weak nations, particularly when they happen to be rich, as Sarawak is, in promise and natural resources. I do not think we can safely say that here in Sarawak we are in any way immune from the dangers which threaten such small territories and although we know we can always rely upon protection of Her Majesty’s Government it is, I think, very important that we should among ourselves take what steps we can to strengthen the security of the Borneo territories. Every step towards closer association: every move which enables the three territories to turn a united front to the outside world will greatly strengthen our own security and the continuation here of the way of life to which we have become accustomed.
I have no doubt that closer association in partnership will have great economic advantages to us. In time it is certain that the larger markets and the removal of trade barriers will lead to greater opportunities and to better conditions and therefore to a higher standard of living. The Government of the three territories should in due course be able to offer to the people greater facilities more cheaply and with greater efficiency. In short, it should lead to greater confidence, more self-reliance, a greater contribution to external defence and to commonwealth solidarity and I believe to a stronger and more prosperous Sarawak.
What of the disadvantages of such a scheme? I can see none of substance. Sarawak will still retain its own name and identity and order its own internal affairs, and control its own estimates. Her Majesty’s Government in the United Kingdom will continue to be our guardian and our friend and indeed a partner with the three of us in this venture. The Queen’s Representative will remain in close touch with the people, and these proposals will not in any way impede or retard the process of preparation for internal self-government as laid down in our Constitution.
I must here, I think, explain the position of Brunei. You will notice that I have throughout this talk referred to the three Borneo territories. His Highness the Sultan
is aware of the discussions which have taken place and is aware also that we in Sarawak and North Borneo intend to consult public opinion. He quite understandably would like first to study the plans which emerge from our discussions and the public reaction to these plans before he commits either himself or his Government to their support.
Brunei is I believe a vital element in this process of alliance and I hope that public discussion will convince the people of Brunei of the solid advantages of a closer association and a better understanding of her neighbours. We have seen examples near us of people, who should be working together, but who have drifted apart to their detriment.
As I said earlier this is only a brief statement of the ideas which we have in mind. Your Residents, District Officers and Senior Native Officers are aware of these views and are prepared to discuss the matter with you at any time, and to answer your questions. When you have had time to consider these proposals there will be formal discussion of them in your District Council and your Divisional Advisory Council, and at a later stage, in the Council Negri.
I personally think the proposals I have suggested to you, or something very like them, are essential to Sarawak's future security and the maintenance of Sarawak’s way of life; others may have other ideas, but whatever the public’s views on these questions, I hope that they are aired and discussed thoughtfully and amicably, and that in no circumstances will you allow mischief-makers to make these proposals an opportunity to foster resentment and racial discord. I think we showed here in Sarawak, when between us we made Sarawak’s new Constitution, that we were capable of settling important issues of this kind in a spirit of reason and co-operation between all races and all interested parties.
I have been in Sarawak eight years and during that time I have seen a lot of this country and met a large number of the people in it. You know that I regard it with deep affection, and that I consider it to be a country full of promise for the future. I want to assure you before I finish that the object in the forefront of my mind when I talk to you tonight is to preserve securely Sarawak’s present happy and friendly character. After long consideration of all the factors involved, I am certain that some closer association with our neighbours is essential for this. I hope that you yourselves will, after you have considered this question, come to the same conclusion.
Goodnight.
In the Footsteps of Tamerlane—II
Having been schooled by years of travel with B.O.A.C., no sooner had I sat down in the Aeroflot plane at Kabul than I fastened my seat-belt. As the plane was revving up a young lady came up to me and asked why I had fastened my belt. "We never use these things. Take it off!” she said and offered me a sweet. I then realised that she was the air hostess. On Soviet planes air hostesses do not wear uniform, so that one may well be misled by young women. Subsequently on the Moscow-Prague flight there was one who wore a skin-tight yellow polo jumper, which I thought most becoming.
Hardly were we air-borne from the strip of sand that serves as Kabul Airport than the young lady again approached and to my astonishment presented me with a cellophane tube 8" x 1 ", for which I could find no respectable use. However, I saw that a number of Russian travellers, who had boarded the plane at Kabul, took out their fountain pens and inserted them in these tubes. I did likewise. I found subsequently that the same usage was followed in all Aeroflot planes. It
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, FEBRUARY 28, 1958
17
is a sensible measure and avoids the embarrassment caused by an overflowing fountain pen at certain altitudes.
After taking off from Kabul we spiralled before facing the majestic massif of the Hindu Kush. At 10,000 feet the air hostess again appeared and asked why I had not adjusted my oxygen mask. I had noticed the device beside my seat but had been so absorbed in watching the incomparable sight of the Hindu Kush that I had forgotten to adjust it when the other travellers put on theirs. The fact of wearing it was most invigorating and added much to the pleasure of the journey.
As the plane emerged from the Hindu Kush, the Amu Darya (which is the Oxus of antiquity) came into view, and here a most astonishing spectacle presented itself. To the South of the Amu lay Afghanistan; an area of riven desert with here and there a tiny village perched on a hill. To the North lay Soviet Uzbekistan: as far as the eye could see an expanse of irrigated cotton, with here and there what proved to be vineyards. In place of the tenuous tracks of Afghanistan were roads, railways, and the modern means of communication. The Amu Darya was the dividing line between the thirteenth and the twentieth century.
Across the river the plane put down at Termez, a modern town about the size of Kuching. Here was the frontier post and passports were stamped. We were called upon to fill in a currency declaration form, which was something new since my last visit to the Soviet Union. Then it had been necessary to exchange all foreign currency at the frontier; now it sufficed to declare it and it could be brought in. Similarly, upon leaving it could be taken out but all roubles must be changed into other currencies. As before, the customs officers did not even ask to see the baggage.
After breakfasting at Termez we again boarded the plane for Tashkent, but whereas from Kabul there had been only some eight passengers, the plane now filled up with Uzbek farmers. It would appear that the following day there was to be a cotton-growers’ conference in Tashkent and matters of some weight were to be discussed. Hardly had the plane taken off than they congregated in a group in the forward part of the cabin and embarked upon a most animated discussion. It was in Uzbek and I could make nothing of it. The air hostess who came to chat with me merely said that they were talking about cotton; it would appear to be a contentious subject. Cotton is the main crop of the Uzbek Republic and its production is twice that of Egypt; oddly enough it is in fact Egyptian long-staple cotton which has been transplanted to Central Asia. However, the cotton-growers in the plane formed a picturesque group with their square songkoks, some wearing the striped overcoat (distressingly like a dressing-gown) over their top boots and breeches, which is the Uzbek national dress. As we came down into Tashkent Airport I asked the hostess why she did not call upon the group to sit down preparatory to landing, but she said it was unnecessary. Soviet passengers on British planes must have loud complaints about the manner in which they are regimented and ordered about.
As against this haphazard treatment of security regulations, Aeroflot provides medical facilities with macabre profusion. As passengers disembark they are met at the foot of the gangway by a hostess and an uniformed nurse bearing a formidable satchel of equipment. As I landed at Termez I was closely scrutinized by a masterful lady, such as the medical profession breeds, so that I wondered whether she suspected me of the Plague. I noted subsequently at the Soviet airports that nurses went out to meet all planes. This, I imagine, is less a comment on the hazards of flying than an extension of general transport usage. Long distance trains carry nurses, and at air
ports as at railway stations there are doctors, indeed such is the profusion of medical staff that the visitor might suppose the country to be peopled with valetudinarians.
Tashkent appears on the maps of Central Asia as a small town. As the plane circles before descending there is unfolded a city the size of Liverpool girdled about with vast industrial enterprises. It differs completely from the cities of Russia proper, for instead of the great blocks of flats, here the population is accommodated in single-storey houses. The streets are planted with trees, so that from the air the impression is somewhat that of a vast bungalow town. Tashkent has an arid desert climate, with temperatures in summer mounting to a parching heat, but thanks to its fine lay-out and to the intensive system of street-spraying, there are not the clouds of dust, which make life so distressing in similar cities in India.
The buildings of Tashkent airport are pleasantly sited in a flower garden and would be most charming were they not wholly inadequate for the surge of travellers which uses them. New airport buildings on a grand scale are under construction and should ease the lot of travellers. The Indian tourist agency which had made reservations for me in Tashkent had stated that I came from Borneo. I was therefore met at the airport by a courier who was a graduate in Chinese. Fortunately, he also spoke English.
Hotel accommodation in Tashkent is inadequate to the demand. There are but four big hotels in the city, though a new one is under construction which will double the existing accommodation. However, the Hotel Tashkent was exceedingly comfortable; it was the only hotel in which I have yet stayed which provided its guests not only with radio but also with television in their rooms. This was the first time that I had encountered television in Asia, but it appears that they have had it in Uzbekistan for several years. The extent to which it is used is shown by the number of aerials affixed to village houses.
Uzbekistan lies in that part of Central Asia which used to be called Russian Turkestan. To be precise it is bounded by the Oxus and Jaxartes (the Amu Darya and Syr Darya), by the Aral Sea and the Altai Mountains. Official statistics give a population of 7,600,000 for the republic; this includes a certain number of Russians, of whom the largest concentration is in Tashkent, where they constitute almost 40 per cent of the population. The Uzbeks are described as a Turkic people, but they have a strongly Mongolian cast of features. They are Moslems and adhere to the Sunni sect.
Tashkent has little of antiquarian interest. I visited a fourteenth-century maderasah, which was still in use. After the great buildings of Delhi, the mosque itself was unimpressive, but the college buildings were beautiful. There were some sixty students in residence all training to be imams. The head of the college said that the full course was one of twelve years, which was in addition to the normal secondary education, so one concludes that the Islamic clergy of Uzbekistan are an erudite body. At Bukhara there was another maderasah of twice the size. The library of the Tashkent maderasah was rich in manuscripts; some of the medieval ones which I was shown were beautifully illuminated.
In the environs of Tashkent there are some beautiful remains of antiquity. I visited the school of the Sverdlov Collective Farm which lies some twenty miles down the Samarkand road. After having seen the school I noticed a domed building across the fields. The Headmaster explained that it was the tomb of a local saint and offered to take me over to see it. I found that it was a fourteenth-century mosque with the tomb in an adjoining shrine. Attached to the mosque was a maderasah of approximately the same date and behind this was a colony for the blind, which I found most interesting.
18
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, FEBRUARY 28, 1958
The colony consisted of a series of small houses each with two rooms, a kitchen and bathroom. Each house was inhabited either by a blind couple or by a small group of blind persons, and all were linked together by stone pathways along which the inmates tapped their way. Each house had a radio and there was a common recreation-centre, which contained a considerable library in Braille. Parts of the old Maderasah buildings were used as workshops, in which the inmates tended rope-making machines. There were other large workshops in which they wove carpets on hand-looms, and some displayed a most uncanny skill in following the patterns with their fingers. They were paid by the hour for their work; the rope-makers earned about 600 roubles ($200) a month and the more skilled workers proportionately more.
After this unexpected digression, the Headmaster invited me to the local caravansary where we sat on carpets amongst other wayfarers, drank green tea from small bowls and ate grapes. At the caravansaries there stop the most various passers-by, some arrive by cars, some descend from vast diesel lorries and some ride up on sturdy cobs. They present as picturesque a company as can be found anywhere in Asia.
The Sverdlov Collective Farm was an agricultural unit which comprised two Uzbek villages. There was one central school for some six hundred children, which provided the normal ten-year course. There were twenty classes averaging thirty children in each and a staff of forty, including the Headmaster. The school bore the appearance of any modern well-run school, but it was distinctive in the lavish equipment of its laboratory and workshop. The former possessed an array of instruments which was, by English standards, astonishing, but which subsequent visits showed to be commonplace in Soviet schools. It was designed for a class of forty working in pairs. The workshop contained an astonishing array of lathes and other mechanical tools, but this I also discovered to be usual. It is interesting that whereas in English schools, the emphasis in handwork appears to be on woodwork, in Soviet schools it is almost entirely on metal work.
I did not visit either of the kindergartens, but we passed one of the cr ches and the Headmaster insisted that I look inside. I have always viewed small children with abhorrence. I had a fleeting vision of rows of cots and pots, expressed perfunctory admiration, and pressed on.
Some of the Headmaster's comments on rural life were very interesting. He said that up till the Twentieth Congress the emphasis had been so laid upon industry, that all his good pupils left their villages for Tashkent or other cities and went into industry, or went for higher studies leading to an industrial career. Few were content to stay on the farm, because by reason of taxation their share in the collective profits was less than they could earn in industry. The new agricultural policy had now redressed the balance, and the the result was seen last year (1957) with a majority of graduation classes going in for agriculture. Another interesting change had been in the matter of smallholdings. Apart from his share in the collective products, each farmer has a smallholding of his own. These may be as much as two acres. In the past smallholding produce had been taxed, but now all such taxes were abolished and the farmer could sell the produce of his holding as he wished; he could if he cared take it into one of the Tashkent markets and sell it there. Teachers were all provided with houses rent free and a smallholding of their own.
It was with regret that I said good-bye to the Headmaster, but I had booked a seat at the opera that night and could not delay. Nonetheless it had been a profitable, if diffuse, expedition, as always happens when one goes with one objective in view and stumbles, upon all sorts of other interesting things. There was but one jarring note. Returning to Tashkent I saw
an announcement that the race course was closed for the winter and that racing would be resumed in March. It was then October.
R. NICHOLL
Note:—
For travellers who would go where they should not.
Soviet visas are issued free of charge by consulates upon production of a note from any tourist company to the effect that hotel accommodation has been reserved in the U.S.S.R. Hotel accommodation has to be paid for at the rate of 11 roubles to £1 sterling. In India such hotel accommodation may be booked and paid for in rupees (sterling) without the use of convertible travellers cheques. The same is true of air and rail tickets.
Once across the frontier, however, the tourist can exchange his money at the rate of 27.60 roubles to the £1 sterling, which is the actual purchasing value of the rouble. It is therefore advisable to book only to the nearest town across the frontier at the rate of 11:£1 and there make onward bookings at 27.60:£1. The difference is considerable. London to Moscow, tourist, by air costs £74 when booked in London. Moscow to London costs £32 when booked in Moscow.
I understand that there is a preferential rate of exchange for Afghanis: 1 rouble to 1 Afghani, of which there are 9 to 1 Indian rupee, of which there are 16 to the £1 sterling. If this is in fact true, by cashing travellers cheques in Kabul it should be possible to get 144 roubles to the £1 sterling.
R. N.
The Atmosphere of the Bornean Forest*
Contrary to popular conception the primary forest in Borneo, like tropical forest throughout the world is usually not difficult to penetrate. In a previous article I have given some idea of how completely tropical rain forest covers the island of Borneo. In old undisturbed forest the undergrowth consists of herbs, shrubs and seedlings and sapling trees and a few woody climbing plants. This undergrowth is considerably thicker than that in an average forest in temperate regions, but it does not prevent one walking at a fair speed as long as one's hands are free to bend back impeding vegetation. Much more liable to slow one’s progress are the frequent small streams, rocky places, undulating country, fallen logs and branches, the buttress roots of large trees and masses of climber tangles which have fallen to the ground, and slippery soils. It is usual to carry a parang but this is used more to mark one’s path for the return journey than to cut a way. In contrast the vegetation of river banks, clearings and secondary growth is so dense that a passage must be laboriously cut out.
In undisturbed forest the ground is gloomy except when the sun is out and sunlight dapples the forest floor. This is because the average height of the larger trees may be as much as 200 feet and the space between them and the ground is more or less filled with the crowns of smaller trees at various heights, which effectively block the light. Winds are generally light in Borneo and can scarcely be felt on the ground even if one sees the crowns of the tallest trees swaying in the breeze. Rain is almost a daily event, quite often coming early or late in the afternoon. One may have little warning of its approach other than a darkening of the sky and the almost complete stilling of any breeze. Then a faint rushing noise is heard in the distance, which gradually loudens as the rain clouds approach, accompanied by peals of thunder. The wind suddenly gets up and the distinct patter of rain drops falling on tree crowns is heard, gradually getting
*Written by the late Mr. G. H. S. Wood who was Forest Botanist, North Borneo, from 1953 to 1957. He died in Brunei in April, 1957, as the result of a tragic accident and the manuscript of this article was found among his personal effects.
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, FEBRUARY 28, 1958
19
louder until a sousing downpour comes down which few clothes can keep out. In such circumstances one can expect little cover in the forest as even the most promising trees are soon converted into waterfalls. If one is wanting to continue walking and the way is fairly open an umbrella is a useful protection, but if one is engaged in some work it is usual to erect a small ground sheet to provide temporary cover.
An outstanding feature of this forest is the richness of the tree flora. The great majority of the plants are woody and of these woody plants the majority are trees of various sizes. Indeed it is estimated that there are not less than 2,500 species of tree in Borneo which reach a girth of twelve inches at breast height. The only herbs are some of the epiphytes and a relatively small proportion of the undergrowth. Though numerous in species the trees of the forest are remarkably uniform in general appearance both in the bole and foliage. The dark green colour and similarity of the leaves of rain forest trees are mainly responsible for the sombre and monotonous appearance of the forest. Many of the trees and shrubs flower for only short periods at irregular intervals and even then most have inconspicuous, greenish or white, flowers. Large and brightly-coloured flowers, contrary to popular imagination, are rare and mainly confined to epiphytes and climbers. The chances are that the observer will be disappointed by the dull appearance of the forest and the absence of flowers, unless he be lucky enough to meet the rare gregarious flowering of the Dipterocarpaceae or other large forest tree families. So dense are the upper canopies of the forest that the flowering of large trees and high climbers is often betrayed only by the presence of fallen flowers on the ground and the wafted scent, which is characteristic of rain forest, since many species are pollinated by insects. The observer, though he will be discouraged by the general absence of flowers, will be impressed by the abundance of flowers produced by any individual, and this is particularly true of those species which flower at occasional intervals. He will also notice the paucity of the herbaceous ground flora, both in species and individuals both of which are generally smaller for a given area than in a temperate forest. The predominance of bare ground or ground covered only by a thin layer of leaves will also be noticed. Though not so readily apparent the abundance of climbers in the upper canopy is shown by their thick stems which cling closely to the boles of supporting trees. One's first impression of sombreness and monotony is increased by the absence of marked seasonal changes in the aspect of the foliage. The majority of the trees are evergreen, the loss of old leaves and production of young leaves being a continuous process which is a consequence of the uniform tropical climate.
In contrast to the abundance of plant life in the Bornean forest animal life is not so evident. Large mammals, other than deer and pig are scarce but one cannot go far without hearing or seeing one or more of the numerous types of monkeys. The chorus of the gibbon apes is one of the most familiar sounds of the jungle, especially in the early morning. Birds are frequent but not abundant, most more highly-coloured than the familiar birds of north temperate regions, but with rather disappointing songs. The most familiar bird-calls are the high-pitched call of the argus pheasant and the demoniacal cackle of the hornbill. Most of the smaller birds make indifferent twitterings or only short passages, some of which become familiar. Insects are omnipresent. One of the most obtrusive are the cicadas whose dawn and dusk chorus is one of the most familiar sounds, which occur with such regularity that one can tell the time within five minutes. These dawn and dusk cicadas are often called "the Iban clock". Ants are not generally obstrusive in the juncle though the large ant if antagonized can give a severe bite; gregarious ants are scarce but are found in certain localities. Of the lesser animals leeches undoubtedly hold pride of place in obnoxiousness. Few localities
are without leeches and in some places they are for no apparent reason exceptionally abundant. Wet weather encourages them to appear in strength and it may be that the places they favour most are the dampest even in dry weather. However they are completely absent from wet places such as swamps and river banks. In the mountains they are to be found up to 6,000 feet above sea level. They are few in species but great in numbers. Contrary to popular imagination butterflies are not conspicuous on the floor of the jungle and are dull in colour. They are much commoner and more brightly coloured in the upper canopy where the observer seldom has a chance of seeing them.
If one is working for any length of time in primary jungle it is usual to make a temporary camp. This is essentially a rectangular ridge-structure with a raised platform made of sticks for sleeping on one side and a special annex with such luxuries as a table and chair if he is working in the locality for any length of time. The whole building is roofed with atap (rectangular woven slats made from palm leaves) or more conveniently with the more portable plain canvas fly sheet. The day’s work begins at dawn, to avoid the heat of the day as much as possible, and ends when one feels inclined. Most of the time during the day one is bathed in sweat owing to the constant high temperature of about 80-85 F and humidity of anything from 60-100 per cent. It is a relief to return to camp in the afternoon and have a bathe for it is seldom that one cannot find a stream near which to make camp. Owing to the high temperature and humidity one wears the lightest clothes possible in the jungle, and most wear rubber-sole jungle boots to keep out leeches. Should one be caught in heavy rain it is advisable to return to camp as soon as possible for a change of clothes, or at least keep moving to prevent catching a chill.
Delegation of Authority with Emphasis on District Officer Administration
[The following is a talk given to Government officers in training]
Delegation of authority is closely linked with the much wider question of responsibility. It is essential to delegate authority but this does not mean delegating responsibility.
The need to delegate authority is an obvious one. No senior Government officer, and by senior Government officer for the purpose of this talk I mean any officer in Division III and above, can deal with everything he is in charge of by himself. He must largely parcel out the work to his subordinates and confine himself to doing the more difficult tasks while at the same time keeping an eye on his subordinates to see that they do what he has given them properly.
Failure to delegate can be disastrous. I think all of you will be able to recall cases of the over-zealous and over-conscientious officer who feels he must do everything himself. And what a nuisance such officers are. They overwork, they get bad-tempered, they acquire a persecution mania and generally speaking the results are slow and inefficient. Such a man is usually touchy and obstinate and when you try and persuade him to do more to delegate he is hurt and offended and feels that his work is not appreciated in the right quarters. There are of course cases where a very hard-working officer gets into this position through not being provided with enough staff to support him but I am not discussing such cases here.
At the other extreme you have the really lazy man who regards opportunity to delegate as a heaven-sent chance to pass the buck in all directions and divest himself of the responsibility which he is paid to accept.
20
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, FEBRUARY 28, 1958
I am afraid that it would be libellous and defamatory if I were to cite examples of what I have in mind but here again I am sure that most of you will be able to recall from your wide experience cases of what I have described.
Delegation of course sometimes works in reverse. An officer may be presented with a problem which strictly speaking is not his job and where he can, quite legitimately, say “This is none of my business”. But if he says this it often causes inconvenience to the public. This is particularly liable to happen in Sarawak where distances are great and where sometimes matters are dealt with in the larger centres. No member of the public should ever, under any circumstance, be sent to the Divisional Headquarters to deal with a matter if the District Officer can possibly take it up for him. In such cases an officer is really delegating authority to himself. He has to be careful that he is not treading on somebody else's toes but far better that some toes are trodden on in Kuching or Sibu or Miri than a member of the public should have to make a long, troublesome, unnecessary journey. The officer who has a go at a problem even if he makes mistakes is of far more value than the man who plays for safety and says "Nothing doing".
Once authority has been delegated to a subordinate it is essential that the senior must keep an eye on what is going on. He must always be ready to deal with a difficult problem himself and in order to achieve this he should not only see the incoming mail but he must frequently see what is going on inside the office or offices which he is in charge of. There are, of course, many excellent subordinates who do not need constant supervision but no matter how high an opinion you may have of a man you must keep an eye on his work because even the best of us is liable to slip up and human nature being what it is there are always the weaker vessels who need supervision and nursing the whole time.
The main things you have to look for are not, as some people think, financial irregularities. Sarawak is fortunate in that the standards of honesty in the Government service is very high. As in every other country there is the odd black sheep but that is not the primary thing to look for when you delegate authority. Il is something which in many ways is far more serious, the sin of sitting on things.
We all of us aim to provide Sarawak with an efficient Government and efficiency very largely means dealing with things quickly. That is what the public expect and that is what they should get. The rare case of a man who is personally dishonest does not really affect the public very much. The odds are that he will be caught eventually and sent to jail. The man who really brings Government into disrepute is the man who sits on things and keeps the public waiting. Most unfortunately such a man cannot be given a prison sentence.
It is a problem that affects the whole fabric of Government. You will find cases in Departmental Headquarters and the Secretariat just as you will in a District Office. And so when authority is delegated you must ensure that your subordinates are doing their job and not holding things up, that the Land Clerk does not have a great pile of land applications, matters of great importance to the applicant, stuffed away in a drawer and that the Licenses Clerk does not send people away who have come to pay their dues to Government, and tell them to come back next day. If these things happen and the man who has delegated authority says that he did not know and that it is the fault of the subordinate, then he, the senior man, is just not doing his job properly.
An essential ingredient in delegating authority is that the officer who delegates must accept overall responsibility for what his subordinates do. The leader of a team is the man who has to stand the racket when things go wrong. He must never try to evade respon
sibility. If a subordinate gets into difficulties then the leader must stand up for him and do his best to fight his battles for him. It is essential if loyalty and team spirit are to be maintained. Delegating authority does not of course necessarily mean that the senior officer is directly responsible for anything criminal which his junior may do but he has to accept some measure of responsibility for the situation which has been allowed to arise and which may have resulted in such sins as dishonesty or defalcation.
If delegation is to be efficient it must be based on knowledge and sympathetic understanding of the subordinate. If a subordinate for whose work you are ultimately responsible looks unwell or comes to the office in the morning smelling like a distillery or wears nothing but the most elegant sharkskin suits or is short-tempered and quarrelsome with his colleagues you must know why. It may well be that it is something where you can help him. There may have been a family quarrel with the occupants of the next Government quarter or he may be worried over debts that he has incurred or he may be just so fond of liquor or so vain that he is over-drinking or over-spending. In all such cases the senior must try and help. He may not be successful but the point is that if a man's personal life is unhappy or unsatisfactory his work will suffer too.
These are I think the broad principles which must guide one in delegating authority. They apply to every aspect of Government work. I do not believe myself that one should lay down rules and regulations as to how matters should be arranged in the District Office. I am no believer in those neat little diagrams where all lines lead to the DO.
The District Office set-up is fairly simple and one which you all know extremely well. Just how the work should best be divided up is really dependent on the individuals concerned. At the head you have the DO flanked on one side by his administrative assistants, the SAO’s, and on the other by the departmental officers. Forest Guards, Customs Officers and Medical staff and propped up from the centre by his clerical staff, the Chief Clerk, Correspondence Clerk, Licenses Clerk, Land Clerk and Court Clerk.
I do not propose to concern myself here with the SAO’s and Departmental staff. I am here mainly interested in the clerical staff which constitutes such a large and valuable part of the backbone of Government. Clerical staff have a most vital part to play in the life of Sarawak because they are the Government officers with whom members of the public most often come into contact and they provide the greatest element of continuity in the office. The clerical officer who is patient, helpful and understanding is a tremendous asset for Government and particularly for good communal relations. The man who is none of these things is a serious liability and can do and does great harm, especially to the interests of his own community, if he is disagreeable to members of other communities. Fortunately the standards in my experience are very high.
As I have said just who should do what is largely a matter of the staff available and of the abilities of the various individuals. One cannot lay down hard and fast rules. But one thing about which I do have decided opinions is that the Chief Clerk should take an active interest in every aspect of work in the office. He should not regard himself as simply being a Treasury Clerk even though in Sarawak this is normally his main function.
Generally speaking the Chief Clerk is a very senior and experienced officer. It is to him that the inexperienced junior should turn for advice and such advice and guidance should be given even before it is requested. It is the DO's job to delegate but he must lean heavily on his Chief Clerk who is very much the foundation stone of the office and it is most important that the Chief Clerk should take a really general interest in the working of the office. I have always had this in the
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, FEBRUARY 28, 1958
21
Stations which I have been fortunate enough to work in but I know it is not always the case and I do regard it as a most important point.
It is of course a problem for the Treasury Clerk to take an overall interest in what goes on in the office, beset as he is by a multitude of important but far from interesting forms and vouchers. It can be done and I have seen it done but I would be the first to agree that it is by no means easy.
I have heard it suggested that it is unfortunate that the Chief Clerk should always have to do the Treasury work. It means that the able and experienced officer has, on promotion, to look forward to much of the dullest work in the office. At the same time the correspondence and filing clerk who should have an encyclopaedic knowledge of what has been going on in the office and in the District is usually a relatively inexperienced junior. It is at least arguable that the roles should be reversed.
CORRESPONDENCE
The Editor,
Sarawak Gazette
Dear Sir,
I was interested in R.A.B's review of Iban Agriculture in your December number. Not only have the departments concerned apparently ignored Dr. Freeman's recommendation for a campaign against over-cropping, but it is common knowledge that the Government Committee controlling internal migration is making it a condition that Ibans settled in new areas should take two crops of hill padi in succession off their new land. This is the practice of krukoh, so roundly and convincingly condemned by Dr. Freeman. Thus the Government far from making krukoh illegal and instituting a vigorous educational campaign against it, is making it compulsory.
It is possible that the Government (or departments concerned) have facts that show that cropping of hill rice for two years in succession is desirable, and not disastrous as Dr. Freeman maintains. It is possible, but not likely since Dr. Freeman is, as far as I know, the only man to do any serious scientific research on Iban Agriculture. If they have, it would be wise to make them public, as to continually act directly contrary to the recorded and well documented recommendations of a responsible research scientist on a subject of this importance, without giving reasons, does not instil public confidence in the internal migration committee and other departments concerned.
I am, etc.
N. S. HAILE
At the Receipt of Custom
By George Schwartz
Although the latest annual report, 1957, of the Commissioners of Her Majesty's Customs and Excise is numbered 48 it does represent the centenary of these reports which first came out in 1857 but at that time separately for the two branches. The 48 relates to the amalgamated report which first appeared in 1909.
The Commissioners are obviously happy to record this centenary, with the reminder that that was by no means the start of the business. Talk about old-established firms. The Customs duties date back at least to the reign of King John and you can wager that they were collected under some other name long before that. The Excise duties go back to 1643 when they were first imposed by the Long Parliament.
Stand and Deliver
Yes, there is a fine old historical and romantic flavour about Customs and Excise, which I am afraid does not attach to the Board of Inland Revenue. The latter
has somewhat the air of an upstart, possibly because it is associated with the grisly modern developments of the income tax, surtax, death duties, and profits tax. Whereas Customs starts us thinking of smugglers and excisemen, brandy-running and secret tunnels, and the parson himself not above taking a small cask on the side. I like to think that at Custom House they still use quill pens and hand round snuff, and if they get the snuff cheap from confiscated contraband, good luck to them. Muzzle not the ox that treads on our corns.
Just to mark the centenary, and with, I imagine, the suspicion of a smile on their faces the Commissioners print some statistics illustrating the progress of the departmental business over the period. I extract some figures for your delectation:
£ millions
1856.57	1913.14	1956.57
Revenue from Central
Government Taxation	68.5	163.0	4920.3
Total Customs and Ex-
cise Revenue ...	41.7	75.2	2108.4
Total Customs Revenue	23.4	35.6	1199.0
Total Excise Revenue	18.3	39.6	909.4
In 1856-7 tobacco brought in £5 million, in 1913-14 £18 million, and in 1956-57 £702 million. In 1913-14 just before the First War, and after Mr. Lloyd George had done his worst as a peace-time Chancellor, drink and tobacco brought in £57 million of the £75 million Customs and Excise yield. Apart from insignificant imposes on tea and sugar, everything else was free of duty.
Now look at the set-up. From alcoholic drink £417 million, tobacco £702 million, petrol and other oils £338 million, purchase tax £458 million, entertainments tax £41 million, betting £29 million, protective duties £90 million, etc.......Grand total £2,108 million.
All collected by 15,000 fellows at a cost of 2d. in the £. 19s 10d. profit in the £. What a business! And if, as I surmise, it's all done with a quill pen and a pinch of snuff, think what will happen when those boys get electronic computers and a couple of Zeta machines.
I also permit myself the surmise that the Commissioners are slightly ashamed of that ignoble purchase tax. Out over the moors with bloodhounds and blunderbusses hunting down illicit stills is a man’s job in the grand old tradition "Hark you. Sir, one pace and I fire”. But sniffing around my lady's dressing table and poking fingers into the cosmetic jar. No, no, not a gentlemanly affair. Faugh! What have Her Majesty's Commissioners to do with bath salts, cuticle removers, eyebrow tweezers, perfumed calamine lotions, deodorants and depilatories, even if there is a useful ad valorem rake-off on these toilet intimacies.
Let them start in the next Budget by withdrawing gracefully from the bedroom and the kitchen, and let us work to the stage when our Welfare State is sustained on the three stout pillars of booze, baccy, and betting, providing a model to the world and an enduring monument to our Puritan Fathers in the Long Parliament.
Sleight of Hand
All the same you must confess it's done very neatly. You pay 1s. 11 d. over the counter for 10 cigarettes and, hey presto, the Customs man filches 1s. 7d. of it and he wasn't even in the shop. You earn £2 by overtime work on Saturday and if you are on the standard rate of income tax that's whittled down to 26s., and if you spend that on half a bottle of gin and cigarettes the Customs and Excise snaffle about 20s. Money earnings 40s. Net real earnings 6s.
But that's why the man next door had his appendix out free, has a boy at Oxford on a State scholarship and has a bigger car than yours. And don’t console
22
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, FEBRUARY 28, 1958
yourself that he paid a bigger purchase tax on the car because it’s on the firm.
Looked at it in the large, and Heaven forbid one should do that, it's all slightly comic and more than slightly crazy. From the cradle to the grave! Talcum powder at one end, and you know which end I mean, is dusted on with a tax, and the brass handles carry a tax into the crematorium. That's apart from what they make on the drinks at the christening and the wake.
The preceding article is reprinted by kind permission of our distinguished contemporary, the Sunday Times of London, from its issue of the 2nd February, 1958, where it first appeared.
It is refreshing to find that, at a time when the Sarawak Customs have just made themselves more unpopular than ever by taxing virtually everything except fresh air, an eminent writer in The Sunday Times is able to state that "there is a fine....romantic flavour
about Customs". He was not, of course, referring to the Sarawak Customs but to that infinitely more predatory body of men the United Kingdom Customs who not only charge you about 60 per cent on everything they can think of (against our humble little 10 or 20 per cent) but then make you pay another 60 per cent purchase tax and cause the whole business of importing to be so complicated that you have to pay a highly-trained agent to do it for you.
Yet he finds them romantic and I think that if he were to study the Sarawak Customs he would find them equally so. Surely, for instance, there is a romantic flavour about the fact that 30 years ago the duty on a case of whisky was $3 whereas it is now the curious figure of $79.20. This indubitably denotes progress and progress always has its romantic side. Or, if you don't look at it this way. you will at least have little difficulty, after comparing the tariffs of yesterday and today, in indulging in romantic yearnings for the days that are no more. — Ed.
Recent Books
Additions to the Sarawak Library during the mouth of February, 1958.
AUTHOR	TITLE
Fiction
Abercrombie, P. B.	The child of fortune (1957)
Aldridge, James	I wish he would not die (1957)
Bloom, Ursula	The elegant Edwardian (1957)
Bradbury, Ray	Dandelion wine (1957)
Brooke-Rose, Christine The languages of love (1957) Bruce, Kate Mary Felicity (1956) Buck, Pearl S.	Letter from Peking (1957)
Buhet, Gil	The Grand catch (1957)
Dudintsev, Vladimir Not by bread alone (1957) Gaskell, Jane	Strange evil (1957)
Humphreys, Emyr The Italian wife (1957) Irving, Charles, ed.	Sixteen on (1957)
Jacob, Naomi	Wind on the heath (1956)
Kittermaster, Michael The District Officer (1957) Macinnes, Colin	City of spades (1957)
Mason, F. V. W.	To whom be glory (1957)
Ott, Wolfgang	Sharks and little fish (1957)
Pape, Richard	Fortune is my enemy (1957)
Paul, Leslie	The boy down Kitchener Street
(1957)
Pulvertaft, L.	Thing desired (1957)
Parker, Richard	Harm intended (1957)
Roberts, Cecil	Love is like that (1957)
Robins, Denise	The seagull's cry (1957)
Robins, Denise	The noble one (1957)
Seifert, Elizabeth	Call for Dr. Barton (1957)
Sinclair, Upton	Presidential mission (1948)
Tenn, William	Of all possible worlds (1956)
Thorpe, Sylvia	Sword of vengeance (1957)
Walker, David	Sandy was a soldier's boy (1957)
Willans, Geoffroy	The whistling arrow (1957)
Wilson, Angus	A bit off the map and other stories
(1957)
Crime and Detection
Buxton, Miles	Death in a duffle coat (1956)
Carmichael, Harry	Emergency exit (1957)
Fitzgerald, Nigel	Imagine a man (1956)
Gair, Malcolm	Sapphires on Wednesday (1957)
Gardner, Erle Stanley	The case of the fiery fingers (1957)
Gardner, Erle Stanley	The D. A. breaks an egg (1957)
Gilruth, Susan	To this favour (1957)
Howard, Hartley	Key to the morgue (1957)
Matheson, Jean	So difficult to die (1957)
Non-Fiction
Balsdon, Dacre	Oxford life (1957)
Beloff, Max	Europe and the Europeans: a report
prepared at the request of the Council of Europe (1957)
Bloemertz, Gunther Heaven next stop: impressions of a German fighter pilot (1953)
Bronowski, Jacob The common sense of science (1951)
Brown, Harrison,	The next hundred years (1957)
and others
Calder, Ritchie	Men against the frozen North
(1957)
Camoens, Luiz de The Lusiads: translated by William C. Atkinson (1952)
AUTHOR	TITLE
Non-Fiction
Church, Richard	The golden sovereign: a conclusion
to "Over the bridge" (1957)
Clark, Margaret M. Left-handedness (1957)
Cloete, Stuart	The African giant: a story of a
Journey (1957)
Cross, Frank Leslie, ed. The Oxford dictionary of the Christian Church (1957)
Danielsson, Bengt Forgotten islands of the South Seas (1957)	Durrell, Lawrence Esprit de corps: sketches from diplomatic life (1957)
Durrell, Lawrence Bitter lemons (1957)
Garland, Thomas O. Artificial respiration, with special emphasis on the Holger Nielson method (1955)
Grant, Jane	Come hither, nurse (1957)
Harrington, Anthony P. Defend yourself with judo (1957) Haskell, Arnold L. ed. The ballet annual 1958 (1957) Huxley, Julian	New bottle for new wine (1957)
Kay, George R. ed	The Penguin book of Italian verse:
with plain prose translations of each poem (1958)
Lord, Walter	Day of Infamy (1957)
Mainwaring, James Psychology In the classroom (1957) Majdalany, Fred	Cassino: a portrait of a battle
(1957)
Matthews, D. S.	Medicine my passport (1957)
Mee, A. J.	Physical chemistry. 5th edition pre-
pared in collaboration with D.M.S. Wheeler (1956)
Merton, Thomas	The silent life (1957)
Middleton, Drew	The British (1957)
Minney, R. J.	Next stop Peking: a record of a
16,000 miles journey through Russia, Siberia and China (1957)
Mitford, Nancy	Voltaire in love (1957)
Morton, H. V.	A traveller in Rome (1957)
Nevins, Allan	Ford: the times, the man and the
company (1954)
Philip, Prince	Selected speeches, 1948-1955 (1957)
Duke of Edinburgh
Sitwell. Dame Edith	Collected poems (1957)
Skinner, Cornelia Otis Our hearts were young and gay and Kimborough, (1956) Emily
Slessor, Tim	First overland: the story of the
Oxford and Cambridge Far Eastern Expedition (1957)
Smith, W. O. Lester Education: an introductory survey (1957)
Thigpen, C. H. and The three faces of Eve (1957) Cleckley, H. M.
Toynbee, Arnold	The world and the West: the B.B.C.
Reith lectures, 1952 (1953)
Trevor-Roper, H. R. Historical essays (1957) Watts, Alan R.	Art ideas for schools
Wildeblood, Peter Against the law (1955) Wilson, Colin	Religion and the rebel (1957)
Wodehouse, P. G. Over seventy: an autobiography with digressions (1957)
Young, John Zachary The life of veterbrates (1955)
Printed at the Government Printing Office, Kuching, Sarawak, F. W. Goodwin, o.b.e., Government Printer.