 Vol. LXXXIV
No. 1202
PRICE
KUCHING, Wednesday, April 30th, 1958
$1.00
Contents
Page
His Excellency the Governor's Hari Raya Broadcast.
1958	... ... ... ... ... 53
Notes and Comments	...	...	...	...	54
Arrivals and Departures	...	...	...	...	54
Education and the Economic Realities of Sarawak ... 55
Kuching Letter	...	...	... ... 56
Visits by His Excellency the Governor—
1.	Second Division—February 1958	... ...	57
2.	Padawan—March 1958 ...	...	... 58
Community Development with Land Dayak Women ... 59
The Rajah Sir Charles Brooke Memorial Settlement ... 60
Diary of a Sedentary Officer ...	...	... 61
Excerpts from Reports of Administrative Officers for the
Second Half-Year,	1957	...	...	...	...	62
Other Voices (2)	...	...	...	...	77
Correspondence	...	...	...	...	78
Book Review—Borneo for Beginners ... ... ... 78
Back numbers of the Gazette	...	...	...	78
Recent Books ...	...	...	...	... 79
The Sarawak Gazette
WEDNESDAY, APRIL 30th, 1958
His Excellency the Governor's Hari Raya Broadcast, 1958
Since Radio Sarawak started its service I have at each Hari Raya broadcast a message to the Malay people of this country. I am very sad to feel that this will be my last Hari Raya message to you. I have enjoyed these years in Sarawak very much and I have looked forward each year to Hari Raya; especially to the opportunity it affords me to visit my friends in their own houses and to meet their families in the atmosphere or goodwill, gaiety and friendship which is the message of Hari Raya.
People may say that there is a tendency to spend too much on entertainment, on new paint and new clothes, on fire crackers and food. That may be so, but it is really a small price to pay if we can thereby keep alive this unique Sarawak form of celebration which is shared and enjoyed by all. I have spoken to you on other occasions of the importance I attach to the significance of Hari Raya to the future of this country as well as to the Malay community. By Muslim tradition it renews the bonds of family and the unity of Islam; by Sarawak custom it strengthens the bonds of friendship between people of different races.
When the Chief Secretary, Mr. Ellis, was leaving Sarawak on retirement the other day he spoke of the dangers of complacency and I entirely agree with what he said. We have much to be thankful for particularly in the racial harmony which exists here as an
established and natural practice as a part of our adat lama, but the danger is that we may forget how quickly relationships can sour, how quickly misunderstandings can grow when fed with jealousy, racial rivalry and mischief; we have surely seen in many countries around us a terrible warning to be on our guard against complacency.
The talks we are now having about a closer relationship between the three territories of North Borneo, Brunei and Sarawak are I know testing our inter-racial unity. I have read with great interest in the newspapers the accounts of Council meetings throughout the country and the letters which have been written by individuals on this subject. Some are enthusiastic, some doubtful, a few hostile and of course there are many who are probably uninterested or uncomprehending. I want you to know that I am not going to accept the views of the enthusiastic just because I happen to agree with them.
There is, I believe, a feeling that the Government is trying to move too quickly in this matter, that there have been too many changes of late and that political advance has been altogether too fast. Let me assure you that in this matter of a closer association between the three territories we have no desire to press you to an early decision. Perhaps it may be a year or two or longer before you have made up your mind what you want to do about it. We must try to avoid making it a racial issue—it's an important matter for Sarawak as a whole and so it is with a single mind we should approach it. We are going to consider this matter carefully and calmly because it concerns our future and because we want everyone to have time to consider the advantages and disadvantages of living in closer accord with our neighbours. I want to hear all points of view. There is therefore no reason for you the Malays to be suspicious either of Government's intentions or the intentions of other racial groups in this matter. The tone of some of the letters which I have read leaves the impression that suspicion arises because some people feel that the Chinese enthusiasm for the plan must indicate that they see in it some benefit for Chinese interests to the exclusion of others; some opportunity for Chinese advancement at the expense of other races. That is untrue and unfair; although there are obvious trading advantages and defence and security advantages in this idea of partnership surely they will be shared by all. The greatest danger to your future as Malays is the growth of racial separatism in Sarawak which would lead to a racial struggle for power. The fact is that whatever prosperity God allows us must be shared by all. In spite of what is sometimes said this is what Government tries to ensure. The fact is however that some people make the most of their opportunities because they are alert and industrious and others do not. The Government Rubber Planting Scheme is a case in point. It has been excellently supported by the Chinese and Iban but the Malays have generally lagged behind. Where there is strong leadership the Malays have proved that they can do just as well if not better than others. At Engkilili in the Second Division, the Tua Kampong with energetic support has done an excellent job of clearing and planting on a co-operative basis.
54
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, APRIL 30, 1958
There is another very good Malay scheme at Senga up the Bintulu River in the Fourth Division. These two enterprises are as good as any in the country.
The Malays cannot prosper if trade is bad for the Chinese or if the country is in political turmoil. Our progress depends entirely on how we pull together— Chinese and Malays, Dayaks and Melanaus in the same boat proceeding up the same river. Which gets me back to Hari Raya: it is the spirit of Hari Raya shared by Muslims and Christians, the spirit of Chinese New Year shared by Chinese and Malays and the spirit of Christmas shared by all mankind which will smooth away racial conflicts and prejudices which are bound to arise in any mixed community. If we can keep this spirit alive we need fear no small differences of opinion over things like education or land or closer association or opportunities, and conversely if we can recognise and silence the mischief maker who perhaps unknowingly spreads his infection then we need fear no ill.
I hope you will all enjoy this Hari Raya and that you will go out of your way to offer the hospitality of your homes to your friends of other races. If each household could make it a point of honour to invite at least one of their friends or acquaintances of other races to their homes during this festival you Malay people could feel you were giving to the country a worthy example of Muslim ethics. You will surely find it rewarding because you will know that you are doing the will of Allah in promoting the brotherhood of man and the prosperity and unity of your country .
Notes and Comments
At the end of March was held the first Sarawak Youth Conference. The Conference, which was attended by a large number of delegates from all parts of Sarawak, was opened by His Excellency the Governor. Sir Anthony stressed the necessity of building on existing organisations and also of putting theory into practice.
Two guests who arrived in Kuching at the end of March came from Laos and they came to learn from us. They were Mr. Bounthamaly, Deputy Director of Information and Propaganda to the Royal Laotian Government, and Mr. Viengsavanh, a senior technician in Radio Vientiane, and they will be attached to Radio Sarawak for about six weeks.
The crop of illipenuts seems to be very good this year especially in the Third Division but the local people say, as do country folk the world over it seems, that it is not as good as it might have been. Does anyone know what is really so extraordinary about the illipenut or its oil that it should command such a high price?
The first group of 53 pilgrims from Sarawak left Kuching for Mecca early this month and there will be more to follow.
The excellent (as is usual) Annual Report of the Geological Survey Department has just been published and it gives some astonishing figures of the value of the mineral products of British Borneo and some equally astonishing figures of the Government revenue obtained from them. The bauxite mining which is just beginning is likely to give the figures a big boost too.
And Bau District Council wish to have cement manufacture declared a pioneer industry. Although they may have an inexhaustible supply of limestone they lack Seria's supply of natural gas. Perhaps the
Bau Road and the Simanggang Road will bring limestone and coal closer together.
There have been a number of important visitors to Sarawak this month including Professor R. E. Holttum, the distinguished botanist, who came for a short time to make a study of ferns, Mr. Keith Jones, the first Secretary at the British Embassy in Manila, and at the same time Mr. T. C. Jones, Assistant Educational Adviser (Technical Education) to the Colonial Office.
The World Chief Guide, Lady Baden Powell, the Commissioner-General for the United Kingdom in South East Asia, Sir Robert Scott, and Lady Scott also paid visits to Sarawak and Sir Steven Runciman returned to Kuching.
Radio Sarawak had an "Open Day", in fact two "Open Days", to mark the inauguration of a twin network service. Programmes are now being broadcast on four frequencies so that alternative programmes are available to the listener.
It is planned to introduce a new air service, from Kuching to Hong Kong direct, in July this year. This will be operated by the Cathay Pacific Airlines and will not be far behind the arrival of the Twin Pioneers for the Feeder Service. Kuching is indeed becoming a busy place and will need the services of the new Hong Kong and Shanghai Bank which was opened in Kuching this month.
Hari Raya this year was a beautiful day even though extremely hot. It was introduced at sunset, in Kuching, by a barrage of crackers and a few cannon which reminded one of Chinese New Year. It was a day very favourable for visiting although a severe thunderstorm at night and frequent rain on the second day rather spoiled things.
Work is about to begin on the development of Kuching Port. A contract has been signed for the building of a two-berth wharf at Sungei Priok about two miles below Kuching. This is part of the first stage of the port development scheme and it should be completed in eighteen months.
Further work will then be undertaken on transit sheds, offices, roads, etc., before continuing with more long-term development work.
Arrivals and Departures
Between 25.3.58 and 26.4.58
Arrivals
Mr. J. Tiernan	By air Singapore/Kuching on
27.3.58.
Returning from leave.
Mr. R. Sturgess	By air Singapore/Kuching on
2.4.58.
Returning from leave.
Mr A. L. McCorkindale By Rajah Brooke arriving (Newly appointed Educa- Kuching on 5.4.58.
tion Officer)	On first appointment.
Mr. R. Brooke	By Rajah Brooke arriving
Kuching on 5.4.58.
Returning from leave.
Mr. K. G. Warrior	By air Singapore/Kuching
(Newly appointed Assistant	on 17.4.58.
Engineer)	(On first appointment).
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, APRIL 30, 1958
55
Departures
Mr. L. A. Bradshaw By air Brunei/Singapore on 25.3.58.
Proceeding on leave to the United Kingdom.
Mr. P. W. Spicer By air Brunei/Singapore on 7.4.58.
Proceeding on leave to the United Kingdom.
Mr. B. N. Lewis By air Sibu/Singapore on 8.4.58.
Proceeding on leave to the United Kingdom.
Mr. P. B. Smith By air Sibu/Singapore on 8.4.58.
Proceeding on extraordinary leave on medical grounds to the United Kingdom.
Mr. J. Pike By air Kuching/Singapore 9.4.58.
Proceeding on leave to the United Kingdom.
Mr. I. W. Francey By air Kuching/Singapore on 11.4.58.
Proceeding on extraordinary leave to the United Kingdom.
Mr. S. E. Corby By Rajah Brooke Kuching/ Singapore on 12.4.58.
Proceeding on leave to the United Kingdom.
Mr. P. E. Cooke By Rajah Brooke Kuching/ Singapore on 12.4.58.
Proceeding on leave to Australia.
Abang Mustapha By air Kuching/Singapore on 14.4.58.
Proceeding on leave to the United Kingdom.
Mr. C. G. Merton By air Sibu/Singapore on 15.4 58.
Proceeding on leave to the United Kingdom.
Mr. S. A. Barlow By air Kuching/Singapore on 16.4.58.
Proceeding on leave to the United Kingdom.
Mr. E. C. Moment By air Sibu/Singapore on 19.4.58.
Proceeding on leave to Australia.
Miss M. O. Rees By Rajah Brooke sailing Kuching/Singapore on 26.4.58.
Proceeding on leave to the United Kingdom.
Education and the Economic
Realities of Sarawak
Sarawak is increasingly beset by the problem of what should be done for the students who are being turned out by the schools system in ever increasing numbers. The numbers of schools are growing and even more important the population, and particularly the Chinese section, is also growing rapidly. There are already many quite well educated boys of all races who leave school and then find it hard to obtain the type of employment which they would like and which present trends in education tend to make them regard as being a desirable goal in life.
The least affected so far are probably the boys who have reached a reasonably high level in the English secondary schools. Most of them are still being absorbed into Government or European business occupations but even here the pressure on the available places is increasing. This means that in the Government service it is becoming easier to staff the less popular branches of the service though the turnover in them is still very high. The less popular branches of the service are those which involve travelling and outstation work. Within the next few years it seems reasonably certain that all branches of the Government service will be fully staffed and that many applicants who a few years ago should have been certain of a post, will have to be turned away.
Far more hard hit are the boys, generally Malays and Dayaks, who leave school with a good primary education and perhaps after one or two years in a secondary school. They have acquired a useful knowledge of English and glimpses of a higher standard of living. What they want above all things is a modest white collar job with Government. In theory they should be able to return to the life of farmer or fisherman in longhouse or kampong where the education they have acquired should be of help to their community in promoting a better and happier way of life. It is sad but true that only very few of these boys will ever find the employment to which they aspire nor do they wish to return to their own communities.
Lastly and perhaps hardest hit of all because there are so many more of them are the boys from the Chinese schools. The system of education in these schools tends to be rigid, academic and old-fashioned. It is changing and evolving but the process is a slow one because of the innate conservatism of the overseas Chinese reinforced by the offices of professional trouble makers who exploit this conservatism by claiming that any attempt to introduce changes is an attack on Chinese "culture". Even the successful school-boy has very little to look forward to except a post as a teacher or the fiercely competitive life of a small trader. Standards of English are poor and the ranks of Government and European business are largely closed to the boys. By all accounts a Sarawak Middle School education is of very little use to them even if they return to China. At the same time the intellectually slow find it difficult to pass their exams and so there is the problem of the over-age student.
Reactions to this unsatisfactory state of affairs vary. The English educated boys are not yet greatly affected. Dayaks and Malays are frankly bewildered. Many Chinese seem to believe that the answer to the over-age student is simply to keep him in school longer, if necessary until he has reached the ripe old age, for a secondary school-boy, of 24 or 25. Some frustrated Chinese youths return to China. In every case any unfavourable development affecting students tends to be blamed, exclusively and quite unfairly on the Government Education Department. It is, of course, always handy to have someone you can blame but even when one concedes that the local education system is not perfect and is capable of dynamic change and improvement, this attitude is almost entirely due to a failure to distinguish between educational and economic factors.
If Sarawak had a prosperous and rapidly expanding economy there would be no employment problem nor would there be a problem of over-age students. The difficulty would be to keep the boys in the schools because there would be such attractive opportunities for well paid employment outside, in commerce and industry and agriculture. Unfortunately Sarawak does not possess an economy of this sort. Instead the economy is a rural one based on the production of two or three main crops — rubber, pepper and sago — all of which are at present in the doldrums and most certainly not expanding, and on the production of timber. The possibility of additional mineral wealth exists but it is little more than a possibility and it is not a factor upon which any reliance can be placed. Industry is on a tiny scale except for processing Brunei's oil.
The fact has to be faced that Sarawak does not possess a rich economy. At present it is a country which is entirely dependent on the land and for purposes of practical planning it should be regarded as likely to remain in this state. The local market is small and the cost of labour high. Consequently the prospects of relief through the establishment of light industries on an appreciable scale are very limited.
This being so it would appear reasonable to suggest that one of the main efforts of Sarawak schools should be to encourage a greater interest in the land and if possible to try and inculcate some practical knowledge
56
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, APRIL 30, 1958
of agriculture. Could not agriculture become a compulsory subject in every secondary school in Sarawak? Admittedly there are many difficulties. Suitable local teachers are virtually non-existent and the Agricultural Department could not take on the task. Agriculture is not a subject which would readily fit into a secondary school curriculum and school gardens and livestock present problems of maintenance and upkeep during school holidays. Furthermore, modern schools seek to provide students with a general education and do not aim to educate the children directly for the vocation they may follow later in life.
The difficulties are real and radical innovation of this sort would be bound to arouse opposition. But at the same time one may reasonably question whether an educational system which produces far more white collar workers and petty traders than the needs of the country warrant is really a suitable one for Sarawak.
Coupled with the agricultural problem there is of course a need, which is likely to be met much more easily and more quickly, for more practical training in schools, to give boys some understanding of woodwork and metal work. This would enable boys with a natural bent towards craftsmanship to acquire a basic knowledge which would help them to become useful mechanics or carpenters and, if they wanted to continue their studies, to take up engineering or other forms of work secure in the knowledge that they possess some natural abilities in that direction.
Such a development is welcome but there is a distinct danger that too much will be expected from it. Technical education will not solve any economic problems. It will not create employment. Technical courses in secondary schools will fill a want and will help the boy who may be clever with his hands and impotent with his pen. But a Technical College for higher studies in a country with a basically rural economy would be a waste of money. It is perhaps unfortunate that the case for technical education is being made, in response to urban pressures, so much more quickly than that for agricultural education which is of much greater fundamental importance in Sarawak. Ideally the two should be linked so that the man who returns to the life of a countryman can help to improve the amenities there, to service an outboard engine, to undertake the elementary plumbing of piped water to the longhouse and to operate a simple electric light plant.
It would, of course, be idle to pretend that the mere introduction of agricultural education on a wide scale would solve all employment problems. The unfortunate thing is that agriculture is all too often more a way of life than a source of economic livelihood. The planter may make a great deal of money in times of boom but the financial reward at other times is a slender one. In the case of padi planting there is generally speaking very little financial reward at all. It need not always be so. There is a great room in Sarawak for more efficient and productive agriculture and educated boys with some agricultural training who go back to work on their farms in the country should play a major part in promoting the growth of efficiency.
It is particularly important to try and combat the prevailing notion that a boy who has been to school and then goes back to the land is a failure. It is a most destructive feeling and a very widespread one in Sarawak. The educated young Dayak who returns to his longhouse is likely to regard it as something shameful even though he may be able to lead and help his entire community, while detribalisation in an air-conditioned office in Kuching is the hallmark of success. It is a feeling that cannot easily be eliminated. About all that is possible is to emphasise the importance of life on the land particularly in the schools, primary and secondary alike and at all levels and perhaps to pay particular attention to agricultural courses, if they could be introduced, by such devices as providing the biggest and best school prizes for
those who do well in such work. But the unforgivable thing would be not to try and do anything at all.
Sarawak is not, of course, unique in having to face these problems. They exist in many countries and the under-employed, well-educated white collar worker is one of the greatest sources of political, social and national instability in all tropical countries dependent on agriculture. It is a problem which does not appear to have been solved satisfactorily anywhere. It may not be possible to solve it in Sarawak but the essential thing is surely to recognise now that the problem exists and at least to make an effort to tackle it while it is still in its early stages of growth.
TRISTRAM.
Kuching Letter
Hari Raya is one of those occasions which I view with abhorrence. Being wholly devoid of the social gifts and lacking any capacity for small talk. I am an embarrassment to both my hosts and myself. The choice between sitting in silence and admiring photographs, or trying to engage in serious conversation, is indeed a choice of evils and I have long abandoned all pretence at the latter, for it abounds in pitfalls as I have found to my cost. I recall on one occasion plunging into a long dissertation on the integrity of the Customs Service and commenting adversely upon the affluence of certain retired customs officials. I discovered to my embarrassment that my host's father belonged to the latter category. On the whole, there is much to be said for St. Benedict's dictum Melius est silere quam loqui, which means "Say nothing". I have always been a protagonist of formality in life. All these occasions would be eased if it were accepted that one went to a house, recited a formula, ate a bun and withdrew with a blessing. Most of life's embarrassments derive from the tendency to improve upon the occasion.
The increase of traffic in Kuching has now reached monstrous proportions. I look back with regret upon, the good old days when my car was K2, and when such of us as possessed vehicles were a small and very select body. One never passed another motorist without exchanging salutations. How different are conditions today! One of the horrifying aspects of this development is that the more numerous the cars, the greater the violence and intemperance of their drivers. At the same time, the innate suicidal tendencies of cyclists and small children are much accentuated. The only crumb of comfort that is afforded is the realisation that a traffic accident, though harrowing to the beholders, is practically painless to those involved. During the war I was plagued with appalling drivers of my staff cars, and on three occasions their recklessness nearly demolished me as well as the car. I can therefore assure prospective victims that it is not as bad as it looks. Either you are dead, or you are so stunned as to be indifferent to your surroundings.
A short time ago I was returning to Kuching along the Simanggang Road and near the 7th Mile I saw a venerable lady with a large basket standing in the rain. I stopped my car and invited her to get in. She did so and appeared most grateful, for she embarked upon an extremely animated conversation. Linguistic difficulties made it onesided, for I could follow not a word. As we approached Kuching her animation increased and, as I thought, she pointed out to me various objects of interest on the wayside. I smiled and tried to express my thanks. It then occurred to me that perhaps the old lady was intimating that she wanted to get out, so I stopped the car outside the Printing Office. She got out I thought somewhat brusquely, and much to my embarrassment crossed the road and waited for a bus going in the opposite
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, APRIL 30, 1958
57
direction. What was I to do? Should I drive round my car and offer her another ride back? I decided that this was inadvisable, as the old lady probably having been carried miles from her home would decline any further conveyance by me. I have often wondered where in fact she lived and just how far I had taken her out of her way. This, however, I cite as but one of the perils of motoring.
Some of the administrative officers of the old school have latterly been taking a firm line in strange matters. One remarked that if he found any young men wearing the rather ridiculous whiskers, that are now effected in some circles in Brunei, he would put the Secret Police upon them. It is now just a century since Ferdinand II (King Bomba) of Naples set all Europe laughing by making the wearing of beards a penal offence. To his disordered mind the beard was associated with parliamentary government of which he disapproved. The result was that his son (Bombino) was chased from his kingdom by Garibaldi and his thousand beards. Let our administrators take warning, and not imperil the canons of male dignity by provoking a similar deluge of exotics upon Sarawak
The opening of the Bedlam at the 7th Mile outside Kuching has provoked much callow wit. Some have suggested that the various Government Departments might reserve accommodation there, and speculation has run high as to the room space required by each. Others have suggested that chambers be built at public subscription for various notabilities. In any case, the increasing onset of insanity of Sarawak must provoke serious thought. I should cite the Electricity Companies as being some of the major contributors. Few things are better calculated to produce imbalance of mind in a normal person, than when listening to a recorded symphony to have it go off pitch, sometimes to the extent of a quarter tone. In the interests of sanity it is now urgent that an Order in Council be made restraining the irresponsible women, who about 8 o'clock at night ignite electric kettles and other such devices.
Certain newly arrived officers have commented adversely upon the subject of snakes in Sarawak. I recall many years ago a somewhat riotous party in Simanggang. Late in the evening one of the convivials cried "Ah, I see a snake. Let us jump on it" and did so. The others, not to be outdone, also jumped upon the suppostitious snake. One went further and said that it should be sent to the Curator of the Museum as a rare specimen. An empty beer box was produced and packed with straw. The suppostitious snake was then carefully coiled therein, and in somewhat shaking handwriting the label was indited "Urgent. To the Curator of the Sarawak Museum. Contents: one live snake". Some three days later the Curator, then Mr. Banks, opened the box and found inside an extremely vicious, albeit bruised, hamadryad. Snakes should not be underrated, even in Simanggang.
Will it never be possible for an inhabitant of Kuching to rest in peace on this side of the grave? I am habitually awakened at night by the howling of dogs under my window. Recently I was roused in the small hours by a marauder going through the pockets of my clothes. Now the night is made hideous by the junket-tings of nymphomaniac cats. I always deplore the association of this animal with the city, and being interested in heraldry (indeed it was on my initiative that the Royal Arms were blazoned on the Departmental notepaper) I have never ceased to deplore Mr. Buck's design of the Municipal Arms. However much they are disguised in technical language. Gules, a cat passant-gardant or etc., the reality is plain to all the world: a tom-cat on the tiles. On the analogy of the Capitoline Wolf, no doubt this lascivious animal will finally be portrayed in the heart of the city; an object of moral embarrassment rather than civic pride.
The question of summit talks is much agitated in the world today. Such things are by no means new, but they have in the past frequently aroused high
hopes only to dash them to the ground. I would cite the example of the summit talks between the King of France and the Emperor, King Charles VI suffered from the defect of reason, and was in full possession of his faculties for only a short period each afternoon. The Emperor (formerly King Wenceslaus of Bohemia) was a chronic alcoholic and was never sober after midday. The talks indeed took place in 1398, but were mutually unintelligible. Let us hope that the forthcoming ones will be more productive.
Robert Nicholl
Visits by His Excellency the Governor
1. Second Division—February, 1958
It has become a cliche to describe His Excellency's tours of the country as "successful" or "interesting" or "strenuous" — as though a week spent in longhouses and visiting new places could be anything else. His Excellency's trip up the Batang Strap and the Batang Undup was certainly all three. It was new country for the whole party except the indefatigable S.A.O.'s who arranged our programme with relentless thoroughness and split second timing. I shall try and set down a few impressions of the tour.
The Ruined Church
At Banting on the Batang Strap there are ten longhouses and broad acres of farming land. The wet padi crops to the inexpert eye were standing well (though the farmers thought not) and from the top of the steep knob of a hill around which the houses are clustered the deep green fields seemed to stretch away as far as the sea. And on the top of the hill stood perhaps the oldest church and school in Sarawak. The S.P.G. Mission was founded in Banting a hundred and ten years ago. With what faith and devotion the little building must have been raised and with what pride the first pastors must have looked on their work. And later on the results of their work. For from Banting has come a steady stream of recruits for the Government Service — Rangers, dressers, policemen — and a stream of enlightened and educated Dayaks to spread new ideas among their people.
And how sad it is to see the church now. The very graves around it seem to breathe an air of decay over the whole place. The belian walls, once so strong and permanent are sagging and gaping where the planks lean out of true; as much light (and rain) comes through the wooden roof shingles as through the shutters, and the furniture inside is worm-eaten and rotten. Only the grey and pink stone font preserves the sharp outlines imparted by the craftsmen who made it.
In the houses at the foot of the hill are found energetic, friendly and intelligent people and yet somehow one felt that they had been standing still. Their leadership falling away from them as though the ruined church was their own epitaph to a glorious past.
But things are stirring again in Banting. The District Council has helped with grants for the school and more boys (but few girls) are attending. The ruined church is a challenge — not in itself — but as a symbol of a period of decay that has come to an end.
At Banting His Excellency entertained the Penghulu, the Tuai Rumah and prominent men of the community to cocktails and a lecture on closer association in Penghulu Kerbau's room in his house. Before the meeting began His Excellency was presented with a fine parang by the Penghulu to mark the first visit of a Governor to Banting. The parang is called tilan kamarau and hangs in an honoured place with the pua which the Penghulu's wife added to her husband's generous gift.
58
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, APRIL 30, 1958
A great achievement
There is not much shade in Pantu — barely enough for a thermometer — so one can only say the day was very hot when we reached there at mid-day. The population of Pantu was out in force to meet us and proudly led us for a mile or so out of town to the new District Council School there. Built by local labour, much local money and staffed by local men the school is truly a great achievement. It is a large building with classrooms complete with the most up-to-date furniture downstairs and boarding houses upstairs. It teaches up to Primary VI and caters for boys and girls in almost equal number from the surrounding villages. The children were all there to greet us with a rousing "God Save the Queen" and how well and smart they looked in their trim blue and white uniforms. Pantu must be as isolated as any place in the Division and it is therefore the more heartening to see such enormous and healthy development in education there. His Excellency was enthusiastic, and complimented the teachers and the committee on their good work and promised to present to the school a school bell as a mark of his appreciation.
As is so often the case the walk back after a visit of this kind is an anticlimax and this day the heat was really oppressive. As we sat down to a delicious meal in the Chinese school (but to which alas our tight schedule did not allow us to do full justice) it was with great astonishment and humble gratitude that we beheld an Astana boy rather shyly produce, as if by magic, a generous dry martini. There is no doubt that progress is coming rapidly to the ulu.
Closer Association.
We probably should not have stopped there at all. We were late after having visited Pantu and Munggu Embawang and the house was not on the programme. But this house had provided transport for us and it seemed churlish to pass by without stopping.
To begin with we were offered tuak rather cautiously by the girls of the house but as time and tuak went on the party got wilder and wilder and the fun faster and funnier. And several people fell off the path as we walked on to the next house!
Politics and Pests
Stumbin is a rich alluvial plain and well farmed with wet rice. The mixed community of Malays and Dayaks produced a valuable surplus of padi and all are tolerably well off. We spent the night comfortably in the community centre — a wooden house like an old fashioned clerk's house in an outstation — and after dinner His Excellency called a meeting of some thirty heads of houses to discuss his recent broadcast on closer association. The lecture lasted a long time and the audience listened attentively, nodding in agreement now and then and laughing at an apt simile or pleasantry. Towards the end it was obvious that several people were itching to ask questions. As soon as questions were called for the Penghulu was on his feet:—
"Now what about the rats in the padi . . . ?"
The Other Batu Lintang
It had rained heavily the previous night and our boats navigated carefully among the tree tops and squeezed painfully under bamboo bridges normally twenty feet above the river. Everywhere we landed it was mud up to the knees.
But there was no daunting of spirits at Batu Lintang, a tiny bazaar situated where the Undup changes course from north west to north east. Everyone was on the Pangkalan to meet us and the District Council school children and the Chinese school children obliged with a few rousing choruses as we walked through their lines to the new District Council School building which His Excellency was to declare open.
In his speech Sir Anthony praised the loyalty and the bravery of the Undup people who had so well supported rightful government for many generations. Now they were taking the lead in building by their own efforts a fine double storey school with accommodation for 150 pupils and sleeping space for fifty boarders.
The school opened, we sat down to a feast inside. His Excellency was presented with a fine Malacca cane and a local kris as souvenirs of the occasion and Sir Anthony promised to present the school with a school clock. But when the time came for speeches after dinner and votes of thanks the party was much too well developed to vote, and no one could make themselves heard. Would that all after dinner speeches were so lost to their auditors.
And the party went on until dawn in Penghulu Rangga's house at Munggu Ruan.
The Batu Lintang people know what they want and are out to get it. They want a road now from the bazaar to Simanggang so that they can avoid the tedious river travel and the dangerous rapids. They have built some of the road already and they are resolved to fight in their local councils for the funds to complete it. May they have every success!
The Happy Fortmen
At the house of retired Penghulu Lambai we stopped for a quick mid-day call. Lambai started to work for the Government in the last century but he is still going strong. In his house are three other old fortmen from Simanggang, full of years and tales. One had been badly wounded and had lost his hands in an explosion whilst loading a gun during the salute for H.H. birthday in 1917. He had been out in the troubles of 1912 and 1916 on the Government side and he was rewarded with a pension for his disability of $4 a month. By the inevitable process of salaries revision it had now become $18 a month. He asked if perhaps it should not be more. "It's becoming almost impossible to manage on it nowadays" he said but he was able to grin happily all the same.
The Happy Return
There is a genius which looks after weak stomachs at sea and which declares that one shall have lunch before leaving the Batang Lupar and tea after passing Muara Tebas. And thanks be, for genius.
2. Padawan—March, 1958
To anyone who has an hour to spare I heartily recommend the reports of Canon Howes on the Padawan Land Dayak Community scheme. These may be seen in the office of the District Officer, Kuching, and in a prosaic file cover is contained the record of a year's very hard work to much purpose. The reports, moreover, are modestly and amusingly written; the terse "22 villages visited this month" from Sister Nichol, and the aside, "Even Mrs. Anah (a black pig) learned to use the pig latrine" indicate how lightly the development team treat the enormous difficulties of their work.
The journey up to Padawan is enough to give one an early presage of the type of travelling that the Padawan team undertakes. By Land Rover, outboard and walking His Excellency's party which included the Resident, First Division, and the District Officer, Kuching, were able to arrive at Padawan rather hot, rather dirty and very sunburnt after travelling for eight hours. Everything went right; just enough water in the river, no rain, no mechanical failures, no sticking in the mud on the Emperoh road. Normally the Padawan boat takes three days of hard labour to get back from Kuching.
The country is very rugged; sheer cliffs, sharp ridges and deep valleys all covered with the Borneo jungle and forest mat, are seen from the river. Padawan
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, APRIL 30, 1958
59
itself is an oasis of cleared land and neat houses among such ruggedness. There is a tiny vicarage set with orchids and bougainvillia overlooking the site and around the central playing fields there is a school, a boarding house, dwelling houses, a carpentry shop, a cookery room and dining hall and a dispensary. There are stores and pig sties and compost houses and three unmentionable but not nameless buildings — "the sparkling gem", "the three bears", and "the shining wonder" whereto the inhabitants of the place whose kneebones are specially formed, repair from time to time to philosophise in solitude.
The purpose of the Padawan scheme is to get 15 isolated Land Dayak villages to co-operate with one another to improve their fanning techniques, their material comfort and their general education. To this end young trainees are taken into the scheme from each village. They look after the scheme farm which concentrates on growing crops new to the Land Dayaks. They learn how to plant citrus trees and high yielding rubber; how to rear fish in ponds and how to improve their pig breeding methods. Under the careful tutelage of Mr. George Green they learn carpentry and general handicrafts and their efforts take practical shape in the buildings of the scheme which are largely made by self help. Sister Nichol looks after the health of the people from her dispensary and by travelling on foot from village to village. There are women trainees as well as men and they learn how to cook and bake and sew and to keep house generally. Their work in particular is a joy to see.
As well as the trainees who live permanently in the camp there are a group of men called by the rather sinister sounding name of "Nyamba Nyamba" men. These are adults who come down from villages from time to time to help with the work and to learn some of the crafts at the same time. The old Padawan school, although technically separate from the scheme, is physically very much a part of it and it is growing in numbers and quality as the months go by.
On the first night of his visit His Excellency gave a cocktail party for the staff of the scheme and the 34 committee members from the surrounding villages. The following day he visited every part of the scheme and talked to the committee members at a special celebration when they were presented with certificates of appointment to the committee. At this meeting His Excellency spoke to the members of the committee about the purposes of the scheme, stressing the need for more co-operation and combined effort between the villages as well as between each village and the community centre. This was the greatest opportunity that rural people had been offered in the First Division, he said, and they must seize it with both hands. The centre should be regarded as an example rather than as an end in itself.
Certainly the examples that we saw should have stimulated people to greater efforts. At the dispensary Sister Nichol gave a demonstration of how ring worm had been tackled in surrounding villages by teaching people how to cover themselves with a rather fiery liquid which is the cure of the disease. In the carpentry shop George Green was presiding over a class of "Nyamba Nyamba" men who were making useful pieces of furniture from wood which they had collected themselves. Some of the articles showed considerable skill in working with unfamiliar tools in new ways. In the cookery room we had a practical demonstration in the form of home baked bread and cakes and we saw some of the women trainees producing fine needlework.
But there is plenty of time for play as well and there were two football matches in the afternoon which everyone enjoyed both watching and playing. All except one little tot who was left half for the trainees and who got a football full in the face and had to be carried off, crying, by his father.
If smell be any criterion the compost factory must be a rich investment. The pigs on the farm were obviously also thriving and enjoying life. The fish farm had suffered through flooding but the trainees were digging new ponds to replace those which had dried up through the dams being washed away. Fish farming is beginning to catch on in the villages too and despite the high mortality amongst fry carried up from Kuching several villages have succeeded in taking a harvest of fresh fish. As the local streams are fished out by derris poisoning this supply of protein could become the stand-by of every village. The citrus fruit trees seem to have taken now and the kitchen gardens are providing a steady supply of vegetables.
An interesting development is the installation of a cheap pipe well. The well works perfectly but the water is tinged with sulphur and is not very palatable.
After taking tea on the second day, His Excellency's party left for the nearby village of Anah or Senah Negri. There seems to be a great campaign to go back to the local names of villages as opposed to the time hallowed descriptions of the maps. This is a praiseworthy effort but confusing. As far as I could see only the very local inhabitants call this particular village "Anah" to the exclusion of any other name. Several people living quite near to the village knew no other name than "Senah Negri". It is certainly true that in Sarawak the same place is often called by several different names by different groups of people. It seems logical to accept the principle that the name used by the people living in a place should be adopted as the official name. But it may not always be possible or desirable to do that and haphazard action taken by a few people will lead to yet more confusion.
By any name, however, Senah Negri is a delightful place and with delightful inhabitants. Despite a heavy downpour we had a great night there and the party did not break up until well past midnight.
The journey back was again completed in perfect conditions and we had ample time to stop at Kampong Landeh where His Excellency talked to the people and heard requests before going on to Batu Kitang where our cars were waiting.
Community Development with Land Dayak Women
One of the important ways to uplift rural community development would be to develop women's sense of responsibility as citizens of the community. If community development projects are to be successful women's activities in the home and in the community should be given assistance from different sources available in the country. Such as—
(a)	Projects of Government
(b)	Voluntary organisations
(c) Projects of International voluntary organisations.
There are three well-known Government schemes, Padawan, Long Lama and Budu Community Schemes. The fourth and little known is the "Mobile Schema" where a group of locally trained native women travel from kampong to kampong to give assistance in their home activities to illiterate village women and girls.
Beautifying themselves is the weakness of all women. From this fact the instructors begin to capture their interest and teach the women to hold a needle properly and carry on from there until they acquire a considerable degree of skill. A group of twenty or thirty women and grown-up girls will stitch away patiently for twenty-five days (equivalent to fifty hours) to get the reward of being able to adorn themselves, and their children, with dresses. These dresses would normally take three months saving to buy from kampong shops
60
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, APRIL 30, 1958
Simple home economic education on rural level standards is essential in household planning. Therefore, it is important that the "Mobile Instructors", must be able to juggle with figures to assist in the budget of the meanest income of a family so that they can get adequate nutritious food. Such problems are of an egg to feed a family of four, and a yard of one dollar material to make three completed, embroidered bodices normally costing three dollars each.
It is vitally necessary that the Land Dayak women must realise that time and energy could be saved if they would adjust their economy to the needs of the twentieth century. Their slender surplus produced by a Bronze Age agriculture could not hope to raise their economic level nor to promote a better standard of living.
Here the "Mobile Instructors" if they are equipped with simple agricultural knowledge would be ideal. They could introduce simple new agricultural methods of cultivating land around their kampong houses. Planting cash crops and greens could help to swell the purse, as well as provide recreational activities for the use of leisure time.
In a sense women in native communities exercise power without responsibility. The public decisions of the community are taken by men, but the homemaking, and the tightening of the purse strings are controlled by the women. Therefore the women must be educated to realise and understand their responsibilities.
Slowly but surely the proper diet habit and methods of food preparation will become an habitual routine among the Land Dayak Women.
There is no doubt such simple pioneer projects towards Community Development among the Land Dayak women are popular, successful, and beneficial to the whole community of the Kampongs. The skill and experience gained by each individual awakens the awareness of responsibility among many other Land Dayak women to be self-reliant, and to improve their future on a self-help basis.
The humdrum life of the Kampong for the rural women is very monotonous, and in carrying out community development projects, voluntary organisations, women's and youth organisations in particular, can assist in carrying out the programmes through the establishment of—
(a)	Meet the Women Sessions
(b)	Mothers' Clubs
(c)	"Learning by Seeing" centres.
In any native community the women are the most conservative element. Without even the experience of travel, without meeting other women outside their own community the progress of community development among the native women will be a slow process.
Irrespective of race, colour, or creed, women are all alike. They are by nature creative and lovers of beauty. It is important for rural women to come in contact with urban educated women other than their "Mobile Instructors". Such connexion between rural and urban women could show rural women the value of having personal pride, practical knowledge of community problems, and to the urban women an awareness that rural women in native society play a direct part in affairs, and can be leaders in their own community.
Occasionally the "Moblie Instructors" encounter unexpected surprises in the transformation of the "Jungle Beauties" into models of the Hollywood beauty parlour. The make-up on their faces with wrong blending of colour shades can be amusing. But one's feeling can be only of admiration for the effort they put up to meet their urban visitors.
Women's voluntary organisations can assist by organising groups of rural women to visit urban areas
to see publicly organised centres where women participate in public life, and to see better homes, for "Learning by Seeing" is one of the basic methods of increasing civic awareness among both rural men and women. Such useful projects could be of recreational benefit to the rural women, as well as a stimulus to develop women's sense of responsibility in the welfare of the community.
The degree to which people, men and women alike, participate in public life depends on the degree to which they are equipped to contribute to the economic and social development of their society. Educated women and youths from urban areas should have an opportunity to make such contributions by taking the lead upon themselves to go in among the rural women.
The importance of the occasional visits to the Kampongs of women and youths who have a knowledge of health practices could set an example in home-care, and nutrition and in furthering good health practices.
S.L.K.
The Rajah Sir Charles Brooke Memorial Settlement
The Settlement Hospital was redecorated by outside contract and to finish off the good work some patients repainted the beds, lockers, tables, etc. The new colour scheme is a wonderful improvement upon the old one and this, together with the repainting of the beds, etc., has given the hospital a completely new look.
For the first time in the history of the Settlement the Iban patients held a full scale joint Begawai Padi; previously small begawais were held in some houses. It was a great success, well organised by the Committee Iban and carried out in the correct fashion. We are informed that, after several hours of Mengap, the spirits gave their blessing upon the padi, the DDS Tablets (the treatment for leprosy), the settlement and everyone in general. Altogether a most successful and happy occasion.
During the Chinese New Year celebrations a concert was given by patients and staff combined. Its main feature was the orchestra which gave a very fine performance—most of the members have learnt to play their instruments here (some even made them here) and great credit must go to them and especially to those members of staff who devoted so much of their spare time to the training of the orchestra. A number of new singers made their debut and the small children romped away with the honours. The comic sketches were hailed with great delight.
Amongst the many visitors last quarter were Lady Scott, wife of the Commissioner-General for South East Asia, and Lady Williams of Kuching. Lady Williams is a friend of the Settlement and Lady Scott too was a most welcome visitor for she is very interested in leprosy relief work in Singapore and recently made a most successful radio appeal for the work of the Singapore Leprosy Relief Committee. Others included Mr. and Mrs. John Wilson of the Royal Commonwealth Society for the Blind—the way in which Mr. Wilson has overcome the handicap of blindness aroused the admiration of the patients. We were also very pleased to show round newly appointed Sarawak Administrative Officers: after seeing the settlement they will be better able to appreciate the many problems of our patients and their co-operation is made much easier.
H.M.
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, APRIL 30, 1958
Satek of Kampong Tijirak learns to use a sewing machine.
Study in concentration: Work on the new shirt is discussed.
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, APRIL 30, 1958
61
Diary of a Sedentary Officer
Further Extracts II
Edited by RULL
Monday. Usual rush of vouchers today. Found a sum of $2.93 had been entered under the wrong subhead in one of the Department's vouchers, and had much pleasure in referring it back with a coldly corrective minute. Have been waiting for this for some time, as Barringer has been quite above himself since the C.S. overruled my decision on that matter of bicycle allowance.
I have missed three India rubbers in recent weeks and "acting on information received" I found them on Cardby's desk. However he had scratched his name on all of them and was only with great difficulty prevailed upon to relinquish one. He really is a most ill mannered fellow. I felt like complaining to the director, only it was such a petty matter. I shouldn't be surprised if it is he who takes my gum pots and ruler, too.
A quiet evening at home with Eva, playing Scrabble. Very enjoyable, except for an argument about the rules. I really think I have had more experience in interpreting ambiguous, obscure, and badly phrased regulations than she has. and so rather insisted on my view especially as it gave me a word worth 27 points. Eva yielded, but not very graciously.
Tuesday. A hard morning working out my mileage claims. The new system, besides taxing one's mathematics, raises very difficult ethical problems. Last month (what with that run out to the airport) I did 102 miles on government duty. Being in group B, with a second hand car I can claim $38.00 for 100 miles, but if I do more than that I come into group A and, for 102 miles, for example, can only claim $30.40. The ethical problem is, is it honest for me to claim only 100 miles, when I actually did 102? Could get no definite ruling from the Accountant-General's office, so eventually claimed for 99, but do not feel quite easy in my conscience. A close perusal of the regulation shows that a person in possession of a motor car for which he paid more than $6,000 is entitled to no fixed conveyance allowance at all, though I know several who are, in fact, receiving it. Something seems wrong somewhere.
Afternoon: working away at chart showing organization of the department. Put Cardby's name in small type to start with, but later relented and put his name in same size type as mine.
Wednesday. Bad sore throat this morning so went along to the hospital. Got so engrossed chatting with Denby about golf, that a lady with four children (who arrived at least four minutes after me) slipped in ahead of me. She was in there for at least twenty minutes. Afterwards found it was only prickly heat. I cannot imagine why people waste the doctor's time with such trivialities. At last managed to get in (although almost "pipped" by yet another newly arrived lady). A very pleasant new young doctor, and had a good chat about my past medical history. Got a gargle and some brown medicine, which looks suspiciously like those the previous doctor used to prescribe—of which I have several partly finished bottles at home.
In the office Cardby was, as usual, offensive: "Been to see the quack, eh? Better knock off the grog, old boy, it'll be the death of you yet." Cardby always refers to medical practitioners as "quacks", a most unfortunate way to refer to a fine public spirited body of men. I need hardly add that Cardby is not noted for sobriety.
Water bill for last month came today—25,000 gallons! Instituted water-saving campaign, then discovered the children playing a game which involved
flushing the W.C. and waiting until it filled up. So this is the explanation for our colossal water bills over the last few months! Gave children a severe "wigging" and eventually found out they had been taught this "game" by that smug little Dierdrie Watson from Uplands. Eva will have something to say to her mother next time she holds forth about Dierdrie, who is held up as a paragon of virtue.
Also received the electricity bill today. I must say I see red every time I see that printed on the back about "This bill must be paid by the 21st" etc. and threatening a surcharge, cutting of the supply, and other dire penalties. The bit about no applications for exemption from surcharge on the grounds of not receiving the bill is to be considered, particularly rankles! Such arrogant and insolent phraseology from a monopoly company to the public they are supposed to serve seems to me quite out of place.
Went to the pictures tonight, to see Victor Mature. However, by mistake we want to the wrong cinema and saw an interminable Italian film about thousands of troops chasing runaway slaves up and down Italy. Eva most put out. Victor Mature is her favourite actor, though personally I don't care for him as he reminds me of a tortoise I kept as a boy.
Thursday. The department was honoured with a visit by Dr. Percy Walterton, Pedagogical Adviser to the Secretary of State for Overseas Territories. Dr. Walterton is an old boy of Cuddlesleigh, as am I, and we had an enjoyable half hour of reminiscences, after the Director had brought him in and introduced him. He was several years before me, of course, but it was grand to find someone who understands all the old school slang—"pakker", "bickles" "The Tick"— and so on. I was glad to learn that the Old Cuddleighites Rugger XV had beaten Cuddlesleigh City "A" 12-7 last month. (My copy of the school magazine "The Cudd" has been delayed). It was very pleasant to have such a fine informal time with a man in such an exalted position. Even more exciting, Dr. Walterton has accepted an invitation to dinner tomorrow night!
Friday. Spent most of the day preparing for the big event. Decided to give Dr. Walterton a real oriental meal—nasi goreng followed by tinned lychees. Eva very busy and now (6.30) still putting the finishing touches to the table.
Later: Evening voted a great success. The Waters's from the P.W.D. were on great form. The Boredsleys from the Secretariat, he is P.A.S. (Org.)— made up the party. Dr. Walterton seemed very much at home, and I looked out some of the old school group photographs, which provided plenty of topics for conversation. Dr. Walterton told us something of his tour: apparently he has had some rather shabby treatment from one or two governments in the matter of allowances and accommodation, even being prevented from using the V.I.P. lounge at one airport.
Saturday. Cardby very insulting today about our distinguished visitor. I noted down his words as am considering reporting him. He said "Hasn't that old fool Walterton gone yet? Its a scandal the way these deadbeats swan around the world wasting the taxpayer's money".
However, later on he apologized in an off-hand way. "Sorry, old boy, didn't know he was a friend of yours. He may work wonders trotting round the world, for all I know."
Sunday. Uneventful.
62
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, APRIL 30, 1958
Excerpts from Reports of Administrative Officers for the Second Half Year, 1957
FIRST DIVISION
District Officer, Kuching
(Austin F. H. Coates)
Law and Order
There was a moment in early October when it looked as though Kuching might be on the verge of being afflicted with youth gang violence of the type to which many other cities abroad have been subject. A group of Chinese roughs had formed the habit of stationing themselves in the evenings around the Lilian Cinema, where they traded cinema tickets at black market prices, threatening cinema patrons and the cinema employees, and occasionally getting involved in fights. On 6th October a member of this group, known as the Lilian Gang, threatened a Malay youth who, the following evening, returned to the cinema with a party of Malay youths estimated to number between one and two hundred. Serious interracial trouble was averted by the good sense of a senior member of the Malay community, who talked to the Malay youths and persuaded them to depart peacefully. Later, eight alleged members of the Lilian Gang appeared in the District Court, where six of them were bound over to be of good behaviour on sureties of $200 each.
There was a slight increase in housebreaking in Kuching, and special measures had to be taken by the Constabulary to deal with this.
Four escapes of detainees took place, two from H.M. Prison, Kuching, one from Santubong, where prison labour is being used to construct new recreation bungalows, and one from the Central Police Station, Kuching. The escapee from Santubong has not been heard of since; the other three were recovered.
A violent fight occurred in a Henghua fishing kotak, on 18th July, when the employee in the kotak attacked its owner with a knife. The owner, seriously wounded, was picked up in the Sarawak River, near Sajingkat having either fallen from, or been pushed out of his boat, and was brought to Pending by his rescuers, another Henghua kotak. Later the employee was sentenced by the Chief Justice to three and a half years' imprisonment for attempted murder.
Medical and Health
During the period under review the Superintendent of Travelling Dispensaries thoroughly toured the District and introduced improved programmes of travelling, particularly in the coastal areas and Samarahan, where there had been complaints from several villages. After these new arrangements had been introduced, complaints died down and the numbers of people being treated rose slightly.
The W.H.O. Anti-Malaria Unit complained of lack of co-operation in certain Land Dayak villages. Before their visit up the Sungei Sarawak Kiri, therefore, in November, Mr. William Veno toured the area extensively, explaining to the people once more the importance of this scheme. As a result, co-operation greatly improved.
Quadruplets were born to a Land Dayak mother, Rubis anak Sadam of Masa'an, on 22nd August. Mother and children are at present being looked after in the Red Cross Hostel, Reservoir Road.
Native Affairs
An effort was made during this half-year to arouse the Land Dayaks to some idea of political consciousness in the context of the new Constitution and the
newly formed Rural District Councils. With the agreement of the District Officers of Bau and Upper Sadong, I visited a large number of villages, usually at weekends, to meet and talk particularly to teachers and other English-educated people. The immediate aim was to try to build up the membership and usefulness of the Bedayuh (Land Dayak) Association, which was at that time little more than a clique of Quab and Siratau people. This Association, if properly conducted, should become the focal point for Land Dayak aspirations, and should be able to advise Rural District Councillors on Dayak needs. At the present time, the Dayak Councillors are ineffective at meetings, largely because they live in remote places, and have little idea of any problems outside their own village. This campaign of interesting educated Land Dayaks in their problems and political future led to a meeting at Siratau, attended by over ninety educated Land Dayaks from three districts, to whom I endeavoured to explain the responsibilities of ordinary educated citizens in relation to the new Constitution. Mr. William Nais, the Acting District Officer, Upper Sadong, also attended and spoke (in three languages), and the Land Dayak Native Officers were also present. The activities of the Association have now been concentrated on raising funds to construct a Hostel for Students in Kuching, for which the Land Office has provisionally earmarked a site just off Ong Tiang Swee Road. The estimated cost of the building proposed is $32,000.
A meeting of Land Dayak teachers was held in early November in Kuching, in connexion with these activities. Before the meeting, thirty of the teachers had the honour of being invited to lunch at the Astana by the Officer Administering the Government.
In connexion with the dispute between Tijirak and Petag, visits were paid to both villages, and the written agreement between them, which in the Malay language is not clear, was carefully examined. The Seburan group (including Tijirak) have been advised to submit a plaint to the District Court asking for a rectification of the agreement.
A new law was passed giving the Governor-in-Council the right to determine where and on what conditions kilongs may be erected.
On 3rd November a fire destroyed eight doors of a Land Dayak palaman at Tebut. All rice stocks were destroyed, and it is likely that this village will have to receive relief some time after February, 1958.
Chinese Affairs
There were no new developments of importance concerned with the growth of left-wing activities in schools and associations. The introduction of a new Societies Ordinance, which transfers the registration of societies to the Constabulary, afforded an opportunity for the activities and aims of all societies to be examined in detail.
There was a decline in the number of Chinese students going to China, and a sharp rise in the numbers going to Taiwan, One hundred and sixteen one-way tickets (for people under the age of 45, most of whom are students) were issued in the first half of the year; 48 in the second half. In 1956 only four students went to Taiwan. During 1957 there were 21 Sarawak students in Taiwan.
The Chinese Advisory Board held one meeting during the period. The principal subject discussed was the control of cracker-firing at festivals. Recommendations for control were made to the Secretariat, and referred thence to the various Councils involved, with a view to considering whether by-laws should be framed. The Kuching Rural District Council discussed the matter at its December meeting, and decided to impose controls, although the Council differed in detail on the actual days and hours of control suggested
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, APRIL 30, 1958
63
by the Chinese Advisory Board. Another of the Board's recommendations was that import duties on firecrackers should be raised.
Agriculture
Weather conditions have been normal, and the close of the year saw an exceptionally good fruit harvest from which the Land Dayaks in particular should benefit.
Padi fields at 17th Mile, Simanggang Road, were attacked this autum by a pest of army worm. Quick information was given, and the Agricultural Department sent out supplies of agrocide, together with explanations on how it should be used. This was administered in time to save much of the padi. Padi rats attacked fields near Benuk (Segu), and again the Agricultural Department was prompt with help.
Education
An important directive was issued, with the approval of the Governor-in-Council, to all Rural District Councils, on the subject of co-operation between Council and Mission education authorities. As a result, the representatives of the principal religious bodies with an interest in education in the District became members of the Rural District Council.
A new Land Dayak school, run by the Catholic Mission, was authorized, situated between Pasang and Begu, and serving both villages. New Malay schools were authorized at Sungei Emas, Senari, Mersan, Rebak and Mang, and, in Kuching, Kampong Gita and Kampong Pulo. The school at Subang, which opened mid-year as a Council school, will be changed over in the beginning of 1958 to the control of the Catholic Mission.
Reference was made in my last report to a proposal to teach dancing to (mainly) Chinese teachers. The first of these dancing courses was run during the December holidays by Mrs. Nora Kraal, at St. Joseph's Hall, and proved a great success. Requests have been received from many teachers asking for more courses to be given in the future.
Communications
On 15th September, preliminary work started on the country road from 22 Mile, Simanggang Road, to Padawan. This work is being undertaken by the Rural District Council, with funds made available by the Government. The first bulldozer went into action at the beginning of October, and by 17th December, after three dry days, I was able to drive in a saloon car for 2.7 miles, through Palaman Mundai (the first village to be reached), to within a mile of Peruman (Simpok). At the end of the year the road was exactly three miles long. Cutting, draining and culverting have been the only operations so far undertaken, pending the arrival of a roller and complete quarrying equipment, all of which has been ordered and is due to be here in January. With the exception of one Malay bulldozer driver, the personnel engaged in building the road are all Land Dayaks; and they have formed an excellent team. Quarters have been constructed for them at Palaman Mundai, and several of them have brought their wives to stay there. The first quarry to be used on the route is the disused one just off Simanggang Road, at 21 Mile. Construction works have been carried out here, in preparation for the arrival of the heavy equipment. It is now our aim to try and get the road cut through to Padawan as fast as possible, in order to establish road communication with the Community Development Project there, even though for the first few months the road will often be no more than a sea of mud.
On 22nd October, Mr. Joseph Cheng Chee-ting arrived from Kuala Lumpur to take up the appointment of Superintendent of Country Roads, in which he is jointly responsible to the Rural District Councils
of Kuching and Upper Sadong. His residence is in Tebekang.
Early in December work started on a country road that will run from 8th Mile, Penrissen Road, to Pangkalan Kuab. The work is being organized by a committee of Chinese gardeners, with the Kapitans China of 7th and 10th Mile as members. Further in, away from Penrissen Road, the organization is in Malay hands, and every able-bodied man in Pangkalan Kuab is giving free labour over the weekends. This is a first-rate example of local initiative and of interracial co-operation, and those concerned have been warmly congratulated. An application has now been made by the organizers for a grant from the Council. The next phase of the road will run into the Sea Dayak zone, passing near Merdang Lumut and Merdang Gayam, and eventually reaching Muara Tuang. It should be possible to complete the job in three years, if co-operation on the present scale can be maintained.
The extension of Penrissen Road from Benuk (Segu) to Emperoh Semadang deteriorated badly due to minor landslides, and it was decided that more work must be done on it Funds were made available from savings in other Districts, and the Public Works Department, with District Office funds, resumed work in November. Stone surfacing has considerably improved the road; but the last half-mile (almost total mud) is still in a bad state, and is liable always to require a good deal of attention. It should be possible in future to extend this road further, in order to reach Bengoh.
At the end of the year estimates were made for improving the road system around Pisang Road West, and a scheme was prepared, for submission to the Rural District Council, for tarmac surfacing in this area.
The inhabitants of Nanas Road West petitioned the Kuching Municipal Council and the Rural District Council for their road to be properly built up. The Council boundary runs down the middle of Nanas Road West, and at the end of the year it appeared likely that the two Councils would agree to share the cost of construction, with the proviso that, on the Rural District Council side, one half of the sum required (a quarter of the total cost) must be subscribed by the inhabitants themselves. A meeting was held in the last week of the year at which the residents agreed to raise this money.
First steps were taken towards the opening of motorable communication between Sungei Tengah and Batu Kawa, by the reconstruction of an important bridge on the route. This project took the whole of the funds allocated by the Council for the road this year, and work on the road itself is thus being held up till after the landas of 1958. Improvements to bridges were also made in the Cross-River Kampongs.
Consultations were held between the District Officers of Bau and Kuching, with a view to connecting the new country road in the Singghai (Bau District) area with Malang Road. Sagah, the most northerly Land Dayak village of the Singghai group, is just inside Kuching District.
Arrangements were made for bicycle licence fees to be collected by the Rural District Council (instead of, as hitherto, by the Kuching Municipal Council) in respect of all bicycles whose owners live outside the municipal area.
Trade and Development
The slump in pepper continued and intensified, and the price of rubber also fell. Money was tight, and this tendency increased after the Government's announcement of increased taxation in the new Budget.
The new Mental Hospital, at 7th Mile, Penrissen Road, was nearing completion at the end of the year. Site formation and building began on the important Government secondary school, just off 24th Mile,
64
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, APRIL 30, 1958
Simanggang Road. A large and handsome new branch of the Chung Hua Middle School was erected on Pending Road.
Site-levelling for the new bazaar at Sungei Maong (3rd Mile, Rock Road) was completed, and agreement was reached with all the shopkeepers at present occupying squalid huts along the main road that they would move into the new bazaar and build on the Government's terms. In these negotiations Councillor Chew Yun-syn gave a great deal of assistance. A special closed sale of lots was held for all those who already have shops in the area, and a few weeks later there was a public auction of some of the remaining lots. By the end of the year the shopkeepers were drawing up a new set of plans for submission to the Council, their ideas having become progressively more ambitious as the new bazaar has developed from talk to realization. There is a strong demand that water must be laid on for the new bazaar, and the Council expressed its disapproval of the answers given on the subject of water supplies for the environs of Kuching by the Divisional Engineer at the Divisional Advisory Council meeting in November.
A piped water supply has been laid on at Santubong, a great deal of the work having been done by the villagers themselves, with Public Works Department funds. The water is taken from Sungei Sabuan, across which a low dam has been built. Incorporated in the dam is a straining filter to prevent solid material entering the pipeline. Pipes 1 miles in length convey the water to standpipes in the village. The scheme cost $19,400, and is capable of supplying between 60,000 and 70,000 gallons of water each day.
In view of difficulties in the pig-breeding industry, which is under almost hopeless competition from Singapore and Kuching firms importing pigs from abroad, the moribund Pig Breeders' Association was galvanized into life (it had not been effectively in existence since before the war), with encouragement and advice from the Agricultural Department, the Veterinary Department, and this Office, The Association is now building up membership, and coming to grips with pork marketing problems in Kuching. It is hoped that in time it will be of service to breeders within reach of Kuching.
lnformation
New arrangements were introduced for the better distribution of Information Office printed matter, much of which has hitherto been sent out from the District Office in a haphazard manner. The new arrangements ensure that one copy of each publication in the appropriate languages reaches every village where there is a school. The publications are collected by the teachers, when they come in to Kuching for their pay, and the S.P.G. and Catholic Missions are greatly assisting the plan by ensuring that publications reach their own teachers. Next year the Council will be spending $3,000 on the purchase of publications, including Life, The Geographical Magazine, Malayan Monthly, etc., in an attempt to remedy the intellectual isolation of educated people living in villages.
Entirely on local initiative, a public reading room has been opened at Kampong Lintang, across river. Assistance in the provision of reading matter is being given by the British Council, the Information Office, and the Rural District Council.
Sport
A very successful sports meeting was held at Nonok, organized principally by Inspector Wan Yusof, on 12th and 13th October. For the first time at these annual sports meetings, the Chinese were invited to take part. Their participation gave added interest to the meeting, and afterwards the Chinese leaders stressed that they hoped similar arrangements would be made in future years.
A Sea Dayak schools sports meeting, attended by the schools of a number of villages, was held at Sungei Tanju on 28th December.
Archaeology
The presence of a bulldozer at Emperoh Semandang was used as a divinely-sent opportunity of levelling a football field for the S.P.G. school there. The operation revealed that the football field is in fact the site of a longhouse of considerable antiquity. The Museum authorities were informed, and visited the site with great promptitude. It is expected that some serious digging will be done there next year. The Land Dayak tradition is that Semadang is the early home of the Biatah-speaking group who moved (possibly in the early eighteenth century) to Seburan (Sentah), which is the present parent-village of this important group that includes Kuab, Duras, Siratau, Tijirak, etc.
Arms
During the period, 122 arms were licensed, compared with 124 in the first half of the year. Fifty-four of these were licensed to natives, 60 to Chinese, and eight to others. Titis brings the total of licensed arms in the District up to 4,142.
Labour
The strike staged by workers of Central Contractors, Ltd., engaged on building the new Municipal Council fiats in Ban Hock Road, lasted until 9th July, when all the strikers resumed work. As a result of the strike, a total of 1,452 man working days were lost. Thereafter there was no sign of any major labour unrest.
A number of accidents, involving workers principally of the building trade, were reported. Three of these —two building workers, one wharf labourer—escaped death after falling from great heights. They sustained serious injuries which will disable them for a considerable time. All are in receipt of payments under the Workmen's Compensation Ordinance.
A Malay workman, who was severely burnt in an accident involving himself and another Malay in the Sarawak Match Factory, died on 25th December as a result of the burns he sustained.
District Officer, Bau
(H. A. L. Ferguson)
General
The most outstanding events during the period were the coming into being of the first fully elected District Council, with Councillors elected democratically on a Ward /Proportion of Population basis thereby every part of Bau District being represented for the first time; secondly, Primary Education was greatly extended to cover the greater part of the district.
Thus a district policy conforming with that of Central Government's policy for paving the way towards self-government took, in a practical way, a notable step forward.
The poverty and illiteracy of the greater part of the population however remains and during the period efforts to alleviate and remedy these were undertaken only on a limited scale owing to shortage of both Land Dayak staff and technical argicultural aid.
Court
The Courts have continued to be busy during the past six months. With two first class, one second and one third class Magistrate in the station, the work has been expeditiously as well as efficiently carried out.
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, APRIL 30, 1958
65
Though criminal cases have increased in number yet they by no means represent the true picture as far as crime goes, for illegal immigrants alone have accounted for over half of the number of cases while offences under the Road and Traffic Ordinance and the Excise Ordinance represent approximately another third.
One inquest was held to inquire into the cause of death of one Indonesian Malay shot dead by a Police officer when the former resisted arrest; a verdict of "justifiable homicide" was returned.
Crime
There was really comparatively little crime during the period and not until the recent past two months did the repeated occurrence of shooting accidents produce concern. Up to 17th February this year a total number of six such accidents were recorded with the loss of one life, grievous hurt to four persons and simple hurt to one. Of these six offenders three were youths of under 18 years of age possessing no licence to own or use firearms. They simply took their father's or friend's gun and discharged the weapon with such carefree bravado that accidents were the natural outcome. The policy of "one door one gun" would seem to encourage this action. Collective punishment by way of wholesale suspension of issue of cartridges for a certain short period might have some effect in drawing the attention of the public to the consequence of rash and negligent use of firearms. The District Officer and Native Officer both visited and sent circulars to area headman concerning hunting methods but to no avail. The jungle meanwhile is more dangerous today than ever before.
Pirate taxis continue to operate from Bau even as far as Kuching though some have been detected and prosecution made.
Health and Welfare
Improvements towards better health were made throughout the six months through all agencies; the World Health Organisation (W.H.O.) teams, led most capably by Christy Alam, again sprayed all areas with "Dieldrin". A breed of mosquito however appeared afterwards to be unaffected and resistant to this chemical and the cheaper D.D.T. is considered necessary. The number of cases of fever at the Bau Dispensary has noticeably declined during the period.
The Superintendent of Travelling Dispensaries, Mr. Hiang Kia Hem, made a successful tour of every Dayak house in Bau District (including farming huts) in an attempt to inoculate everyone against yaws.
The Dresser and staff at Bau Dispensary continued to give invaluable first aid to whoever appeared and more serious cases continued to be sent to the General Hospital, Kuching.
The District Council Clinic seems to cope with larger numbers of women and babies (and relatives in attendence) each month. Every Monday afternoon Miss Mair Rees of the Clinic, Kuching, comes up with six or seven nurses to deal with the majority of antenatal patients and newly-born infants. The Monday ante-natal attendances ranged between 48 and 91, whilst Registered Infants have also to be examined and these increased monthly—in September 1957 by 71 and January 1958 by 35, and both the popularity and pressure of work grows.
An extension to the Clinic was built during September and this is at the time of writing again barely adequate on a Monday afternoon. Chinese and Dayak women use the Clinic more than Malays. During February an "Advancement of women” series of afternoon lectures and discussions was held in the Malay Kampongs of Buso and Ledah Tanah and Bau District Council, receiving an account of its success from Native Officer Abang Ali bin Haji Wahab, decided to extend monthly trips to other places in addition to
the above so long as one dresser or midwife remained in Bau itself on that particular afternoon. Siniawan, Simpang Kuda School, Krokong, Kampong Sudoh and Grogo villages were thereupon scheduled for inclusion.
The Midwife and Health Visitor were available to answer both day and night calls.
Bazaars were efficiently inspected by the Health Inspector, Lai Ah Kit, and inefficiency on the part of scavengers or proprietors not keeping their premises in a sanitary condition were effectively remedied.
Concrete drains to Tondong and Buso Bazaars were laid. Tondong latrines remained in a shocking condition and the Local Committee again thwarted the Council's order for the installation of Aqua Privies in Tondong shophouses by a debate in Council which ended in the postponing of implementation until April, 1958.
The Bau District Council after a careful searching of ways to eliminate the stray dogs nuisance in the bazaars reluctantly decided that subject to a public notice Police help would be sought to shoot these animals, all other methods having failed.
Powdered milk, made available by UNICEF, was distributed each month through all the schools in the District. Some of the ulu schools are sometimes late to take their allocations but this new system works more efficiently than the other methods tried hitherto. Steps have now been taken to ensure that rural schools do in future take their monthly quotas.
Registration of the blind and those suffering from tuberculosis was extended through the good works of the District Council, Relief Committee and Dispensary staff. There are five blind persons fully annotated, and Doctor Wallace visited the station in November and dealt with those others who were partially blind.
The elimination of skin diseases and stomach infestations made little headway in the more rural areas despite occasional visits by Administrative Officers with drugs and medicines. Until such time as "Ulu Dressers" are established (and there are three under training now for Tringgus, far Jagoi and Opar areas up country) little effective work can be accomplished.
However, the only really black spot concerns the increasing number of T.B. patients. There are now 71 registered patients receiving monthly treatment in Bau, and there are a few hundred others who are too old or weak to come down to the Dispensary from far away villages.
On the whole therefore much good work was accomplished despite the size of the health work.
Native Affairs
With the recommendations of the Geddes's Report on the Land Dayaks of Serian very much in mind its relevance and application to the Bau Land Dayaks was examined by the Native Officers and District Officer and found to be closely applicable. In Bau District there are two types of Land Dayaks—those near to the bazaars who copy the Chinese and have entered the monied economy and others—the majority, who continue to follow traditional farming methods and do not use money. The latter naturally are the most difficult to administer when questions of education, new planting, etc., are put before them.
The greatest single factor among the Land Dayaks, working for their good, continues to be the dynamic growth of Christianity. During the period other villages such as Stenggang and Tabong have agreed to split up and form model villages with an integrated social system. This allows peaceful co-existence between those accepting Christian practices and those who wish to continue following the ancient customs; jealousy however does arise where the latter see that there is less time wasted and consequently more progress where
66
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, APRIL 30, 1958
farmers no longer have pantangs and the four villages that have already divided are examples of this. Those newly converted Christian Dayaks do however have this deplorable (though understandable) psychological attitude of superiority, indeed smugness, towards their heathen fellowmen, which in Kampong Kandis (Siniawan) and Kampong Stenggang (Jaggoi) continue to cause unpleasantness whenever they meet. At the latter place, despite some strong language there has been no further violence and monetary pledges have been returned.
During the past six months regular educational tours for the more intelligent farmers were made to Semenggok Research Station, Tarat, Samarahan. Mr. Kimura's garden at 10th mile, Batu Lintang and Kuching in an effort to get these people to start thinking about their own standard of living. With the Sengghi Dayaks this paid dividends in the form of ploughs for their herd of buffalo, purchase of two Tamworth-Berkshire piglets, new fish ponds stocked with Government supplied fish by Ong Kee Bian, and further orders for first quality Leghorn and Rhode Island Red poultry, others returned knowing how to bud rubber and with orders for budded orange and rambutan trees.
Visits to Kuching to see schools, the facilities of the Central Library, and Radio Sarawak at work were also made.
I think the policy of breaking down the intellectual isolation of teachers, headmen and selected farmers to be of great value, since "seeing" is not only believing, but understanding and wanting too. (In the past six months this policy with regard to new schools has proved itself. Without these visits to Kuching I do not think six new primary schools would have been undertaken in time for 1958).
The inclusion of the more intelligent Land Dayaks in the business of Local Government, as from the beginning of 1958, has already, by an examination of Council agenda, brought about a fresh complexion to the administration of the district; such items as Pigforaging By-laws and amendments to the Land Dayak Law; Rural Paths and Ways By-laws; purchase of road-making equipment; many aspects of education have been voiced.
The provision of a Council forum for the practical application of progressive thought is complementary to the new awareness of themselves as a people which Christianity and improved communications and radio are bringing about.
There remains however the conflict of opinions about progress between the young village committee members and the old headmen. Some Sengghi Dayaks have suggested a way of reconciling this problem and are proposing to institute a Sengghi Parliament, comprising, on the one side of the Tubon Village Hall, the younger "House of Commons" and on the other, the more conservative, older members of a "House of Lords". The assembly, it is suggested, should meet after the Bau District Council’s monthly ordinary meeting and be presided over by one of the two District Councillors for Sengghi, perhaps Tua Kampong Michael Ridar, who apart from being the leading and most active of the younger Sengghi Dayaks is, secretly, the doyen of Orang Kaya Pemancha Nyarah. In this way, roads, farming methods, co-operatives, village resettlement and school affairs together with similar items from Bau District Council can be discussed by or relayed to the nine Sengghi villages.
This unique arrangement (for Bau) would however, for the present, work successfully only for Sengghi; Serumbu Dayaks have at several large meetings at Simpang Kuda School and at what turned out to be a cocktail party in the co-operative store at Kampong Seromah voiced equal interest in Land Dayak affairs but are less intelligent than the Sengghi people.
Visits to Dayak villages, schools and meetings held by Native Officers and District Officer have been continous throughout the landas season.
The amounts of padi planted by most villages are considered to be small and there is enough in most cases for not more than six months of 1958. Many villagers during the past few months were seen buying rice from the bazaars. Parang and other knives are no longer made by the Dayaks of Bau District, neither are baskets or clothing. Everything is bought or obtained by barter.
The three-mile road from Tondong to Sudoh (Sengghi) was constructed between August and October for approximately $3,000. Of four bridges, there remains only one more which at the time of writing is being made by Government carpenters. The road will soon be ready for cycles and motor-cycles.
The Malays of Bau District, though few in number, are widely scattered along the banks of small rivers. They have been the hardest hit by the fall in the price of rubber. The Buso Malays are still in a very unhappy economic position with small gardens of old rubber with declining yields. A substantial number of Malays have moved during the last few months to seek work in Kuching and elsewhere.
The new surau at Bau is a token move in the right direction in bringing together Bau Malays whose younger men seem often inclined to forget their religion and customs.
Chinese Affairs
Despite the continued verbal reminders of low rubber and pepper prices the bazaars, perhaps going about their business a little more leisurely and quietly, continued with their getting and spending regardless. The Dayaks and Chinese small-holders bringing in their rubber and pepper and the weekly, or bi-weekly, "Bazaar Lorry"—which most proprietors now seem to have shares in — continue to make its way to Kuching. Road traffic if anything increased judging by the number of new cars, buses and lorries.
The most remarkable achievement lies in the rebuilding of the Bau Chung Hua School which beside its old buildings is now beginning to assume fine proportions and looks well against the rugged limestone of Krian. The costs, which are being spread over a number of years, are at the present time a heavy burden for the local Chinese, but both here and at Siniawan there are over 400 pupils at school.
Small-holders alongside the main and minor roads have now begun to replant rubber seriously and usually under the Government Scheme. Day by day old landscapes change as more and more hill rubber is being cut and contour terraces made for the efficient future tapping of budded rubber.
Pepper continues to grow in a healthy manner. There are two orange gardens in the district at Tai Ton and Penjiru.
There is still a lot of land astride the roads that could be used to advantage, some of which is potential mining, but much of which is owned by people who cannot use it efficiently due to various causes. A District Office survey of this land use has been undertaken by S.A.O. Lo Yik Fong and Native Officer Abang Maimoon. The results are of great interest, as are the causes for non-cultivation.
All the new basketball courts are used regularly on dry days and even the smallest schools play this game which seems to be preferred to badminton.
The New Year was greeted in traditional style and the second day, being so fine, led to both bus companies working overtime.
Agriculture
It must be said that rubber replanting and some new planting of clonal seedlings and stumps have continued to hold the centre of work in the district. It has not stopped certain of the more progressive small-holders
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, APRIL 30, 1958
67
and farmers, however, from building and stocking new fish ponds—whether of cement or earth—the result of encouragement from the Fisheries Section under Mr. Ong Kee Bian.
From the air however the acreages of pepper, new rubber (in rows or along hill terraces), and other gardens — orange, coffee, or pineapples — give the impression that successful agriculture is only just beginning. Mining lands take up so much of the easily accessible areas, but there are a lot of old gardens.
The small-holders are continuing to take an interest in the new rubber and getting it into the ground.
The Dayak farmers, whose lands are not capable of producing more than five or six months, rice a year at present, are slow to come forward, always making excuses for not joining the scheme. The chief trouble is of course money. They cannot hire labour to dig the holes or make the terraces since they cannot borrow from anywhere, or if they can they do not. Whilst payments are not normally due until after work has been done and approved.
During the second half of 1957. there were hardly any seeds made available to the Land Dayaks and others, who had prepared holes for seedling stumps, were told to wait until February or March, 1958. Some had waited almost a year.
It is to be hoped that from 1958 onwards more staff will be made available for the Land Dayak villages, since on a door basis the scheme cannot yet be said to have started as far as these people are concerned. It is also asking a lot of one man to walk 200 miles a month inspecting only a quarter of the Dayak villages who have participated so far.
A padi survey was begun at the beginning of the year. Notes on monthly retail prices of pork and chickens were also made in different areas.
Requests from the Sengghi Dayaks that instruction in ways that will lead to better rice-yields were made. After subtracting mountain areas the proportion of farming land for rice-culture on a door basis must be very small. There is little swamp padi although efforts are being made to make the most of what there is.
Inoculations of poultry and pigs were made at times when disease was suspected in the Jagoi, Sengghi and Bau areas. Requests for this help were promptly answered by aid from the Veterinary Department.
Forestry
Erosion continued as a result of farming earlier in the year up the steep slopes of the Jagoi mountains. Notices in Malay were sent to all the area headmen and followed up by visits.
Continued encroachment of farmers onto the steep forested slopes of the Sengghi-Beranang-Matang range was also noted.
The gazetting of communal forests in the Jagoi and Serumbu area are still awaited, whilst the bellian forests of Stass-Stenggang need attention.
An aerial inspection of forest cover in relation to erosion slopes made in December revealed a triangular area between the Serikin River (Jagoi) and the Pedis River (Krokong) with the apex at Krokong that appears devoid of much soil and vegetation on low shale hills. If something could be done to check run-off over the dendritic erosion pattern of this tract of country, I would recommend the creation of communal forest and forest for timber extraction industry for the future.
The gold-mines eat an enormous quantity of timber each year for the lime-kilns and the creation of such a forest would relieve the Krokong Dayaks of a worsening headache.
Trade
Indonesians continued to bring rubber, pepper and sarongs into the district. Trade was made directly with Pangkalan Tebang, Pejiru and Krokong—within the ten-mile frontier zone.
During the six months trade was less than the same period last year.
Public Works
The contract for concrete piers for Boring Bridge could not be put out until the all-important plans and specifications were ready. These eventually arrived only to coincide with the landas season but at some small loss to the contractor the piers were completed. Since then plans and specifications for the single span bellian structure have been gratefully received from the Public Works Department and a Foochow contractor's tender for a little under $17,000 net has been accepted.
The approach road to the bridge site was improved by laying crushed stone blocks and tailings and buses now use this route.
The new bazaar shophouses at Buso have increased to ten in number and most of the attap dwellings across the road in that bazaar have now been vacated and pulled down.
Work on the Tondong-Sudoh, 3-mile stretch of road was virtually concluded in October, 1957, but bridging continues. There remains only one more 20-foot bridge before Kampong Sudoh and indeed Sengghi is linked by a quicker route to Tondong. The bridges have been made strong enough to take a bulldozer of four tons or more. The problem of getting such a machine across two streams between the Bau side and Sudoh-Tondong road-head would have to be solved if a jeep-able road is to be made. At present it can be used for motor-cycles and bicycles.
The Dayaks of Sengghi have begun to make a 12-foot road which will eventually circle the mountain and reach the Bubut river just before Kampong Sagah (Kuching). An inspection of the ways would seem to favour a link with Kuching via Sungei Tengah Estate rather than Batu Kawa cycle track which is very, very long. It is a self-help scheme but local government should somehow give encouragement with the bridging. Without a Road Rate however, funds have not been available.
Bau minor roads though put to an ever-increasing test by more motor traffic managed to survive the rainy season fairly well, but it would seem a heavy roller is absolutely essential. Bau District Council has therefore agreed to buy a diesel 4-6 ton roller for these roads.
It has also been decided to buy a 4-ton D4 tractor bulldozer. The Bau District Council has now therefore formulated plans to work independently of the Public Works Department, which is considered to produce greater flexibility and efficiency in regard to road making and repairs.
Constabulary
Constant patrolling, licence checks, road block inspections, escorting of illegal immigrants to the frontier and watchfulness leading to many prosecutions where the law was transgressed were carried out with the greatest efficiency.
Language classes and other pastimes, not forgetting badminton, have also reached good standards.
Telecommunications
The lines from Bau to Buso, Tondong and Dahan have been good, though a lot of cutting back of branches is needed to diminish the number of breaks that occur.
The Bau-Kuching links, with a new mast are a great improvement. There is seldom difficulty and they work most satisfactorily.
Education
Six new primary schools were eventually opened during the period after seemingly endless travels by Native Officer, Reverend Fathers, Council staff and
68
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, APRIL 30, 1958
the District Officer to multitudinous up-country sites. Two remain to be built—namely, one between Pangkalan Tebang and Kampong Gumbang and another across Sengghi Mountain at Kampong Segong. These two (plans for which have been made) will complete—on a geographical basis —the provision of primary education facilities in the district.
Government was quite emphatic that every village could not have its own school since there were not enough teachers to be found. Bearding further argument by choosing the sites and at the same time quickly calling up embryonic school committees from various villages to lay before them plans; lists of materials, sizes, quantities, nails; and then drawings of what they should look like when completed, seemed to have the desired effect and groups of villagers went directly into action.
The Jagoi people were, of course, the slowest to react but their new Councillor, Mr. Semos, meant to have the school started in January and it is now nearing completion despite harvest time. Meanwhile pupils are learning in private houses.
The new schools are as follows: —
1.Simpang Kuda School (Serumbu) 9 villages and Dahan Estate 4 teachers.	163 pupils
2.Serumbu School (Palaman Segah)
3 villages
2 teachers	57 pupils
3.Siniawan Native School
3 villages
2 teachers	69 pupils
4.Tembawang Sauh School
2 villages
1 teacher	40 pupils
5.Jagoi School (Sungei Podam)
3 villages
2 teachers	60 pupils
6.Serasot Mission School (Jagoi)
2 villages
1 teacher	50 pupils
Much of the planning with regard to ordering of books, furniture and materials as well as the procedure concerning school fees, registrations and many other administrative details were diligently and enterprisingly undertaken by the District Council staff where much is owed to the Secretary, Mr. Chia Kui Chai, who forewent leave in order to see the plan through.
The Education Department gave every assistance and advice at many stages, particularly with the search for teachers, since locally there was little material that could be called really satisfactory. Thus, for the time being, there are many untrained, passed Primary VI teachers only, leaching in Bau Primary Schools.
Geographical and other magazines of an educational nature were agreed by the District Council to be made available for a trial period of twelve months to teachers in Local Authority Schools. Teachers received Sarawak dalam Minggu, or the English version, each month during the period. Some teachers also received the Sarawak Tribune.
There were some misgivings at the beginning of the year when some more senior pupils from Bau Chung Hua School were not permitted to enter the Mission School and were asked to continue their studies in Kuching Middle Schools. The desire for a liberal education exists but, amongst other things, the poverty of English language (not to mention Malay) in Bau District Chung Hua Schools is perhaps the greatest drawback to the more intelligent Chinese pupils upon leaving their primary schools. Absorbtion into the life of Sarawak, outside Bau anyway, is not easy unless one can speak a language other than Mandarin and Kheh.
Local Government
Bau District Council leapt from strength to strength in the scope of its work and diligence of performance.
Between the 1st and 16th December an election was carried out on democratic lines to find sixteen Councillors from ten wards covering the whole district. The composition of the Council too, based on a Ward/ Population basis resulted in nine Councillors for Land Dayak areas, six for Chinese areas and one Malay representing the dispersed Malay communities. Thus for the first time the Land Dayak, who form the largest even though poorest section of the community have a council majority.
The many apprehensions at the time of the election campaigns were dispelled after only a few meetings in February. The Council would seem to have great promise, if nursed carefully. Its members (among whom only one Orang Kaya Pemancha was re-elected) are mostly young, virile and enterprising representatives of their wards. Some too are particularly gifted in their comprehension of three or four languages.
The works of the Council are too numerous to record specifically; suffice it to say that work centred on schools, but otherwise ranged from Prevention of Pollution By-laws to the provision of a cement reservoir near the top of Gunong Jagoi, from the breaking of the pork-butchers price-ring in Bau Bazaar to bus and taxi requirements.
The Council is a very busy one, efficient even though rather overworked. For the district generally, the Council in its new form, is a very good thing.
Mining
Bukit Young Mine under the management of Ong Ah Khin has increased its production of gold over the last six months and several large new buildings have been erected as development required. This is the most successful mine at present.
Ban Lee Mine is a mystery mine. Reports of production are always sent but show always a Nil Return.
There were two new mines opened, one by Ng Kui Hiung on the ex-Borneo Gold Mining area at Bidi where ores have been located and show promise of being relatively rich; the other by Lee Tung Sen at Nam Loong along the Bidi-Krokong Road. There is good promise here also.
Sport
The provision of basketball courts in the main bazaars, the renovation of the Bau football field and setting of swings and slides has made a great difference to the children of these places, and badminton has also been most popular. A district basketball competition was held successfully in September and won by Chung Hua School.
Acting District Officer, Upper Sadong
(William Nais)
Court and Crime
The number of cases heard in the District Court shows an upward trend for the period under review, though none of these cases concerns any serious crime. Most of the offences have been connected with the Road Traffic Ordinance. This is so as a result of the Police campaign against operators of private cars used as "pirate taxis" which are neither licensed nor insured to carry fare-paying passengers. They have proved a menace to society, not only because they take the bread out of the mouth of the lawfully licensed taxidriver, but their cars are not covered by a Third Party insurance to protect the passengers from the risk of
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, APRIL 30, 1958
69
accident. However, the Police efforts in curbing their pirate-like activities have proved highly successful and resulted in a number of convictions and heavy fines being imposed. It is hoped that with the co-operation of the public this menace will soon be completely wiped off the road.
There were two cases heard under the Excise Ordinance during the second half-year under review. One Chinese woman, Chong Moi, who was convicted in 1956 for distilling illicit arrack and fined a total sum of $1,025, had the fine reduce to $425 as a result of a petition she made to His Excellency the Governor.
Despite this she still failed to pay the reduced fine and was consequently committed to prison for six months.
An inquest was held to inquire into the double deaths of Kon Ai, an elderly Chinese aged 71 years, and his Dayak wife, Juon anak Nyandeh, who was in her early fifties. Both lived at Pangkalan Koran. It happened that Kon Ai first murdered his wife by strangulation and afterwards committed suicide himself by hanging. A verdict of murder followed by suicide was returned on the couple. No motive could be given for this double tragedy.
One illegal immigrant from Indonesian Borneo was sentenced to serve a four month term of imprisonment in Kuching. Before this term expired he escaped in a Dayak village at Koran not far from Serian.
There was one fatal shooting incident in December at Merau in which a Land Dayak, Namkum anak Ludai aged 45 years was shot dead by a fellow-hunter. The case is still subjudice.
Seven accidents were reported and dealt with but none of these was fatal.
On the 9th September, 1957, Liberation Day, the Police mounted a Guard of Honour which was inspected by the Acting District Officer. Long Service Decorations were presented on this occasion to seven village headmen, two Melikin and five Land Dayaks for their long and meritorious service to the Government and to their people in their respective areas.
Health
The health of the district has remained satisfactory and there were no serious epidemics. Medical attention continues to be popular at both Serian and Tebakang dispensaries. Attendance at these two dispensaries has been steady. It is as yet too early to predict what the effects of the increase in medical fees would be like on the dispensary attendance, although there is no real ground to fear that the revised fees would prove a hardship to the villagers.
The site for the new maternity clinic at Tarat had been prepared and levelled out with the aid of one D4 tractor before it was put on the construction of the Tebakang/Tebedu Road. The work on the building will commence as soon as sufficient funds have become available. In the meantime the two midwives employed by the Upper Sadong District Council continue to work in the temporary clinic close to the office of the Tarat Agricultural Station which is visited weekly by the Sister-in-Charge of the Maternity Clinic at Kuching. Although the present structure of the clinic is most unsatisfactory, it does not in any way impair its popularity.
The work of the World Health Organization Anti-Malarial Unit in re-spraying the district was carried out successfully from village to village. No hut was too remote to be left out. The "operation cats" goes some way in restoring goodwill and the cat-population in the villages where cats had been killed by the insecticide. The demand is still enormous and cannot all be met. However, the people have slowly come to realize that the spraying is for their own good and indeed is a blessing in disguise, in that it helps to rid their villages of the menace of malaria and head-lice, which are
common among the natives. This realization is important as otherwise the work of the spraying team would be greatly hampered.
During the months of November and December a mass yaws-campaign was carried out in the areas of the Batang Kedup and Batang Kayan and in the Melikin areas by the Superintendent of Travelling Dispensary. All the villages in these areas were visited and in each village penicillin-oil injections were given and treatments for other types of illness were also dispensed. The Superintendent's report reveals some disturbing facts regarding the poor standard of living of the people concerned. Having enquired of the Native Chief of the area, it is learned that it is not starvation, but merely a poor standard of living. However, measures are now being contemplated to send relief in the form of powdered milk to the areas most in need of such aid. I must compliment the Superintendent on the thoroughness with which he carried out the campaign.
The Hospital Assistant at Tebakang paid monthly visits to Tebedu on a routine travelling programme, and also carried out inoculation in the villages near and around Tebedu. He will continue to do vaccination in all villages near the border line of West Borneo when new stocks of vaccine lymphs are available. This is essential to guard the people against smallpox which was breaking out in Klamantan Barat.
Native Affairs
In my previous report mention was made of the Dayaks taking up rubber cultivation seriously especially along the stretch of the new road to Tebakang. This is all very encouraging, but unfortunately it is not without stirring up more land disputes. As it is, the Administration is already fully saddled with land disputes to settle without having more to come in. But this is only a natural thing to expect. As more and more land is taken up for cultivation and there is less for everybody, disputes are bound to arise.
In a recent case before the District Court, not less than 54 Land Dayaks from Kampong Tebakang were each fined $10.00 for pulling out some 2,000 rubber plants belonging to a neighbouring village. In addition to the fine, each was also ordered to pay $20.00 compensation for the loss incurred by the injured party. A similar case of mischief was perpetrated by a Dayak of Kampong Tarat, but the number of rubber plants pulled out in this case was less than two hundred.
In order that village boundaries may show up on aerial photographs, rentises were cut in the Melikin and in the true right-hand bank of the Batang Kedup in July prior to aerial survey operations. These aerial photographs will also give a general idea of the extent of each communal area, which it is hoped will also minimise the number of land disputes among the villagers.
If the smell of the fruit is anything to go by, the durian season has well set in. Other kinds of fruits are also in season now, and together they provide a handsome cash return to the villagers whom we can see daily carrying their loads of fruits to sell to the bazaar. At its peak time the durian costs only as much as fifteen cents each. The fruit season is not without its tragedy. It brought a fatal incident in its trail when last November, a young boy fell down from a rambutan tree by the roadside near Kampong Pichin and was immediately taken to the General Hospital and was still there at the end of the year; and another, in last December, also a young boy in his teens, fell to his death while climbing one of the fruit-trees behind his village. He was immediately taken to the Serian Dispensary, but he survived only two hours after his fall without regaining consciousness.
Chinese Affairs
There has been an influx of Chinese parents coming in to register the late births of their children during the past six months. This is understandable in view
70
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, APRIL 30, 1958
of the education policy, and strict insistence on the correct age-group for admission to schools as a birth certificate will always be required to determine a child's age.
Two new shophouses have been completed at Palah bazaar. Altogether five shoplots had been laid out and three had already been taken up including the two shophouses. Due to the present trade recession, there is no possibility of anyone venturing to put more shops at this bazaar in the immediate future.
None of the ten shoplots at Tanah Merah has been taken up, and it looks probable that they have been abandoned for good. Apparently nobody has any interest in this area. Part of the shoplot area had been taken up by the Serian District Council for a Council School.
The temporary shophouses at Mereng are yet to be demolished, and they drag on a miserable existence as there is not much business at present. Three lots had been allocated, but the holders are not keen on building new shops because of the steady decline in business with the neighbouring villages which have established co-operative village shops of their own.
One of the three canteens set up to cater for the needs of the Public Works Department workers engaged on the Serian/Simanggang road project has been allegedly reported to be illegally dealing with rubber in direct contravention of the conditions of the canteen licence, but no concrete evidence to substatiate this allegation could be obtained. The bazaar traders were not happy over the existence of this canteen and the way it conducts its business; in that, they alleged that being an advantage point along the route taken by the villagers to the bazaar, the said canteen played unfair advantage over them by stopping the village folks and buying from them whatever produce they off from a source of their regular customers with a consequent reduction in their bazaar trade. This complaint has been brought up in the District Council Committee meeting and the decision taken was to give a fair warning to the owner of the canteen concerned to strictly comply with the conditions endorsed at the back of the licence, failing which he would suffer the withdrawal and cancellation of his canteen licence.
Education
Work has not started on the new buildings of the Upper Sadong District Council Higher Primary School at Tarat. It would commence as soon as the plans of the school buildings and the teachers’ quarters which have been submitted to the Education Department, are approved. The site of the new school is adjacent to the proposed site for the new Ante-Natal Clinic.
A new District Council School at Tanah Merah, Semerahan, is nearing completion and will be known as Tanah Merah District Council School. It is being built with the co-operative efforts of the villagers concerned. Altogether nine villages have subscribed towards the building of the school which is designed to accommodate about one hundred students and there will be boarding quarters built close by, to enable children from distant villages to benefit from the school. Tanah Merah is about one hour's river journey down river from the 27th Mile bridge. The children attending this school will be mostly Sea Dayak of the Sebuyau stock, and as it is not far from Merang Bazaar, it is hoped that some Chinese children too, will benefit from the school.
Six untrained teachers from the District Council's Schools sat in October, 1957, for the entrance examination to qualify them for admission to the 1958 Grade IIIA Teacher Training Course at the Batu Lintang Training Centre. It is sad to record, however, that none of these six teachers was accepted. This is indeed a pity as we would like to see the position of the
Council Schools being consolidated by staffing them with more trained teachers. Obviously it is not easy to replace them without bringing the schools to a standstill, and until such time as we can find suitable teachers, we have to make do with their services, limited though their education may be. This year, however, we welcome two more teachers who have completed their training at the Batu Lintang Training Centre. They will start teaching in the District Council Schools as from the beginning of 1958.
Local Government
The Upper Sadong District Council continues to function as usual. The Councillors meet regularly once a month and the Council business is discussed in a more cordial and impartial atmosphere. The Council is most fortunate in having one of its four members on the Divisional Advisory Council being elected to Council Negri. The Honourable Orang Kaya Pemancha Dukau thus deserves the honour of being the first Land Dayak representative in Sarawak history to sit in the Council Negri. The mainstay of the Upper Sadong District Council, the Honourable Orang Kaya Pemancha Dukau has given it the benefit of his wide experience and maturity of age, and his firm but tactful influence has led to a smooth conduct of the Council affairs. Members of the Divisional Advisory Council have made a wise choice in electing him to the Council Negri.
The Serian/Tebakang Road has now been completed and a car can drive right up to the Tebakang Bazaar. From Tebakang work continued on the construction of the road to Tebedu, a distance of about 26 miles. Up till the time of writing the road from a junction by the Tebakang Kubu has been opened up for about three and half miles and well past Kampong Pichin. Two D4 Tractors, one six-ton roller and two five-ton trucks are on the road construction and the labour force numbering altogether twenty-five with one foreman and one Up-Country Road Superintendent to supervise the road works. The latter is employed for this project as well as for Senah/Negri Pedawan Road project and therefore each project gets half of his supervision which contributes a great relief both to the Chairman of Kuching Rural District Council as well as to the Chairman of Upper Sadong District Council from the pressure of supervising the country-road works.
Public Works
All the Junior Service quarters at Serian had been given a new face-lift with their redecoration recently. For some of the quarters the re-decoration had been much too long overdue, and with it the home "atmosphere" had brightened up considerably. The colour scheme is most suitable and attractive and it is hoped that the Government quarters at Tebakang which are yet too sad in appearance will be decorated with the same colour.
The new retention wall at the Serian Pangkalan has now been completed and surfacing of the bank along the wall has been done. The completion of this Pangkalan should prove a welcome service to the down and upriver traders who transport their goods up and down the river through this Pangkalan.
The Serian/Simanggang Road, the biggest project the Public Works Department has ever had, has been opened up for about 13 miles up to a place called Engkabang and jeeps can drive right up to Sengei Krait about 12 miles from Serian. I should say the Department is lucky in building the road through the saddle of Gunong Simuja where recently a great deal of laterite stone deposits were discovered and found quite suitable for surfacing the road at a very low cost of twelve cents per ton.
The Water Works Department made a preliminary survey of the waterfall at Ranchan and found it adequate for the supply of Serian Town. Subsequently in the month of July a party of surveyors from the
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, APRIL 30, 1958
71
Department surveyed the line from the waterfall to the new Police Station at 38 mile. In the course of the survey, the people in Serian were in a happy mood thinking that piped water supply which is long overdue would soon be available. Since the Serian representatives on the Divisional Advisory Council were told that the project would definitely commence in 1958, it is sad to record, however, that the Department will not be able to undertake the work.
Agriculture
Following a disappointing padi harvest in the first half of the year most areas had successful burns.
Towards the end of the year three requests were received from Dayaks in Melikin area for assistance in controlling padi pests. The Agricultural Department sent out a "Swing Fog" team and in all approximately 570 acres of hill and swamp padi were sprayed. In addition to this 224 ounces of zinc phosphide rat poison were distributed during the half-year. At the time of writing there has been a spell of continuous rain and rising water flooded many parts of the district. Therefore, as padi harvest depends largely on the mood of landas, it is feared that as far as wet padi is concerned the padi harvest next year would be any different from what it was in 1957. Hill padi on the whole is good; however, it is too early to predict the outcome.
Applications to participate in the rubber planting scheme continue to come in and one Field Agricultural Assistant from Tarat Agricultural Station has been attached to the District Office to deal with rubber applications and to give necessary advice to the public on matters concerning pests and on methods of planting rubber. During the period under review, 89 planting permits for 320 acres of land were applied for planting rubber mostly in block and this is indeed highly encouraging when it is considered that the applicants are not only Chinese, but also including a great number of Natives who live right up the Ulu. The majority of the Dayaks who live along the main road have taken seriously to rubber planting and their enthusiasm has led to many land disputes, resulting in hundreds of young rubber plants being pulled out and going waste. Nevertheless such a situation is well under control now. The number of those who live along the stretch of the new Serian/Simanggang Road taking up rubber cultivation is growing steadily.
Sheet rubber still comes over the border from Indonesia and during the last six months 4,000 piculs passed through the Customs in Serian.
Despite the low price of pepper quite a number of gardeners along the Kuching/Serian Road are planting up new fields. It is thought that this is being done chiefly as a "stand-by" and also in the hope that pepper prices will rocket again in future.
The waterfall at Ranchan, situated about a quarter mile away from the Serian/Simanggang Road has become a popular resort for week-enders for its swimming and scenic beauty. It also offers privacy and seclusion which attract a good number of people from even as far away as Kuching.
Tuba-Fishing was successfully held on Sunday, 8th September, 1957, by the Malays, Chinese and Land Dayaks of Tebakang and Serian. Their efforts in organising this ever popular water-sport go on a long way in fostering racial harmony and for this reason are all the more praiseworthy.
District Officer, Lower Sadong
(Abang Haji Abdulrahim)
Crime
A shooting case is pending. The victim who was wounded on his right thigh was still undergoing treatment in the General Hospital, Kuching.
Medical and Health
The spraying of the Sungei Pinang area was done towards the end of September before the WHO Malarial Pilot Team extends the spraying along Abok areas.
It seems unlikely that a dispensary would be built in Simunjan in the year 1958, although the district needs one very badly. However, the Travelling Dispensary No. 3 functioned satisfactorily and a number of serious cases have been conveyed to Kuching hospital from time to time for treatment.
The health of the populace as a whole was normal.
Native Affairs
Wan Haji Deni of Pendam, a well-known coconut estate owner has been elected a member of the Coconut Advisory Committee.
There were three applicants to perform the Haj this year compared with five during the year 1956.
The Durian seems to prosper both Malays and Ibans for the season. Late in the year many boats crowded the Kerupok Lake off Bukit Punda for the trade. Most of the fruits were for the coastal markets.
A slight increase in the price of copra recently delighted the Bugis while their padi grew fairly well.
Although the landas is approaching it is unlikely that the usual high water would damage the Ibans' wet padi in the interior with the view that the plants grew well above the flood level except in certain areas.
The application of Penghulu Birong of Sungei Arus, Sebangan, to retire was approved by the Chief Secretary on August 1st. The Penghulu who is now over 70 years of age was the best Penghulu in the district. An election will be held in his area to select a suitable man to take his place.
Chinese Affairs
The year 1957 should be a lucky one for the traders in the Simunjan bazaar as none of the old shophouses went down to the river. However, a number of kampong houses have been demolished because of the erosion.
Posts and Telegraphs
The V.H.F. is functioning satisfactorily save on one occasion off the air for a day, that is on August 13th. Revenue collected from trunk call fees for the second half year amounted to $2,398.45, an increase of $366.60 from those collected in the first half year. The station was occasionally visited by the Technical Assistants from the Headquarters.
Ten telephones were installed for the subscribers in the old bazaar including the District Council Office. Two of these have been disconnected.
Agriculture
As usual the 1957 harvest was good. The padi planting appeared to be good although more issues of rat poison for the local farmers were made.
The kampong at Semera with 350 houses approximately was almost deserted during the farming season as the occupants were engaged in their padi planting here and there in the Batang Sadong owing to shortage of padi land at Semera itself resulted by the erosion and damage by sea water. Over 150 applications were received from the inhabitants of the kampong for farming at Ulu Semera have been forwarded to the Superintendent of Lands and Surveys, Kuching.
Lands and Surveys
Unlike the previous years the populace are now satisfied with the frequent visits of surveyors to survey the land they applied for. However, there were no applications for land issued at the end of the year as all the lucigrams were recalled for checking and bringing them up to date. Three hundred and twenty-four
72
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, APRIL 30, 1958
applications were received during the second half of the year compared with thirty-nine applications for the first half.
Education
The Abang Man School, Simunjan, is still occupying its old building. Subscriptions have been raised and a plan for the new building is in the course of preparation.
The site earmarked for the Chung Hua School, Simunjan, at the back of the new bazaar has been acquired by Government. No application for the land has yet been received as the community is still discussing its building.
Acting District Officer, Lundu
(Abang Abdul Karim)
Medical and Health
A W.H.O. Anti-Malarial team headed by T. H. Huxley-Duggan, Superintendent for the First Division, gave a second spray in September to the kampongs which had been sprayed in January in the first half year. Kampong Sebako as reported suffered damage due to the spray that a few pigs died. Unluckily this was reported late in December and nothing could be done to prove that those pigs died as a result of the spraying.
Native Affairs
Hill padi farming was good throughout the whole district due to good burning. The harvest will be promising. Engkabang was flowering in some parts only but the crops would not be so good as expected.
Sea Dayak immigrants at Sebandi had cleared a vast area at Tanjong Bemban for 1957/1958 farm. The roughly estimated area cleared was about 270 acres. This consisted mostly of paya and some empram. The padi on the whole was good. The harvest would be a promising one.
T.R. Kasau of Sebandi and ten others at end of the year had put posts for their permanent longhouse. This is situated between Sungei Sebandi Kechil and Sungei Sebandi Besar. The rest had not made up their minds to join T.R. Kasau after harvesting. They were advised to have a longhouse by joining the one put up by T.R. Kasau.
The Malays of Sematan were benefited by Sematan Bauxite Company. They could earn their living more easily than before—by becoming daily-wage earners. In the past they used to go out to the jungle to look for garu for days or to work as daily labourers with pepper planters upriver.
Land Dayaks were gradually coming down to the office to apply for new rubber planting under subsidy.
Agriculture
The Selako living on Lundu/Serayan Road had tested the swampy padi farming at Titiakar as a pilot scheme. Eleven persons farmed there and they realised the difference between swampy and hilly farms. This scheme would attract the neighbours to join them. This area would give room for at least 50 farmers.
Padi farms at Tanjong Purun in November were attacked by army worms; after treatment by an Agricultural Assistant the stumps originally attacked came up pretty well. The whole area has been farmed and the result would be a promising one too.
People living along the coast mostly did not do padi farming that is, people of Kampong Rambungan, Stoh, Pugu and Sematan.
Forests
Lundu Sawmill Company during the early part of the second half-year had difficulty to obtain logs as big trees along the sides of the rail line were scarce. In December, 1957, the rail line had been extended by another mile to a place where big trees were obtainable. During the second half-year, 3,253 logs were rafted down from the logging camp to the sawmill.
Nine hundred and forty-five tons of sawn timber were produced during the second half-year.
Public Works
The work for Lundu Water Supply had commenced in mid-November under the supervision of P.W.D. Assistant Engineer. Local people were engaged as the labourers. Very unfortunately the whole job could not be finished in 1957 due to landas and only part of the reinforced dam was done.
The force of the water was too strong and therefore there were no means and ways to have the whole dam done.
Almost all the materials for the job arrived at Lundu. The job will be started again after landas season.
Local Authority
The Lundu District Council met regularly. The Chairman had done much for the development of the Council but the Council only had in mind to increase the expenditure for improvement and never thought or found means and ways of increasing the revenue in order to balance the budget.
The electricity owned and managed by the Council at Lundu had given no additional profits besides paying back a portion of loan plus five per cent interest. The co-operation of the consumers should be asked so as to prolong the life of the engine. Because at times the engine had given trouble as I am informed on the date of writing due to overload, which means that the Lundu District Council should make a frequent check on the consumers.
Certain house-owners at Kampong Stunggang (Malay) who are subject to pay Road Cess of $3/ - per house per year, marched to the Council Office and informed the Secretary that they refused to pay the Cess unless the Council would build the required bridges. The Secretary was being advised to take up action legally as laid down in the said By-laws. The consequence was, most of those concerned gradually paid up their outstanding Cess.
Education
Although Capital Grants of 50 per cent for Selampit, Stunggang (Malay) and Sematan Schools, were made, I notice the local committee of the schools concerned had not tried to collect subscriptions towards their own shares of 50 per cent for the proposed building. They have been reminded.
Capital Grants for the Upper Primary School and another extension to Bumi Putera School at 72 per cent in all had been approved and the work will be commenced in 1958.
Lundu District Council was fortunate enough to have two Grade IIA teachers from Batu Lintang to teach in the Upper Primary School, Lundu. The Upper Primary-Classes. i.e., Primary V and Primary VI, would commence in January, 1958. Children who passed Primary IV from other schools were encouraged to join the Upper Primary School at Lundu. Temporary building was being built up for this purpose. The Chinese gardeners at Selarat and Serayan request to open a school between Selarat and and Serayan was approved but the school had to be financed by themselves in the first year. It would be aided if it should show sign of progress in the second year. Same to the application for Kampong Gelam.
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, APRIL 30, 1958
73
Minor Roads
Approximately eight miles out of ten miles of Lundu/ Serayan Road with one-side drain was completed. It needed surfacing and levelling once more as some of the filling was washed away by the heavy rain during December.
Lands
The proposed area for the airstrips both at Sematan and Lundu were demarcated.
The Land Valuer visited Lundu in October to value land within the proposed area for Airstrip at Lundu. Valuation assessed was agreed by owners concerned. Payment would be made in 1958.
Trade, Customs and Labour
No goods from Indonesia were imported to Lundu, except the rubber from natives living along the border who used to do marketing down to Lundu which they can easily reach within a day.
Due to the rubber and pepper slump the whole business looked dull throughout. In the six months only $271 was collected in Customs duties and of this some was levied on goods imported from Singapore.
The Bauxite Company Limited, Samatan, was busy installing plant and machinery, two blocks of six-door barracks, one wooden bungalow, engine house, vehicle shed and other buildings were being put up. The site around the mine where work would start was being cleared. The road from the washing area to the mine was being built. The work would be started in the early months of 1958 as expected. Two Senior Officials of the Company were stationed at Sematan. Local people were engaged as daily labourers. About 150 labourers would be required when the Company started work on the mine.
FIFTH DIVISION
Limbang District
Courts
Not heavy during the second half year to compare with 47 cases during the first half year. On the criminal side, there were seven cases heard by Distrct Court, three Police Court, ten Petty Court and four Native Courts. There were nine civil cases of debts falling within the jurisdication of District Court, five Court of Small Causes and two Petty Courts.
Of the criminal, the most spectacular were charges under Dangerous Drugs Ordinance in possession of prepared opium, driving truck without efficient brake and of cheating.
Two inquests on death of one Dayak and one Kelabit by falling trees and one Malay for committing suicide were heard during the half year.
It may be added the Court House roof tumbled down as the result of a heavy downpour during the month of December. All court cases had to be held elsewhere. The new Court House which is now under construction will not be completed before the middle of 1958.
Crime
Petty theft does not figure at all prominently in the recorded crimes. It is a fair inference that smuggling of cigarettes and other articles goes on between Brunei and this district. It is impossible to patrol effectively the whole frontier between the two territories and the cheaper price for cigarettes and the higher price in padi in Brunei must be a constant magnet for such activities.
Constabulary
The Police are undertaking the functions of fire bridgade and from their regular practices it appears the protection of Limbang from fire is in good hands.
Native Affairs
Dayaks
Some of the Tabuns and Ibans at Batang Limbang are restless and would like to move to Baram. The Tabun intended to return to their homelands at Batang Tutoh, Baram, while the Dayaks merely seek for farming land.
There is enough reasonable padi swamp land in the Ukong area, but the Dayaks want hill land. One house of twelve doors has made good progress in planting wet padi at Ukong under the supervision of the Department of Agriculture; if this proves successful, it would, I believe, set an example to encourage the other Dayaks to follow suit, although the transformation of hill-rice Dayaks into swamp-rice Dayaks is not one which can be faced with equanimity. However, one house has already made gardens under the Rubber Scheme. Many others are showing an active interest.
As in the first half year, Dayaks from other Divisions were still lounging about to obtain travel documents in Limbang, after making unsuccessful attempts in several other districts including their own.
A very poor longhouse of eight doors, Rumah Kula at Sungai Sebena, was totally destroyed by fire on 16th December and a great deal of property was lost. Provisions, clothing and the sum of $10.00 per door were provided from local collection.
Malay and Kadayan
Five persons who had returned from their pilgrimage to Mecca arrived on 31st August whilst another 26 applications for Haj have now been received.
It is rather disappointing to note that they have not planted as much area of padi as they did during the previous year. The reason given was because the old aged farmers are getting too old to do hard work, while the younger have mostly changed their profession into something else.
Like the Dayaks the Malays and Kedayans are showing an increased interest in planting budded rubber.
Malay fishermen, especially at Rangau, still maintained a good catch during the half year. They are better off than most of the Malays living in Limbang. As stated above most of the applications for Haj received were from Malays of Kampong Dagang who had made their money chiefly from selling fish.
Bisaya
They seem to be gradually becoming interested in education, several have been sent for training at Batu Lintang.
Chinese Affairs
Another application representing one hundred families of the Kheh Community from Third Division have been received by the Honourable the Resident, Fifth Division.
Local Authority
The progress of Limbang District Council is slowly becoming better in spite of understaffing in the office. Similarly the Councillors show a keener interest in proceedings.
The payment of $1.00 surcharge for non-payment of Education Cess on 1st August, 1957, has become the subject of talk and dissatisfaction amongst some of the people.
74
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, APRIL 30, 1958
Some interesting decisions of the Council during the half year have been as follows:—
To extend the rating area from 1 mile to 2 miles
To build one Type "C" quarters for Local Authority staff
To approve an estimate for local scholarship
To build a new school at Limbang under the Government Scheme, with 50 per cent grant from Education have been approved.
Five members of Lundu District Council visited Limbang on 10th July.
Education
Schools in the district continued to function normally during the period. Efforts are being made to construct the building of the Malay school at Limbang under the grants-in-aid scheme at the cost of $40,000.
The construction of St. Edmund's School was under preparation during the period under review, while the Chinese school has been delayed, in spite of several tenders issued.
A keen interest in education is taken by all sections of the community and efforts are being made to raise the standards in all schools.
Seven teachers who attended the vacation course at S.O.A.S.C., Brunei, found that the course was interesting and beneficial.
The Moasaili School organised school sports at the end of December to celebrate Parents Day.
Public Works Department
As the weather improved work was recommenced on the 5 miles Brawan Kubong Road which is now completed except for the bridges which are still to be done next year. The road is generally satisfactory but the surface will not stand up to heavy rain and floods.
The gravelling of the first mile round road was in progress during the half year, except for about three more chains still to be done when funds are available.
The construction of Police station, court house room and earth filling of dispensary site were in progress. Two Type "C" quarters, one Superscale quarters and Residency have been completed during the half year followed by the demolition of three condemned Junior Service quarters and the old Residency. The Customs godown was still not completed in spite of long delays.
Water supplies have not been entirely satisfactory during the six months.
Health
The general sanitation of the district was very good and the health of the people continued satisfactorily, with the exception of the third quarter when bronchitis started spreading amongst the children in the town area and a few of them developed complications. In the fourth quarter there were cases of bronchitis and pneumonia, but many people were admitted to the State Hospital, Brunei.
The total number of cases treated in Limbang Dispensary during the half year were:—
New cases .. .. .. 1,282
Repetition cases .. .. .. 944
Admitted to rest bed	..	..	20
Admitted to Brunei	Hospital	..	85
The Travelling Dispensary made its regular service to outlying villages. The State Medical Officer, Brunei, paid two visits to longhouses at Medalam and Ulu Limbang.
There were no epidemics of any sort at Ulu Limbang and the general health of the people there was so far fair, except there was a mild epidemic of chicken pox in one longhouse during the
fourth quarter, and four persons were infected, two adults and two children.
Labour and Economic
There have been no labour disputes and prices have remained steady.
Telephone and V.H.F. Communication
This had done a satisfactory job during the half year. Limbang will have an independent link between Lawas and Miri within the early year of 1958.
Prisons
Regular monthly visits have been made by the visiting Board. There have been no complaints and the health of prisoners has been satisfactory. They are employed in the general upkeep of the station.
Number of prisoners admitted during the half year was five.
Padi Purchase
Padi sold to Government at the main buying station.
1956	1957
Ukong ..	..	1,427.36	2,270.54	pkls.
Batu Ranau ..	1,867.52	1,717.15	Nanga Medamit ..	4,041.34	4,480.45	Padi stocks held in Limbang as on 31st December, 1957 were 12,150.86 pikuls, up to the end of December 2,681.69 pikuls have been transferred to Lawas.
Trade and Shipping
The trade in the district remained the same. In spite of increased Customs duty a great variety of goods continued to arrive from foreign ports
Agriculture
The Dayaks, Kedayans and Bisaya have been busily engaged in their padi farms during the third quarter. Most of the farms at the Ulu Limbang have had good burns. During early November the padi growing, was better than last season and a good harvest could be expected. Unfortunately owing to dry weather, the Dayaks were apparently disheartened to a widespread unknown disease among the padi which turned the green leaves into yellow and dead. The Agricultural Department is being asked to help either by personal direction or advice.
The Agricultural Officer reported that twelve doors of Dayaks had made good progress in planting wet padi at Ukong. It is hoped to encourage more hill Dayaks to plant wet padi next season.
Forest
Foreign export during the half year was as follows: —
Tons Rounds Tons Sawn
Hong Kong	..	351.400	—
Brunei	..	—	612.626
Administration
The Census which was completed in the middle of the year showed a total population of 15,085 comprising—
1957	1956
Malays	..	..	4291	4243
Kedayan	..	..	2189	2090
Dayaks	..	..	4290	2990
Bisaya	..	..	2351	2274
Chinese	..	..	1053	1005
Kelabit	..	..	135	133
Arab	..	..	10	10
Indian	..	..	3	3
Murut	..	..	524	374
Government servants ..	239	231
15085	13360
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, APRIL 30, 1958
75
Lands
The more keen interest in budded rubber and the more applications for land coming on the more land disputes cropped up.
Establishment
The Honourable the Datu Bandar acted as Resident from 18th September to 14th November.
Lawas District
Court
Routine court work is not usually onerous in Lawas. However, figures for the district have been sent skywards by 157 cases for failure to pay education cess. The fines have been $5.00 in all cases, that is to say same amount as the cess itself, and work has been considerable. It is not expected that there will be as many cases next year, but the Local Authority has kindly resolved to lighten the burden of the administration by imposing an automatic surcharge of $5.00 for late payment, thereby incidentally swelling their own depleted coffers. There has been no civil litigation of any importance.
Crime
Gani bin Drahman was brought to trial on the charge of theft of an outboard engine at Kuala Lawas. He had taken the engine from a perahu whose owner he knew, and hid it in the jungle some two miles away. He eventually "found" it himself after the Police and half the local population had been looking for it for two days. His defence was that it was all a joke. The magistrate was not amused and sentenced him to three months!
Land
There has been some activity under this head during the period:
Merapok: A thousand acres of reasonably good swamp are available for settlement at Merapok where all races are anxious to receive immigrants. The Kedayans, who own the land have made the reservation that they should be given enough for their own use. This is no problem. However, a proper irrigation scheme needs to be planned, and as Merapok river water is brackish, the Mengalong river below Sindumin in North Borneo would need to be tapped. This scheme is still under investigation.
Town Lands: The Superintendent of Lands and Surveys has found a reasonably suitable residential area near Sundar bazaar. This is buffalo-grazing land and negotiations are going on with the local people. Also at Sundar the local people have agreed to give an area of buffalo-grazing land for the extension of the town padang and for Government and Local Authority buildings around this extended padang. It is now under survey.
Agriculture
Padi: A most promising crop has been spoilt by drought. Following a good burn the prospect of a bumper crop was good even up to the beginning of December; it faded rapidly after that.
Swamp padi has survived better but there is no recent information about the crop in ulu areas.
Rubber: The low price of rubber has resulted in a reduction of tapping of old rubber, but enthusiasm for budded rubber continues unabated. By the end of the year 249.28 acres of land for this purpose were approved or under application.
However, it is becoming disquietingly apparent that a number of these applications, which continue to come in daily, are not genuine. The position is that a number of people, but particularly the Malays and
Kedayans, are afraid that they may be left behind in the rush for land by potential immigrants and others. They have not the money to apply for the land for any other purpose and are taking advantage of the offer under the Rubber Development Scheme to pay costs of survey, etc. The result may be that a block of 100 acres which should be planted up solidly, will develop into, say, 30 acres of rubber dotted about haphazardly. It is understood that this matter is under consideration.
Other Crops: There is little to report under this head except that great interest in coconuts has been shown recently.
Education
Three new schools were approved for 1958, at Ulu Merapok, Long Lutok and Long Tengoa. The main building at Ulu Merapok was completed by the end of the year. This will be the first Tagal school in Sarawak.
Perhaps because the influence of Brunei is so great, Malays along the Trusan river have a high opinion of the importance of Jawi and were very glad to hear that it could be made part of the normal curriculum.
The collection of school fees has been good on the whole, though there has been a widespread feeling that school fees should be abolished now that Education Cess has come in. This is particularly strong at Awat-Awat. The people at Long Semado, on the other hand, agreed without a murmur that they should come into line at $1.00 a month instead of 50 cents a month. On the whole, however, there has been little opposition to the Education Cess. Those who have failed to pay have done so more from reasons of indolence or poverty rather than any active dislike of the idea.
Chinese schools have functioned reasonably well. There is a welcome and strong demand for English instruction at all schools, which led to a petition from the Trusan Chinese to transfer their teacher who had no English.
The Religious Education Course at the Borneo Evangelical Mission is apparently proceeding satisfactorily. One hundred and twenty adults are instructed there for four years with a view to becoming pastors.
The Education Committee of the Local Authority has functioned well, though they tend to think a little on racial lines—the Malays being only interested in Malay schools, Muruts in Murut schools and so on. However, they have a very sensible and practical approach to problems.
Medical
The two dispensaries at Sundar and Lawas have functioned adequately during the period. There have been no epidemics of a serious nature. A dyphtheria epidemic which is reported to have broken out in the Kelabit country does not appear to have spread to the Ulu Trusan.
The Travelling Dispensary has completed one trip to the Ulu Trusan and did noble work treating 431 patients. Requests for visits of the Travelling Dispensary from Trusan, Awat-Awat, Punang, Kuala-Lawas, Merapok and Long Tuma, have been sympathetically received, and a boat and engine have been estimated for. When the new dispensary is opened at Long Semado, the Travelling Dresser will find himself free to provide a regular service to these places.
The Long Semado dispensary had been erected by the end of the year and was approaching completion. It is understood that a dresser will be made available in April, by which time painting, etc., should be finished. This will provide a very real service.
76
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, APRIL 30, 1958
It is apparent that the efforts of the Anti-malarial Unit have reduced this disease in the district. It has been necessary to combat the belief that they were supposed to kill all mosquitoes everywhere and that they fell down on the job.
Chinese Affairs
In spite of the depressed price of rubber a mood of some optimism prevails. With the arrival of Mr. Duchesne, the Road Engineer, the Chinese realise that Government really means business, and that many of their favourite projects will come to fruition.
The new bazaar site at Lawas is nearly complete in spite of several delays due to the breakdown of equipment. Lots have been drawn to establish which trader will get which shoplot.
Construction of new shops in Merapok bazaar is proceeding rapidly. As mentioned above the traders there are very keen to bring new shops. They are very conscious of the contrast between their bazaar and the prosperous, well laid out and well planned, flourishing bazaar of Sindumin.
A new large launch the Sri Lawas has been put into commission, and may well be a blessing to Lawas when a regular schedule has been worked out.
Native Affairs
A distressing number of Malay taxpayers are away from the district in Brunei and elsewhere. At the moment there is little to keep a young Malay at home. Work is difficult to get, and not very remunerative. The fishing grounds are indifferent, and the price of fish is better in Brunei. Budded rubber has not yet come into its own. It is thought that the development of an irrigated padi scheme at Sundar might draw some of the young ones back. The older people are very much aware that the young man coming home after a couple of years in Brunei is by no means a millionaire; they use what influence they can to keep their sons at home.
Some 30 doors of Muruts from British North Borneo have been farming hill padi in Sarawak in the Merapok valley under the pretext that they maintain traditional rights there. Some have planted rubber in Sarawak which they sell across the border in Sindumin. Whereas the Tagals have still plenty of hill padi land, the Kedayans are desperately short. Much of the country is already sheet lalang. Another year of farming there on this scale will use up all the remaining belukar. The matter has been raised officially and is to be hoped that they will not farm in Sarawak again. It is a fact that they are themselves very short of hill padi.
The Kedayans in the Merapok area appear receptive of new ideas and will undoubtedly make good progress if they are given good leadership agriculturally.
The Tagals, too, are showing signs of wishing to progress, though they are far more backward than their Murut neighbours. As a start they need medical attention and a Dresser has been sent on an extensive tour of the area. They are at the moment paying lip service to Christianity but only a few are following any of its precepts. They complain that difficulty in carrying out their produce has prevented them from extensive cultivation of any crops. The argument appears specious—the main trouble is more likely to be worms and malnutrition, but the possibility of clearing the river or of building a bicycle track is being considered.
A meeting of Murut leaders was arranged with a view to codifying murut adat. A draft will shortly be published. The most important resolution at this meeting was that Murut belukar could not be sold for budded rubber and other permanent crops at a greater price than $15.00 per acre. Murut in Mixed
Zone areas had been asking $30.00 an acre and more from Malays and Kedayans who wished to plant budded rubber. As stated in my last report, one Murut may claim rights over several thousand acres and the problems of control of the sale of these rights is a major one.
One of the problems of the routine administration of the Muruts may be solved if the proposed Murut Customary Code is approved. It is that each kampong or village group has its own idea what customary fines should be. Adultery for instance is punished by a fine of $30.00 by Wakil Penghulu Tai Asi, but by $15.00 only by Penghulu Sibal Bunak.
Local Authority
Tua Kampong Haji Zainal-Abidin has continued to hold the chair of the Lawas District Council with an excellent combination of firmness on the one hand and sweet reasonableness on the other. I am happy to report that he was re-elected for a second term of office at the beginning of this year.
Lively debate is the rule and not the exception for this council. All works for which the Authority had the responsibility during the year have been completed with the exception of the two schools mentioned above, and the Secretary-Treasurer has managed to keep his head above water in the ocean of school accounts.
The final balance sheet showed the Local Authority with the total credit (including surplus balances) of only $24,073.88 so generous Government assistance will be necessary if the Authority is to carry out its ambitious 1958 programme.
Communications
The arrival of the Road Engineer has convinced everyone that Government really means business.
The Gaya road has been improved, and is "jeepable" as far as the Gaya river. It has been surfaced with Colas emulsion for the first quarter mile. Three new bridges on this stretch have been erected, and three on the part before the Lawas airstrip have been strengthened and widend to take any traffic. At the Gaya river the road comes to a clean stop. A bridge is required over this river if the fertile Lawas Damit Valley is to be developed, and if the people at such centres along the road as Long Tuma are to be given a means of bringing out their produce.
Routine maintenance has been carried out on the Ulu Trusan track and two sulaps have been built for the convenience of travellers.
Other minor paths have been adequately maintained by the Local Authority, as have also bazaar roads.
The Operations Officer, Mr. J. E. Seal of Civil Aviation, visited Bah Kelalan and considerably improved the airstrip there by means of local labour. Long Semado must await its turn in the new year.
Telecommunications in Lawas are barely adequate. Sometimes Limbang and Sundar are reasonably clear and sometimes not. The service is further interrupted by frequent breakdowns. Brunei can seldom be obtained on telephone from Lawas. Labuan has been achieved only once.
The Apoh, being the only launch plying between Lawas, Limbang and Brunei, has worked magnificently. It has frequently been difficult to arrange for the crew to get even one day off a week. Maintenance is done in odd moments. Apart from routine mail runs, she has to carry school children coming and going, sick, P.W.D., and Land Office coolies, and Government Officers, none of whom take kindly to being stranded in Brunei—or for that matter in Lawas.
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, APRIL 30, 1958
77
Public Works
Apart from other items already mentioned the Public Works Department have undertaken the following:—
The bazaar site at Lawas, as already reported, is nearing completion. It has turned out very satisfactorily and a rocky hillock, which looked as if it would give trouble, turned out easier to deal with than was thought. The area is extensive enough and an extremely pleasant bazaar could be developed there.
The new Government offices at Sundar are going up quickly and appear in every way satisfactory.
The Road Engineer's house was put up with truly remarkable speed and efficiency at very little cost; though the site is a little sheltered it is considered satisfactory for a temporary house. In the event the house looks far from temporary.
Various other minor works were carried out, the most noteworthy of which was the painting of the Bah Kelalan Kubu.
Miscellaneous
Routine maintenance of stations has been satisfactorily carried out though there were some anxious moments before it was known that a Supplementary Warrant would be available to pay December wages.
A really successful regatta and tamu was held at Sundar. Many visitors arrived from Brunei and Limbang and a satisfactory number of Muruts came down from the Ulu. The Sundar Committee were congratulated on their efficiency and organisation.
This was followed by an equally succcessful Parents' Day in Lawas. The schools' sports, if a little rural in scope, were at least entered into enthusiastically by parents and children alike. The highlight of the day was a P.T. display and a handicraft exhibition. A school band from far away Long Semado came down and kept everyone entertained during the evening which was rounded off by a school concert.
Other Voices (2)
In my last article, I tried to provide some material from certain Chinese newspapers published in this country to English speaking people who may want to know whether "Peking nationalism" is present. I should add, however, that if these people are inclined to think that it is present, such a conclusion should not be applied to every newspaper every day. Nor should it be thought that any one of them is really a Sarawak version of the People's Daily News. In fact some of them are most co-operative with the Government of Sarawak in publishing press releases and offering useful comments on current issues. Nevertheless, material of a particular type does occur with some consistency in a certain section of the Chinese press, and it is proposed to describe it for the benefit of students of Sarawak affairs.
It is recalled that a promise was made in the last article to discuss the way in which certain material is selected to build up a "correct theory" for the understanding of the "objective environment", which is alleged to be the cause of many evils. This "theory" is not explicitly Marxist, but it is my view that it would serve subversive elements equally well.
In a longish poem, a writer describes his understanding of this world. He hates it because the rich have every convenience and the oppressed are gagged. Then follow these lines:—
"The customs are doubled;
The Education Policy is being carried out.
A whole series of facts:
The White Paper,
Common Examinations,
The system of Selected and Unselected Pupils.
What is the purpose?
A popularly selected Municipal Council is formed;
The question of joint self-government of the three territories is introduced;
The question of independence is heard? (sic) Democratic voices fill the streets? (sic) Cry; right; I know;
But . . .
Ha, ha,
I know now."
This does not appear to be poetical, but it is not meant to appeal to one's aesthetic sense. The following passage from another poem can be regarded as a continuation of the one just quoted:—
Ah! I understand.
Souls living in this dark night
Suffer much, and much pain
From the Owl's
Unreasonable insults and oppression . . .
But the souls of this land
Have a pair of resisting hands, Which grip with strength From anger and hatred.
They have a heart
Which in days to come
Will be used to burn
In the wilderness in this dark night.
Hear ye:
Many feet are running,
Running
Because
Of the search for the seed of fire
A bright seed of fire
Is already burning in the wilderness; Countless souls
Are running towards this seed . . .
This is not an esoteric allegory, for it is transparent. It is typical of much that seems to have been carefully selected to influence the readers of certain Chinese newspapers. The question is often raised. "How many people do in fact read such poems?" The answer is in this title of an article. "Workers should double their efforts to acquire culture." Culture, by the way, is not the kind taught in finishing schools.
GRUNDIG
78
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, APRIL 30, 1958
CORRESPONDENCE
The Boma,
Chinsali,
N. Rhodesia.
26th March, 1958.
The Editor,
Sarawak Gazette.
Sir,
I refer to the letter from Austin Coates published in your December issue concerning the origins of head-hunting in Borneo.
A story I heard bears out the deduction that it is of comparatively recent origin. Very roughly the details were this:—
Some time ago when the Saribas Dayaks were still inhabiting the upper Batang Ai a certain Dayak who had no child took with him a jar and with a small party crossed what is now the border into Indonesia and there, after some enquiry, found a family in the area who were missing to give him a boy as an adopted son.
After the gawai isu the party set off to return, leaving the jar with the natural family as a token
On the way home misfortune and sickness overtook the party and one or two died. The Dayak on whose instigation the party set out had a dream wherein he was directed that his adopted son should be slain and his head only retained and taken home to the longhouse and preserved in order to ward off further disasters. On awakening he told the others of his strange dream; for it was more strange to him at that time than it is to us in the relating now, for head taking was unknown at that time. The sorely tried members of the groups persuaded him that he must follow the dream and, very reluctantly, he did so in order to preserve the lives of the others.
He returned to his longhouse safely with the survivors of his party in good health and told his anembiak the story. The head was duly kept and the house prospered.
Some time later a Kampar from the area across the (now) border stayed in the house, heard the story and carried it back to the house of the natural parents. They were extremely incensed, for they had trusted the stranger, despite the fact that he was from another group and they had hoped that friendship would have resulted between them. They decided to take revenge and set out into the area of the other house and after some time fell upon a lone person from the house, took his head and returned with it. Thereafter vengeance followed vengeance and the custom spread. (The substance of the dream was still retained in that to the heads were attributed supernatural powers).
In 1956, there was an old man in Tanu (Tanu, Saribas) who could tell the proper tale and relate the names of the generations from the said originator of the custom down to the families now residing in the Layar.
I am, Sir, etc.
A. M. Phillips.
Borneo for Beginners
Is it not time that around the coast of Borneo there should be placed clearly legible posters saying "This island has been explored". Over the last few decades people have come to explore Borneo rather as in the nineties they went to shoot elephants in Africa. Young men broken in love, old men broken by love, men with a name to make, and men with none to lose, have all made a point of exploring Borneo and what is much worse, they have embodied their experiences in print.
Not so long ago we were favoured with a massive work by an American, who in process of stumbling over gold and diamonds, discovered darkest Borneo to be inhabited by ferocious cannibals. Today, the reviewer picks up any book on Borneo with the utmost misgiving. The trouble is partly that people will take Borneo as seriously as themselves. Gone are the days when the more saucy writers like Mr. Somerset Maugham and Dr. M. Mjorberg could indite their “chroniques scandaleuses". One sighs for a return to flippancy.
Pierre Ivanoff* does not conform to either pattern. His account of the French expedition to the Ulu Mahakan is sober and factual. Apart from falling into the common error of referring to Bornean farmers as warriors, it is singularly unromantic and is concerned solely to portray the life of the people of the interior as encountered by the expedition. Ivanoff saw nothing that any District Officer of the Baram ten years ago could not have witnessed daily. Now, however, with the impact of Christianity and Bunganism, the rites and ceremonies described in this book have vanished. Today one can see these old observances, and then only to a limited extent, in Long Moh or Long Panai. One can well forsee that the ethnologists will fall upon Mr. Ivanoff and rend him asunder, for some of the explanations he offers for primitive customs are certainly rash. None-the-less, his impressions are those of an intelligent observer. They are supported by excellent pictures which whet the appetite for sight of the motion films which he also took. Throughout the text the word Dyak is used in the Dutch sense, i.e. to connote all the inhabitants of the interior of Borneo. In fact, the people with whom the book is concerned belong to the Kayan-Kenyah family, and those whose curiousity is aroused by this volume can further amplify their knowledge with the work of Hose and McDougall.
The "Head Hunters of Borneo" can be specially recommended to the following categories of persons:—
1. Aunts who have nephews living in outstations,
2. Nephews living in outstations who are likely to be visited by enquiring aunts,
3. School boys who think that Sarawak ends at either the 3rd Mile on the Simanggang Road or Tannah Merah, Sibu.
The last is by far the most important.
Robert Nicholl
* "Head Hunters of Borneo" — Pierre Ivanoff — Jarrolds 21s net.
Back numbers of the Gazette
The library of Batu Lintang Training Centre is short of two back numbers of the Gazette for completion of the 1954 volume.
If any reader has spare copies of the August and September issues of the 1954 Gazette the Librarian at Batu Lintang Training Centre would be very pleased to receive them.
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, APRIL 30, 1958
79
Recent Books
Additions to the Library during the month of April, 1958
AUTHOR	TITLE
Crime and Detection
Chase, James Hadley You're lonely when you're dead (1957)
Christie, Agatha	The 4.50 from Paddington (1957)
Howard, Hartley	The long night (1957)
Mansfield, Paul	Final exposure (1957)
Stout, Rex	Three witnesses (1956)
Fiction
Amis, Kingsley	I like it here (1958)
Barnes, Margaret
Campbell	Isabel the Fair (1957)
Bernelmans, Ludwig	The woman of my life (1957)
Byrd, Elizabeth	Immortal Queen (1957)
Clewes, Winston	Clementine (1958)
Coates, John	Lettice (1957)
Colette	Claudine in Paris (1958)
De Hartog, Jan	The lost sea (1957)
Gibbs, Willa	The Dean (1957)
Goethe, Johann	The sufferings of young Werther
Wolfgang Von	(1957)
Goncourt, Edmond
L.A. de	The Zemganno brothers (1957)
Greenwood, Robert A breeze in Dinglesea (1957)
Hutchinson, R.C.	March the ninth (1957)
Jacob, Naomi	Gollantz and partners (1958)
Jameson, Storm	A cup of tea for Mr. Thorgill
(1957)
Maclean, Alistair	South by Java Head (1958)
Malpass, E.L.	Beefy Jones (1957)
Mann, Thomas	Buddenbrooks: the decline of a
family (1957)
Martin, Bernard	The obscure way (1957)
Mittelholzer, Edgar	Kaywana blood (1958)
Peyrefitte, Roger	The keys of St. Peter (1957)
Plaidy, Jean	Flaunting, extravagant queen
Powell, Anthony	At Lady Molly’s (1957)
Proust, Marcel	Remembrance of things past. 12
Vols. (1955)
Sagan,	Francoise	Bonjour Tristesse (1955)
Sagan,	Francoise	A certain smile (1956)
Sagan,	Francoise	Those without shadows (1957)
Scott, J.M.	I keep my word (1957)
Smith,	Shelley	Rachel Weeping (1957)
Thomas, Gwyn	A point of order (1956)
Wagner, Geoffrey	Sophie (1957)
Waugh, Evelyn	Vile bodies (1949)
White, Patrick	Voss (1957)
Wylie,	I.A.R.	The undefeated (1957)
Non-Fiction
Allen, John	Masters of British drama (1957)
Aristophanes	Against war (1957)
Atkins, John	Graham Greene (1957)
Bacharach, Alfred
Louis, editor	The new musical companion;
being “The musical companion" thoroughly revised and brought up to date (1957)
Baldwin, Monica	I leap over the wall: a return to
the world after twenty-eight years in a convent (1954)
Betjeman, John and
Taylor, Geoffrey, compilers	English love poems (1957)
Boros, Julius	How to play par golf (1957)
Brain, Russell	Tea with Walter de la Mare (1957)
Brockbank, Russell	Up the straight (1953)
Brockbank, Russell	Round the bend (1948)
Bruce, Maurice	The shaping of the modern world,
1870-1939, Vol. 1: Ends and beginnings: the world to 1914.
(1958)
Buchwald, Art	I choose caviar (1957)
Burke, Jack	The natural way to better golf;
illustrations by Norman Todhunter (1955)
Calder, Ritchie	From magic to medicine (1957)
Cardus, Neville	Talking of music (1957)
Cassell & Co., Ltd. The Cassell miscellany, 1848-1958
(1958)
Catling, Gordon	Sailing and cruising for everyone
(1956)
Chevalier, Pierre	Subterranean climbers: twelve
years in the world"s deepest chasm (1951)
AUTHOR	TITLE
Non-Fiction
Collis, Maurice	The hurling time (1958)
Conybeare, Sir John and
Mann, W.N. editors Textbook of medicine, 12th ed.
(1957)
Couldery, Frederick A.J. Your business matters (1958) and Sheppard, Allen J.G.
Craig, Edward Gordon Index to the story of my days: some memoirs of Edward Gordon Craig, 1872-1907 (1957)
Cubberley, Ellwood P. The history of education (1948) Davis, Marilyn Kornreich Music dictionary (1957)
De Mare, Eric	Photography (1957)
De Valois, Dame Ninette Come dance with me: a memoir, 1898-1956 (1957)
De Zoete, Beryl	Dance and magic drama in Ceylon
(1957)
Eliot, T.S.	On poetry and poets (1957)
Enright, D.J.	The Apothecary's shop (1957)
Everett, Katherine	Bricks and flowers: memoirs of
Katherine Everett (1951)
Fanner, Bertram Hughes Pioneer peasant colonization in Ceylon: a study in Asian agra-
rian problems; with a foreword by Lord Soulbury (1957)
Fisher, Margery and
Fisher, James	Shackleton; drawings by W. E.
How, who served with the "Endurance" expedition (1957)
Fitz Gibbon, Constantine The blitz; with drawings by Henry Moore (1957)
Friedman, William
Frederick and Fried-
man, Elizabeth	The Shakespearean ciphers
examined (1957)
Fuchida, Mitsuo and
Okumiya, Masatake Midway: the battle that doomed Japan 1957)
Fuller, Roy	Brutus’s orchard: poems (1957)
Garland, Madge	The changing face of beauty: four
thousand years of beautiful women (1957)
Gatland, Kenneth W. ed. Project satellite (1958)
George, Daniel	A book of anecdotes (1957)
Graves, Robert	Goodbye to all that, New edition,
revised with a prologue and epilogue (1957)
Gurchan Singh	Singa: the lion of Malaya; being
the memoirs of Gurchan Singh; edited by Hugh Barnes (1949)
Hanfstaengl, Putzi	Hitler: the missing years (1957)
Hankinson, J.T. and
Faulkner, R.G.B.	Boxing (1952)
Harrison, David	Tudor England. 2 Volumes (1953)
Hill-Reid, W.S.	John Gram's journey: a convict's
story 1803-11. (1957)
Hodgkin, Robin Allason Education and change: a book mainly for those who work in countries where education is part of a process of rapid social change (1957)
Hogben, Lancelot	Men, missiles and machines: the
wonderful world of power
(1957)
Hollidge, F.S.	The driving rest fully explained.
4th ed. (1956)
Hope, Jane	Happy event (1957)
Horner, Isabel	Teach yourself dressmaking. Rev.
ed. (1947)
Hulme, Joe	How to play soccer (1952)
Hutchins, Patricia	James Joyce's world (1957)
Inge, W.R.	The post Victorians (1933)
Jewkes, John, and others The sources of invention (1958)
Kennedy, Sir John	The business of war: the war nar-
rative of Major-General Sir John Kennedy; edited and with a preface by Bernard Fergusson (1957)
Lee, Gypsy Rose	Gypsy: a memoir (1957)
Lehmann, John, ed.	Coming to London (1957)
Lodge, Tom	Beyond the Great Slave Lake
(1957)
Macgregor-Morris,
Pamela	Chipperfields' Circus (1957)
Mander, Raymond
and Mitchenson, Joe The British theatre (1957)
80
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, APRIL 30, 1958
AUTHOR	TITLE
Non-Fiction
Massingham, H.J. and
Massingham, Hugh, editors The great Victorians (1932)
Mayfield, Guy	The Church of England: its mem-
bers and its business (1958)
Merton, Thomas	The strange islands: poems (1957)
Miller, Hugh, ed.	The best one-act plays of 1956-57.
(1957)
Moore, Patrick	Earth Satellite: the new satellite
projects explained (1955)
Morris, James	The market of Seleukia (1957)
Nicholls, William	Revelation in Christ (1958)
Nicolson, Sir Harold Journey to Java (1957)
Oxford University Ex-
ploration Club	Sarawak Papers: Scientific results
of the Oxford University expedi-
tion to Sarawak (Borneo) in 1932 (1952)
Palmer, King	Teach yourself to play the piano
(1957)
Phillips, William	Ventures in diplomacy (1955)
Pine, Leslie Gilbert Heraldry and genealogy (1957)
Raitt, Helen	Exploring the deep Pacific (1957)
Reeve, Dominic	Smoke in the lanes (1958)
Rice, David Talbot The beginnings of Christian art (1957)
Ripley, Elizabeth	Michelangelo: a biography (1953)
AUTHOR	TITLE
Non-Fiction
Rose, H.J.	A handbook of Greek mythology,
including its extension to Rome. 6th ed. (1958)
Scrivener, Leonard, ed. The complete hallroom dancer (1957)
Skorzeny, Otto	Skorzeny's special missions (1957)
Slim, Sir William	Courage and other broadcasts
(1957)
Smith, Constance
Babington	Evidence in camera: the story
of photographic intelligence in World War II. (1958)
Smith, Prudence, ed. Africa in transition: some BBC talks on changing conditions in the Union and the Rhodesias. (1958)
Stanley, Louis T.	Swing to better golf; with a fore-
word by Ronnie White (1957)
Stanley, Louis T.	This is putting (1956)
Stendahl, Krister, ed. The Scrolls and the New Testament (1955)
Symons, Julian	The General Strike: a historical
portrait (1957)
Tyndale, H.E.G.	Mountain paths (1948)
Werth, Alexander	The strange history of Pierre
Mendes-France and the great conflict over French North Africa (1957)
Wilkinson, Doug	Land of the long day (1956)
Young, Gordon	The cat with two faces (1957)
Printed at the Government Printing Office, Kuching, Sarawak, F. W. Goodwin, o.b.e., Government Printer.