MONDAY. JULY 2nd. 1934.
Mr. Ho ENG CHIANG, formerly of B.N. Borneo, after a short illness passed away at his residence, Nanas Road, Kuching, at 8.10 p.m., on Tuesday, 29th May. at the age of 67 years. He leaves a widow, five sons, Mr. Ho Hong Soon, Mr. Ho Hong Kiat. Mr. Ho Hong Boo, Mr. Ho Hong Leong and Mr. Ho Hong Tay, eight daughters amongst whom are Mrs. Lee Shak Jam of Singkawang, Mrs. Chan Kim Loong, Mrs Chan Kim Kiat (Martin Chan, Mrs. Augustin Chong, and many grandchildren to mourn for him. (B.N. Borneo papers please copy).
Acknowledgment.
Mr. Ho Hong Soon and family thank all friends and relatives who sent wreaths, etc., and all those who showed much Empathy by their attendance at the funeral.
JUNE.
His Highness the Rajah, and party, left for Singapore by T.S.'S Vyner Brooke on 18th Juno, and sailed for England by s.s. Rawal¬pindi on 22nd June. We take this oppor¬tunity to wish His Highness bon voyage and au revoir.
His Highness the Tuan Muda, accom¬panied by his son, Mr. A. W. D. Brooke, arrived at Kuching on 12th June. Mr. Brooke has been appointed a Cadet in the Sarawak Civil Service as from 1st June, 1934.
A regatta took place al Kuching on Satur-day. 16th June, in honour of His Highness the Rajah’s impending departure and the arrival of His Highness the Tuan Muda, and Mr. A. W. D. Brooke. An account of the proceedings appears in our columns.
As His Majesty King George's Birthday occurred on a Sunday His Highness the Rajah was pleased to gram a public holiday on Monday, 4th June
We are informed that the Sarawak Steam-ship Co., Ltd., have received news by tele¬gram that their new motor-ship Rejang was successfully launched in Singapore at noon on 29th June.
This vessel, which is expected to arrive in Kuching about the middle of July, will replace m.v. Margaret on the Kuching/Sibu run.
Our contemporary The Singapore Tree Press, in its issue of June 9th, 1934, states that His Highness the Rajah has just given £20,000 towards the building scheme of the Imperial Forestry Institute at Oxford. We would point out that this is an error. Actually, the amount of the gift was £25.000, and it was made in 1930.
In a recent issue of the Sarawak Govern-ment Gazette, we note that Mr. R. G. Aikman, Sarawak Civil Service, has passed the Chinese Language examination, with honours. We lake this opportunity to tender M.r Aikman our hearty congratula¬tions.
Building operations are taking place on the empty area behind the Government Printing Office. We are informed that a new “talk” cinema is being constructed and should be completed sometime next October. The contract is in the hands' of Messrs. Gammon (Malaya) Ltd.. Singapore.
A party of Officers and ratings arrived from H.M.S. Herald (Capt. E. F. B. Law), on Thursday, 28th June, to contest with Kuching at cricket, football, tennis and golf. The party returned to H.M.S. Herald on Saturday, 30th June
The following telegram, addressed to the Government Secretary, was received from Captain Law :
“Request you will convoy to His High-ness the Tuan Muda and all concerned the grateful appreciation of my Officers and men for the hospitality they enjoyed at Kuching.”
Mr. A. W. D. Brooke, accompanied by Capt. R. E. Le Sueur, visited the Talang- Talang Islands and Lundu, in H.H..M.Y. Maimuna from the ’9th to 21st June, and proceeded to Bau by car on the 25th June, returning the following day.
On Sunday, 17th June, a most enjoyable garden party took place at Astana during the afternoon. A large number of guests were invited and all communities were represented. An excellent programme of music was furnished by the Kuching Military Band.
ARRIVAL OF HIS HIGHNESS
THE TUAN MUDA.
His Highness the Tuan Mucin, accompanied by his son, Mr. A. W. O. Brooke. strived from Singa¬pore on Tuesday. 12th June. His Highness was met at Pending by the Government Secretary, Mr. C. F. C. Macaskie and proceeded to Kuching in
H.H.M.Y. Maimuna. As the yacht passed Fort Marghareta a salute of twenty one guns was fired, all guards turning out with the usual compliments. On anchoring opposite Astana, the Treasurer of Sarawak, Mr. E. Parnell, and the Resident. Mr. W. F. Dick, proceeded on hoard to meet His Highness, who was lowed to Astana landing steps in the State barge and there was received by His Highness the Rajah and members of the Supreme Council and Committee of Administration. After inspecting the
guard of honour furnished by the Sarawak Consta¬bulary under the command of Mr. D V Murphy. Their Highnesses then proceeded to Astana where Heads of Departments and representatives of the Millay and Chinese communities were waiting. Mr. C. F. C. Macaskie proposed the health of His High¬ness the Tuan Muda and Mr. A. W. D. Brooke, which toast was drunk by all. We join our readers in welcoming His Highness the Tuan Muda back to Sarawak and Mr. A. W. D. Brooke on his first arrival in this country.
From “THE TIMES” of 1834.
WEDNESDAY, APRIL 2, 1834. Price 7d.
On Monday an inquest was held in the King's Bench Prison on the body of John Mytton, Esq., who died there on the preceding Saturday. The deceased inherited considerable estates in the conn lies of Salop and Merieneth. for both of which lie served the office of High Sheriff, and for some lime repre¬sented the borough of Shrewsbury in Parliament. His munificence and eccentric gaieties obtained him great notoriety in the sporting and guy circles, both in England and on the Continent. Two medical attendants stated that the immediate cause of death was disease of the brain (delirium tremens), brought on by the excessive use of spirituous liquors. The deceased was in his 38th year. Verdict -"Natural death."
Twinkle, Twinkle,
■"Airmindedness:	The thrill of flying;'' ''See
the world from an aeroplane;”- -these are slogans that are hypnotizing the sluggish mind of creeping mortals. And mortals, like flying ants, are button¬ing on their wings and fluttering through the clouds in transient bliss. It is refreshing, therefore, to be informed Unit the real attraction of the air lies in its inducement to sleep, for that is what the writer of a recent article in the Gazette would have us believe. Lulled by the hypnotic drone of the engines. he seems to have slumbered through "nice days, lying in the caressing arms of Morpheus. And all for the cost of E180, one hundred of which, we arc told, was out of his own pocket I A costly dream withal!
Methought I heard a voice cry, ‘Sleep no more' ” But Macbeth could not murder the sleep of that innocent in the sky, who passed through Rome, Alliens. Cairo and Baghdad with the bored remark that ' they lend themselves to a hectic night, a good dinner ; and (note this !) a comfortable bed !” shades of the Caesars, the Pharoahs, and Haroun al Rashid I” A comfortable bed, when the memories of wo thousand years of fame await you there  Sic transit gloria mundi.
But. perchance, we are misjudging our dreaming airman. Perhaps, after all. he is the complete philosopher who can, like the Dormouse from the depths of his stoical Void. regard with serenity the evils of tins unhappy world.
And we, aping the Hatter, will mouth in vain the song of the mad tea-party—
"Twinkle, twinkle, little bat!
How I wonder what you're at.'
You know the song, perhaps"?
"I’ve heard something like it," said Alice
"It goes on, you know,” the Hatter continued, "in this way :— Up above the world you fly, Like a tea-tray in the sky. Twinkle, twinkle—"
Here the Dormouse shook itself, and began singing in its sleep. "Twinkle, twinkle, twinkle—” and went on so long that they had to pinch it to make it stop.
Dahan Rubber Estates (1933) Ltd.
RESTRICTION AND RUBBER PRICES.
The first annual general meeting of the Dahan Rubber Estates (1933) Ltd., was held on Friday, 18th May, at 13. Hood Lane, Lund	 E.C.
Mr.C. 15 Sutton (the Chairman) said : The crop for the eleven months under review amounted to 311,000 lb., taken from an area of about 726 acres, the average yield being 490 lb. per acre The period under review was probably me worst dining the depression, as is evidenced by the fact that the average net sale price was 2,d0d per lb. and the cost f.o.b. being 2.03d. per lb. The remit of the year's working is that we made a profit of £332 19s. 3d. Adding interest received, and allowing for nil expenses and debenture interest, there is to carry-forward to the debit of profit and loss account the sum of .E1,038 17s, 11d.
In reviewing the position we have to pay a tribute to the loyally of our manager, who has curried on dining the slump conditions at a great disadvantage and reduction in salary, but we hope that the present price of rubber will enable us to put back to a large extent the cuts in salaries of the staff.
Attitude OF MANUFACTURERS.
We have not yet heard of the amount of the crop we are to be allowed to produce in the restriction scheme, and we are mailing application for the necessary assessment of the estates
I have noticed a good deal of anxiety on the part of manufacturers as to what the ultimate price of thee article under restriction is likely to be, and suggesting a pegging of the price of me rubber, but it is curious to note that in their anxiety on this score  they seem to have forgotten that during the slump years shareholders were without dividends, directors without fees, agents’ remuneration drastically reduced, estates filling back in cultivation, managers and assistants dismissed. The distress occasioned thereby necessitated. at one time, Europeans being fed in communal kitchens in Malays, added to which unemployed Europeans drifted back to this country to add to the distress here.
Whilst it is suggested that 6d. should prove a remunerative price for all estates, I consider that this price, is not high enough, and agree with the Dutch that around 9d. should be the reasonable price for the article. From the rate of progress in consumption iris quite possible that it will overstrip production in the not distant future, and prices may even rise to a higher figure than suggested.
The report and accounts were unanimously adopted.—Investors' Chronicle.
Brunei’s Progress.
Few parts of the world suffered as little as the State of Brunei during the slump In the Adminis¬tration Report for 1933, it is stated that the aggregate value of trade for the year was $4,602,805 as against $3.935.985 in 1932 and $2,695,005 in 1931. A slight decrease in the value of imports was accounted for by the lower prices of the commodities. The value of exports increased from $1,505,738 to $2,191,037 Greater exports of plantation rubber and crude oil were responsible for this increase, most other exports registering a decrease. The sale of chandu increased from 6,591 tahils to 7,903 tahils, although the number of registered adult smokers fell from 587 to 330. Wages of agricultural labourers rose  slightly during the year, and the cost of living fell.—Straits Times.
Old Coffins in British North
Borneo Caves.
BY PASTOR OROLFO,
Senior Forest Ranger, Forest Department,  North Borneo.
The Idahan, natives of Lahad Datu, who are; said to be the descendants of Gomorid Kimau, the reputed discoverer of most of the caves in Madai, Baturong and Tapadong Hills, are a people whose ancestors were once the Dusuns of the place and four or five centuries ago "kafir." It is strange, that many of the old men of Lahad Datu can trace their ancestors to "six or seven generations back from Abdullah, traditionally the first of their ancestors to be converted to Islam. legend says that before 'he natives accepted Islam, they placed their dead in coffins and kept them in caves where the coffins would withstand decay for a long time. There are eaves in Madai, Buturong and Tapadong Hillis where remains of coffins in excellent pre. servation can be found. It is interesting to note that the coffins are similar to those of Chinese make. Possibly the natives copied such coffins from the Chinese, who are reported to have been in North Borneo as early as the 12th century if not before.
Beautifully CARVED.
The coffins which I have seen are mostly made of Belian and Merbau : sone are made of soft worlds belonging to the Dipterocarpaceae family, The tree was apparently cut into coffin-lengths split into halves, hollowed out and carved to taste Some of the coffins are beautifully carved. The lids of some are adorned with "temadau” heads carved on both ends. The coffin is generally one to two indies thick and when empty can hardly be lifted by five men. Some of the coffins are very long, as long as nine feet. Inside the large coffins small coffins may be found. It is possible that these small coffins were loaded with jewellery and other property of the dead and put together with the corpse into the large coffin. On the floor of some caves containing coffins, I have dug and found numerous broken ami rusty parangs, spears and knives, broken plates, broken jars, beads and various wooden art idea. 
NAMES or CAVES.
The following are the names of the caves or places, in which old coffins can be found :—1. PUSU Samang Alag Cave—Madai Hill. 2. Pusu Sa- mung Tas Cave Madai Hill. 3. Kuhonatok Cave Madai Hill. 4. Nagob Bilo (near it) Baturong Hill. 5. Pusu Bakas (near entrance) Baturong Hill. 6. Samang Bust Tapmlona Hill. 7. Sa- mang Itay Tapadong Hill. 8. Mandag Awan Tapa- dong Hiil. 9. Batu Blas Tambiroga. Hill near Tapadong Hill.
In Batu Blas Cave, the Dusuns are said still to bury their dead in a similar manner to the old dais. I have, however, not been able to visit this cave. 
The above-named caves and the places around the hills, as well as Kalang Balai Hill, which is south of Baturong Hill, and said to have, once been a native village, may be of value in determining many facts about native life in the days before the advent of the Chartered Company.—B.N.H. Herarld.
OLD SARAWAK.
From the Sarawak Gazette
47 Years Ago.
THE
SARAWAK GAZETTE
Price THURSDAY. 1st DECEMBER, 1887. 10 cents.
CORRESPONDENCE.
To the Editor of the "Sarawak Gazelle."
DEAR SIR.—The enclosed letter is a copy of one lately received by me for H. H. the Rajah. It appears to me to be one of interest as recalling from the dim past the early days of Sarawak by one who was, in however humble a capacity, a participator in the cruise of the yacht Royalist a cruise which in those days was a work of grout, danger, and of which ilia kingdom of Sarawak as it next stands is the solid and valuable outcome.
I remain.
Dear Sir, Yours faithfully.
F. O. MAXWELL.
To
His Excellency
Rajah Brooke.
YOUR EXCELLENCY. I have been afflicted during the  past two years with blindness (cataracts) and have been under three of operation at the Norfolk and Norwich  Eye Infirmary and I shall probably never be able to resume my occupation which is upon the water.
I most humbly solicit Your Excellency to contribute  something toward- helping me in this time of heed assuring  Your Excellency that the smallest donation will be most thankfully received by
Your Excellency’s
obedient servant,
THOMAS BROWN.
Cleynextthesea,
E. Dereham.
Norfolk,
England.
September 13th, 1887.
YOUR EXCELLENCY,—The reason I have appealed to Your Excellency is—
I was a mariner on hoard the Royalist Captain Hart Commander, at the time of the expedition to Borneo under your late lamented uncle Rajah. Sir James Brooke. I often imagine being at Sarawak standing on the landing looking al the beautiful Royalist lying al anchor in the river Mari- tabas. I often think it scarcely true that such a small vessel should achieve so momentous a feat as that of tra¬versing the ocean from England to Borneo and the work she done when there. I should like very much to know tf Capt. Hart is alive. It so be must be getting a very old man as I am 65 and 1 WAS youngest but one on board At that time. I should also like to know what has become of the Dyak boy we used to call Jack Rattlin also the coast of Guinea boy “Tom Swab." I shall never forget going down the river in the war prows in pursuit of the Malays who had robbed the Dyaks of their rice. We went down one river and up another so far that the branches of the trees retarded our progress, and we had to remove them no that we could go on. I was very glad when we got back as it was a carious time. I should hare settled in Sarawak but I was obliged to leave on account of my health. If you would please to forward a small donation will be most thankfully received by a devoted follower of your late uncle.
I am.
Your Excellency’s, humble and obedient servant.
(Signed) J. WOODHOUSE
For THOMAS BROWN.
P.S. I hear there it a life of your Excellency’s uncle in print, but I have not the means of purchasing it.
‘Should any of our readers desire to assist Mr. Thomas Brown we shall be very pleased to receive and forward any subscription sent for the purpose— ED. S.G.]
IMPORTANT.
ALTERATION IN AIR MAIL FEES TO
GREAT BRITAIN ANO NORTHERN IRE-
LAND, IRISH FREE STATE. CANADA, AND
SUCH BRITISH POSSESSIONS AS CIRCU-
LATE BY AIR TO LONDON.
WiTH effect from 3rd April, 1934, an inclusive fee covering both Air Mail fee and postage will be introduced for such countries within the British Empire as circulate to London by Air.
Sarawak Library.
The following books have been purchased by the Committee :—
The Walls are Down . J. C. Moore F-m 379 Excursions to Lilliput... Lewis Gibbs F-g 210a » A Thatched Roof . Beverley Nichols F-n 211 (A,J The Tudor Wench ... Elswyth Thane F-t 183d Namesakes
Kuching Regatta, 1934.
A most enjoyable regatta was hold at Kuching, on 16th June, in honour of the impending departing of Ilis Highness the Rajah for England and to welcome back to Sarawak. His Highness the Tuan Mnda an Mr. A W. D Brooke. Tine being Mr. Brooke’s first arrival in this country.
With the kind permission of His Highness the Rajah, H H. M Y Maimuna WAS need as a grand¬stand. Amongst those who witnessed the regatta were His Highness the Rajah, His Highness the Tuan Muda. Mr. A. W. D, Brooke and a number of European and other members of the community. In spile of heavy rain during the night which lasted until several races were over the river was crowded with boats from every kampong. and the banks of the river, which had been tastefully decorated, were crowded with sight¬seers. During the intervals between races various ingeniously decorated boils were towed up and down the river Among the many attractions we cannot fail to remark on one huge dummy figure which made a Point of gravely saluting the crowd during intervals of light-hearted dancing. Music was provided by the Kuching Military Band which was towed up and down the river on a decorated raft. The event was heartily enjoyed by all com¬munities and we take this opportunity to congratulate the committee and all those responsible for the success the occasion so richly deserved.
Cricket.
There was a disappointing response by Europeans for tins fixture and the situation was not made any easier by those members who promised to play arid then simply failed to turn up Despite these disappointments a most enjoyable game resulted, Mr. Bales XI scoring a decisive victory.
A vote of thanks is due to those players who uncomplainingly fielded through both innings, and in one case even bowled for both sides, also to two from H M.S. Herald who turned out at a moment's notice.
ft is a great pity that with a return fixture, with Miri in view more representative sides could not have been brought together.
Mr G. T. BATES XI.
St. Michael’s Catholic Club.
BILLIARDS LEAGUE, 1984.250 UP. (NO HANDICAP).
Final Result.
A Silver Cup kindly presented by Mr. Chen Ah Pow for this League was awarded to the winner, Mr. Tan Soon Tye.
The highest break prize was won by Mr. L. K. L. Chan who scored 48 points.
Kuching Amateur Association
Football League.
The League matches for tins season nave been played half-way through its fixtures. So far no slackness was shown in the spirit of the games, which were watched by the public with great interest all round
On the 9th June, there was displayed a fast and most interesting game packed with thrills rather uncommon for a First Division match, when the Medical .4, the Champion of the League, met the Chinese team—S.C.F. A. The former team was lead¬ing by two goals al an early stage of the game, one of which being scored from a penally. The latter was not at all disheartened. but used every effort to score, which they managed to do successfully by drawing level at 2 - 2. Towards the conclusion of the game, the Medical .4. looked dangerous and was within an are of seining on a number of occasions, bill their opponents' full-backs and goalkeeper de¬fended well.
The Second Division match between the Gersik and the, P W. D was postponed to Thursday, 14th instant, as the day already fixed, viz , Wednesday, 13th instant, was a Mohammedan Festival Day, Mandi Sapar.
Owing to the visit of the H M.S. Herald, whose team accepted to play two matches against the European Combined Team on Thursday the 28th and against the Kuching Selected on the following day, some alterations in the fixtures were found ne¬cessary. Consequently, the match between P.W.D. and Addinul was brought forward to Saturday the 30th instant and the match between S.C.F A and Constabulary 4 was postponed to Monday the 2nd July, the one fixture taking the place of the other.
The following are the positions held by various learns in the League Competitions up to 30th June:—
FIRST DIVISION.
HERALD'S XI vs. EUROPEAN COMBINED TEAM.
H.M.S. Herald's XI played their 1st match against the European Combined Team on a soft ground which was caused by the heavy downpour of rain which occurred during the afternoon. At first, the game appeared to be one-sided when the local team pressed for two goals within the space of 10 minutes, but later the visiting team got going and scored two goals. The home team beat the visitors by 6—2. Mr MacDonald refereed the game.
The "HERALD" AND THE REST vs. KUCHING
SELECTED.
The next afternoon saw Kuching Selected in notion against a picked team from the Herald and the Rest. Among the Ing crowd present at this match were His Highness the Tuan Muda and Mr. Anthony Brooke. It was a better game than the previous day, especially in the first half when exchanges were even from end to end. On the resumption of the second half, Kuching Selected forwards indulged in a number of a fine short-passing and continued to play with confidence. At tins stage the home team dominated the game and kept On scoring. The result was Kuching Selected 7 and the Herald and the Rest 3. Mr. J P. Baird refereed and teams lined up as follows ;—
The Herald and the Beat: Abang (Municipal), Chater (Alang Alang), Mills (Herald), Cooper (He¬rald), Harding (Herald), Edwards (Herald), Moore (Herald), Pa'ee (Medical). Michael Juan (Consta¬bulary. A Harry (Medical), and Yates (Herald).
Kuching Selected : Chiang Khoon (S. C. F. A), Deli (Constabulary), Amit (Medical), Eng Seng S.C. F.A ). Francis Tan (Medical), A. Yahya (Medical), Stephen Harry (Constabulary), Frederick Then (S.C.F.A.), Jaw Joo (S.G.F.A ), Freddy Lim (S.C F.A.). and Weng Seng (S.C F A.) -Contributed.
Club News.
Sarawak Club.
BOWLS HANDICAP COMPETITION poll JULY. 1934
Second Division News.
SIMANGGANG DISTRICT
May, 1934.
The District Officer. Mr. R. L. Daubeny, reports-
General.—His Highness the Rajah and party, accom¬panied by the Resident, Second Division, arrived at this station on 7lh instant. His Highness was met on the wharf by the District Officer, Simanggang, and after inspecting a Guard of Honour under P.I. Abano Ali was met by a representative gathering of all Government Servants and a parade of the local schools.
His Highness spent the next day interviewing local Chiefs and others, and the day after proceeded to Engkilili. accompanied by the Resident, Second Division returning to Simanggang again in the evening.
His Highness left for Lingga on Thursday 10th on his return to Kuching.
BETONG DISTRICT.
Moy, 1934.
The Acting District Officer. Mr. J. J. Hill, reports:—
Agriculture.—The padi harvest can now be said to be almost completed and from all sides reports show- that the best crop for some years has been obtained.
Pepper crops appear also to be fairly good but there still remains a month or two before picking will commence. The Rubber Restriction has been explained throughout the district to exporters and producers. They all appear to understand it.
Miscellaneous.—His Highness the Rajab, accompanied by the Resident, Second Division, paid a visit to the station on the 2nd May. His Highness on landing shook hands with the leading members of the community and afterwards proceeded to the Fort, where numerous intel views were given. Later in the morning Ilis High¬ness inspected the new bazaar, also paying visits to the Govern ment Malay School and Chinese Tong San School the early evening a visit was paid to S.P.G. Mission where the Church and school building were inspected his Highness left on the 3rd by m l. Betty for Tanjong Pujor, hence by H.H.M.Y. Maimuna to Saratok
KALAKA DISTRICT.
May 1934.
The Acting Assistant District Officer, Mr J. C. H. Barcroft, repot is:—
r il— The chief event of the mouth was the visit of His Highness the Rajab, to this district. His High¬ness and party were accompanied by the Resident, Second Division	
At 4.45 p.m. on the 5th the Maimuna anchored below the bazaar. His Highness landed and after a short stroll returned to the yacht
The official landing took place the following morning, when a large crowd headed by Native chiefs. Civil Servants and lending Chinese were assembled to greet the Rajab.
The road leading to the Fort was lined by boys of the Malay, S.P.G. and Chinese Schools.
At about 11 a.m. the Rajah left the offices and pro¬ceeded through the bazaar and buck to the Maimuna. The Rajah landed again in the evening and after a walk through the Malay kampong proceeded to the District Officers bungalow where the. Dyak Chiefs were assembled.
At 7.15 a.m. on the 7th the Maimuna sailed for Kalang, A short visit was paid to the offices and Malay School, Kabong, after which His Highness sailed for Lingga.
ENGKILILI DISTRICT.
May, 1934.
The Acting Assistant District Officer, Mr. E. M. Selous, reports:—
Agriculture—The padi harvest is now practically over and, though crops have been variable, sufficient has been obtain, d for the needs of the district, and the Ulu Lemanak in particular has produced a much belter yield than last year.
Miscellaneous- His Highness the Rajah, accompanied by the Resident, Second Division, visited the station on the 9th and met the principal Chinese, Malays and Dyaks from Engkilili and Lubok Antu. His Highness returned to Simanggang with the Resident after lunch.
Third Division News.
OYA DISTRICT.
April, 1934.
The Acting District Officer, Mr. L. K. Morse, reports
Obituary	The death of Haji Elijah bin Haji Metup
Tuan Belal Oya was reported during the month.
SIBU DISTRICT.
May, 1934.
The District Officer, Mr. E. O. Bruce, reports:
Trifle.—Local market price of Para rubber has remained in the neighbourhood of $23 per picul.
Full preparations were made for the enforcement of the Scheme for Restriction of rubber exports as from the 1st June, and Chinese Dealers appeared to appreciate the  necessity therefor.
Trade figures are as under :—
Experts race for 15 men boats from G.C.M., S.A. D C . Government staff, etc.
Chinese Kotaks.
Pemukat.
There will be other amusements such as barrel races, greasy pole, a flour and water dip, and a swim¬ming race for boys.
Two totalizators will he run selling $1 tickets. There will be a $1 sweepstake on the 30 men boat Champion Cup Race.
After the Regatta there will be an entertainment of fireworks and dancing. Owners of boats, 'Tua Kampongs, etc., are naked to miter teams to amuse the audience for ten minutes each. Prizes will be given for the best teams.
COMMITTEE. J. B. Archer, Esq., J. O. Gilbert, Esq., The Capt. China, Mr. E. Yuen Kee, Haji Serat, Mohamed Hiprawi., T. Rhys Jones, Esq. (Hon. Treasurer), W. B. A. Hankey, Esq. (Hon. Secretary).
