MONDAY, OCTOBER 1st, 1934.
Engagement
HARNACK—ADAMS-—The engagement is announced between Miss Patricia Evelyn Addington Adams, only daughter of Mr. and Mrs. H. A. Adams, and Mr. W. Harnack of the Sarawak Civil Service.
Local and personal.
SEPTEMBER.
His Highness the Rajah’s birthday oc¬curred on Wednesday 26th September, At 8 a.m. a salute of twenty-one guns was fired from Fort Margherita. His Highness the Tuan Muda, presented Long Service Decora¬tions and Medals at the Court House. We take this opportunity of wishing His High-ness the Rajah very many happy returns of the day.
His Highness the Rajah, accompanied by Her Highness the Ranee, Dayang Elizabeth, Dayang Valerie and Mr. J. C. V. C. Brooke, arrived at Singapore by the s.s. Rajputana on Friday, the 28th September.
A most enjoyable, dance was given at Astana by His Highness the Tuan Muda on the eve of His Highness the Rajah’s birthday.
We are informed that His Highness the Tuan Muda will be sailing for Singapore on the 7th October. His Highness will be sailing for England by the s.s Rawalpindi on the 12th October.
An Official Gazette, Extraordinary, of the State of North Borneo relates that Mr. D. J Jardine, C.M.G., O.B.E... arrived in the
Territory on 12th September, 1934, and assumed office as Governor and Commander ¬in-Chief of North Borneo. His Excellency paid a flying visit to Kuching when s.s. Darnel called in at Pending on Monday, 10th September.
We welcome back to Kuching Mr. and Mrs. B. J. C. Spurway and Mr. D. C. Hudden, who arrived by M.V Marudu on the 3rd September, Mr. and Mrs. I. S. Hammond by T.S.S. Vyner Brooke on 7th, and Mr. E. H. Elam by the same vessel on the 16th.
At the annual general meeting of St. Michael’s Catholic Club held on the 26th August, 1934, the following gentlemen were elected office-bearers for the ensuing year:— President: Rev. Father A. Hopfgartner; Vice-President:	Mr. A	Chong;	Hon.
We note with interest the announcement of the engagement of Miss Patricia Evelyn Addington Adams, daughter of Mr. and Mrs. H. A. Adams, to Mr. W. Harnack of the Sarawak Civil Service. Mr. Adams was formerly an officer of the Sarawak Civil
Service and served from 1902—1925. Miss Adams was born at Kuching and spent her childhood in Sarawak. We take this oppor¬tunity to wish the engaged couple all success and every happiness in the future.
His Highness the Rajah’s Birthday.
His Highness the Rajah's birthday occurred on Wednesday, the 26th September. A public holiday was observed throughout the State. At 8 n.m. a salute of twenty-one guns was fired from Port Margherita and all ships in port were dressed. After the salute had been filed. His Highness the Tuan Muda proceeded across river to the Pengkalan Batu where a Guard of Honour, furnished by the Sarawak Constabulary, was drawn up under the command of Mr. D V. Murphy. After inspecting the Guard. His Highness proceeded to the Court House, which had been tastefully decimated. where all European and Native Government Officers were assembled. Long Service Decorations and Medals were then presented by His Highness.
During the afternoon the final of the Black and White Football Trophy was played The finalists were the Medical A. and Constabulary A Teams A report of the match is published elsewhere in our columns. Before the game and during the intervals the Drums of the Sarawak Constabulary played a selection of marches. At the end of the game His Highness the Tuan Muda kindly presented Cups and Shields to winners of tile various competitions during the season.
Obituary.
MR. CHARLES Wn.t.BS JOHNSON.
It is with deep regret that we have to report the death of Mr. Charles Willes Johnson, on the 18th September. Mr. Willes Johnson had been in a nursing home in London for some weeks with a severe, attack of sciatica. but had recovered suffi¬ciently to leave the home at the beginning of September.
Mr. Willes Johnson came of a distinguished line mi both sides of his family, being related on one side to His Highness the Rajah and mi the other to the well-known legal family of Willes. He was a solicitor by profession and al one time a partner of Messrs. Torr & Company, solicitors to the Govern¬ment of Sarawak in London. While with that firm he was the head of their Parliamentary branch, and acted as legal adviser in England to the Sarawak Government. In 1912 he was appointed to the Sarawak Government Agent in England and gave up his partnership in Messrs. Torr i Com¬pany. He retired on pension in 1929. On the formation of the Advisory Council in 1912 he be¬came Secretary to the Council in addition to his other work. During his tenure of the post of Government Agent he was twice called to Sarawak by His Highness the Rajah in order to advise on legal and administrative matters.
Since his retirement he has acted as Hon. Secretary of the Sarawak Association und was appointed by His Highness the Rajab to be one of the Trustees to administer the fund, donated by His Highness, for assisting the education of children of Colonial Civil Servants.
Mr. Willes Johnson leaves a widow, and two surviving children by his first wife, and we extend our heartfelt sympathy to them in their bereave¬ment. Some two years ago Mr. Willes Johnson sustained a sad loss in the death in Singapore, in a firing accident, of his second son Lionel, who was with the Asiatic Petroleum Company, Ltd., there.
Mr. Willes Johnson will long be remembered by Sarawak Officers for his kindness and courtesy while Government Agent and for the hospitality he always extended to them while on leave.
After his retirement he continued to take a deep interest in Sarawak and his distinguished presence and genial manner will be greatly missed from future gatherings of Sarawakians in London.
LIEUT.-COL. MAURICE BRETT.
Lt.-Col. Maurice V. Brett, of the Roman Camp, Callander, died suddenly at Callander to-day, 18th August.
Col. Brett, along with his son, Mr. Anthony Brett, and his son-in-law, Mr. Kenneth Thornton, were grouse shooting on the Colonel's estates about four miles from Callander, when he suddenly complained of feeling ill. He was rushed home by motor ear, but died early in the afternoon.
Col. Brett, who was 52, was the younger son of the late Viscount Esher, and of Eleanor Viscountess Esher, of the Roman Camp, Callander, and was the husband of Zena Dare, the actress, who has been appearing in Ivor Novello’s new play, “Murder in Mayfair,” at the King’s Theatre, Glasgow, during the past week.—Sunday Times.
Lieut.-Col. Brett was the brother of Her High¬ness the Ranee. We beg to tender Her Highness our deep sympathies at her sad loss.
Mount Mulu.
Mt. Mulu forms a watershed between the Tutoh, a large tributary of the Baram River, and the tri¬butaries of the neighbouring Limbang River. It was first climbed by Shakelton in 1932 and later by Messr. Trumpy and Irving of the Sarawak Oilfields Company.
On leaving Marudi by small launch the Long Patah house at Long Bruang can be reached in a day, whence the appropriate coolies will in another day paddle and pole one up to a small Government ku'm nt I King Malinau, near the foot of the Mulu range. Here it is as well to divide up loads : as the mountain is over 7000 feet high, samits—a sort of leaf mat— are necessary for making the nightly shelter where no suitable leaves can be found : blankets. A bottle or two of arak and smoked pig meal are more or less essential, for one cannot expect coolies clad in but a loin doth to stand the—to them—unusually cold mountain climate.
Four hours paddle up the Malinau and Malinau Paku brings one as far ns limits can go, for the river there arises out of a hole in the ground and, in dry weather, this point is the less easily reached owing to the many fallen trees. From here another foul hours' walk along the stream-bed past the bare towering cliffs of Gunong Api brings one to a point where one must leave the river-bed and climb a spur of the mountain. So far the limestone bills on each side of the Malinau Paku are poor in vegetation, full of small holes and caves, recalling the neighbourhood of Niah. or even Bau and Bidi. On- first ascending the Mulu ridge it is at once evident the mountain is soft sandstone and a profuse vegetation, including Belian. Kapor, Damar and Jankar trees, presents itself. Numerous shelters where natives have worked jungle produce are encountered on route, and it is not difficult to find sufficient water for cooking in many places however dry is the weather. At about 2000"feet altitude one meets a stiff climb over limestone, poor in
vegetation, full of ferns, palms, puntu, etc., passing again into the sandstone well-wooded regions at about 2500 feet. Still climbing ensues, but by midday the top of the ridge is attained at an altitude of about 4000 feet. From here on one can walk for about seven hours through dense moss forest with occasional ups and downs and at the end ones altitude is only 5000 feet, when one is at the foot of a sharp ascent to the final peak.
The surrounding mossy forest is just like any other moss forest, on the crest of the more or less knife-edged ridge the trees are small but just below and in the hollows big trees are plentiful. Water occurs at frequent intervals, but in dry weather only in small quantities; pigs and even rhinoceros leave their traces, and the birds are those confined to higher altitudes. On the way one passes a clear space on the cliff edge from which a view could be obtained over towards the Limbang, lower Baram and Tinjar, but the view was obscured by haze and a wasps' nest.
From the camp at the end of the ridge an hour and a half stiff climb up the final peak brings one to the foot of the highest point, (5,800 feet above sea level. In dry fine weather the cold was not intense, but a most cold wind caught one on the ridge and camping on the slope below was necessary to avoid discomfort. Although the ridge crest provided trees too small to be of any use, on the slope just below, in a perfect glade just made for camping and with a fair water supply, occurred trees a foot or more in diameter, mostly Quercus sp. (oak) and selunsor, the one that sheds its bark.
Half hour's climb, a short part of it hanging on to two rotans and roots and moss in a vertical cliff " face, brings one to the top, an altitude of about 7,250 feet. The actual top ridge is several hundred yards long and quite broad, covered with whim¬berry-like brushes 3 or 4 feet high and riddled with tracks of deer and pig, the latter, having fed on acorns, about four inches thick in fat on the back, worth a prize in any show.
Like moat mountain tops, except on lucky occasions, clouds and haze even in early morning obscured the view. Below one sees clearly the Malinau Paku and Gunong Api. the Malinau pierc¬ing Gunong Melarat in the middle and the Madalam, a tributary of the Limbang, near the end. Between the Malinau and Malinau Paku a long sandstone ridge some 4,000 feet high runs from Mulu to Melarat which is clearly a limestone mountain. The sea was invisible and far to the North lay a confused mass of high mountains from which it was impossible to distinguish Kinabalu, as hoped. Near at hand were Mt. Obong and its spurs, with Began Priok more distant; between Obong and Multi ran the Malinau. to which there appeared to be a sheer abrupt drop from Mulu's highest peak. Further round, Mt. Murud, Batu Lawi and mountains in the Ulu Tutoh and Baram were very clear, but Kalulong and Batu Song were very indistinct, whilst Dulit and other mountains were indistinguishable; from so great a height small and even largehills so merge in the haze with their background as to be less easily made out than they are from lower altitudes.
Properly organized and going “all out" one’s actual travelling lime up and down Mulu from Long Malinau is only about 6 or 7 days, but trans- port and the food question slow one's rate of travell¬ing and limit one's stay on the mountain. The climb is in no way difficult and in fine weather the conditions quite pleasant, there is plenty of room to walk about, the sides of the mountain are not too steep and the water supply is adequate in the dryest times. The fauna is, oddly enough, rich in birds and mammals before only known from Kinabalu and so far unrecorded from Sarawak.—E.B.
For Fat Men Only.
According to The Lancet, a study carried out by the Royal Air Force as to the relative resistance to disease of underweight and overweight men is wholly favourable of the big fellow. It has been discovered that overweight men are not only better able to resist disease than are underweights, but that they stand physical and mental strain very much better than their thinner comrades —Straits Times.
OLD SARAWAK.
From the Sarawak Gazette
47 Years Ago.
THE
SARAWAK GAZETTE
Price THURSDAY, 1ST SEPTEMBER. 1887. 10 cents
OUR NOTES.
The now printing press which recently arrived from England han been used for the first time in the publication of this number of the Sarawak Gazette. It is of the make known an “Harrild’s Bremner" and is a moat complete and handsome piece of machinery, it has appliances capable of producing all kinds of printers work.
Being considerably larger than that previous in use, two houses have been taken in the bazaar and thrown into one which forms a commodious printing office and godowns, much more convenient than the old one in the Court House which was rather limited as regards elbow room. Another advantage is that the new office being in the bazaar the other Government offices will be spared the noise which used to reach them from it when the machinery was at work.
Sarawak Library.
Kindly presented by His Highness the Rajah: These I have loved S. P B. Mais F m 9 (3) Purchased by the Committee
The Sarawak Library has been carried on for a great many years with the pecuniary assistance of Government and by the personal efforts of His Highness the Rajah, The Bishop of Labuan and Sarawak, The Manager of Borneo Company, Limited, and successive Honorary Secretaries. It probably reached its height of prosperity some three or four years ago with a membership of over one hundred and twenty, whose subscriptions, together with Government’s generous contribution, enabled the Library to pay its running expenses and a little over.
It has, however. been evident for some time that the present building, for the use of which the Library is indebted to the S.P.G. Mission, was no longer as suitable as it was, and it was further evident that the Library's slender funds could neither permit of a new building nor the repair of the old one
At this stage His Highness the Rajah kindly offered to house the Library in the Museum Bunga¬low, specially rebuilt for the purpose, and to attach the Library to the Museum Department to be administered, under the same conditions as before, by the Curator and an Advisory Committee of three subscribers appointed by Government The accept¬ance of this offer having been received from the majority of subscribers it is proposed to start work shortly on the new building, which may he finished early next year.
It is probable that so long as members get their books they don't mind who runs the Library, but the advantages of a new building, fresh cases, continuity of supervision and a permanent establish¬ment cannot fail to appeal to subscribers, whilst many smaller items of care and upkeep will be facilitated, the Advisory Committee being as before open to receive suggestions, complaints or other matters brought forward by members Contributed.
Notice.
SARAWAK LIBRARY.
In order to meet the problems arising out of the need for a new building the Sarawak Library, by consent of the subscribers, has been transferred to Government and will, in future, be administered by the Curator of the Sarawak Museum assisted by an Advisory Committee. Entrance fees and subscriptions will remain as at present and subscribers will enjoy the same facilities as they have had in the past.
First Division News.
UPPER SARAWAK DISTRICT
August, 1934
The Acting District Officer, Mr. R. G. Aikman. reports:—
Agriculture.—The Dahan Rubber Estates, Ltd harvested 21,000 lbs. of dry rubber during the month. The rainfall at Bau was 3 48 inches. The highest recorded in 24 hours was 75 of an Inch and the daily average was 11 of an inch. The rainfall at Dalian Rubber Estates was 10 75 inches.
Gold Mining-The Tong Aik Gold Mining Syndicate at Jambusan commenced leaching on the 5th and slopped abruptly at the end of the month owing to the results of the leaching being negligible.
This was the thirtieth mine to commence leaching operations and. so far as the results of the opening mouth are concerned, has unfortunately proved to be the biggest failure yet recorded
The number of mines which have closed down, either temporarily or permanently, now amounts to twelve.
A similar number of mines are, however, showing a steady output and seem likely to continue to do so for some time to come.
The failures may be attributed to ultraoptimism in the early stages, to failure to obtain reliable technical advice before putting up a plant, to a lack of skilled assayers. and last, but not least, to general mistrust in the matter of assaying samples.
A start was made with the somewhat large task of registering all labourers employed in the gold mining industry, and considerable progress had been made with the undertaking by the end of the month.
The total production of gold for Upper Sarawak for the month of July, 1934, amounted to 2,627 ozs.
Five General and two Exclusive Prospecting Licences were issued during the month.
The actual gold obtained by the following com¬panies (or the month of July, 1934, was 
SADONG DISTRICT.
August, 1934.
The Acting Assistant District Officer, Mr. S. G. Hansom, reports :—
Agriculture — The burning off of padi farms is extremely late this year. When travelling in the Ulu it was noticeable that no burns whatever had then taken place, in spite of a prolonged period of fine weather. Land Dyaks, with the foolish and prolonged "pantang" in which they indulge during this season, are very liable to lose their opportunity " for a good "burn."
Kuching Football Association.
PRESENTATION OF SHIELDS, CUPS AND MEDALS.
Before a large gathering of spectators and under the most ideal weather, the final of the Chinese Cup Competition was played on Wednesday, '26th instant, on the Padungan Ground, in honour of His Highness the Rajah's birthday
The finalists were the Medical A and the Con-stabulary A, both of whom put up a plucky light throughout the game. The latter team was seen to dominate the game at the outset but they fulled to score on many open chances A ding-dong struggle ensued and there was no scoring in the first half.
On the resumption of play Medical A look the lead by one goal ten minutes before the linishing time, when Harry scored from a centre passed to him by Paee neat the goal-line Soon afterwards Constabulary A attacked most determinedly but without success At this moment Michael Juan let drive a terrific shot, but Yahya, who happened to be in the goal area at the time, managed to head the ball above the bar. At the other end Medical A pressed again and scored their second point through Paee. The Constabulary A never gave up trying add continued to attack with vigour, but were constantly checked by the Medical A defence Result: Medical A 2, Constabulary A 0
The Medical A also won the League Champion¬ship this year, thus annexing both League and Cup Double. They have held the League humour for three consecutive years, for which achievement they were presented with a special replica of the Kuching League Shield in the First Division.
The James Buchanan Cup goes to the Municipal XI who beat the Gersik team by 2—0 in the final The former team also had the distinction of winning both the League and Cup Double in the Second Division,
The Association is indebted to the Acting Cum- missioner of Sarawak Constabulary for his courtesy in allowing the Constabulary Drum and Fife band to play selections before and during the interval of the game, and to those gentlemen who refereed the matches during the competitions.
His Highness the Tuan Muda, who was present, kindly presented the various trophies and medals to the Captains of the respective winning teams at the conclusion of the game, after which event. Mr. G. T. Bales, President of the Kuching Football Associa¬tion. thanked His Highness for the honour of his presence and for giving away the prizes. Three hearty cheers to His Highness the Tuan Muda concluded the meeting
The result of this year's competitions is aa follows
AUTUMN RACE MEETING, 1934. After the hour of 11 a.m. on the 13 th and 15th October, 1934, all Motor Vehicles must proceed to the Race-course via Padungan Hoad or Ban Hok Road only, and up to the hour of 7 p.m. on these days, must return by the Sekama Road only.
Exceptions: His Highness the Rajah's Cars. The Government Secretary. The Resident, First Division, Kuching. The Principal Medical Officer. The Secretary, Sarawak Turf Club. In cases of extreme urgency permission may be obtained on the Course for other cars to return via Ban Hok Road. After depositing passengers at the Grand¬stand, vehicles will line up on the extreme left hand side of the Grandstand road, one behind the other, and within three yards of each other facing away from the Grandstand. Rickshaws and bicycles may proceed to the Race-course at any time, and by any road, and must park on the Bandstand plot. They will not be allowed to remain on any part of the road leading to the Grandstand or raids leading to the Race-course., All vehicles must move to their parking grounds without delay, as directed by the Consta-bulary.
WARNING, The driver of any vehicle, endeavouring to turn in Grandstand road or, stopping to pick up passengers in Grandstand road, will be prosecuted for causing obstruction.
Third Division News.
SIBU AND KANOWIT DISTRICT.
August, 1934.
The District Officer, Mr. E. O. Bruce, reports:—
Trade.—The local market price of Para rubber averaged $27 per picul.
Trade figures are as follows:—
MUKAH DISTRICT.
August, 1934.
The Acting District Officer, Nr. L. K. Morse reports:—
P.W.D.—During the month a one chain Rentis was cut from Kuala Petanak to lire p imping station, a distance of about five hundred fathoms, while,-. tile Hoad reserve from Petanak to the Oya road win also cleared.. Work had commenced on a footpath from Petanak to the pumping station at the end of the month. I understand that the materials for the electrification of the pumping plant will arrive within lire next few weeks.
Oya AND DALAT.
August, 1934.
The Officer-in-Charge, Mr. D. R. Lascelles, reports:—- Trails.—This has beau the outstanding month of the year as regards trade. At the beginning of the month the price of sago per passu was 84 cents in Dalat and 42 cents in Sungei Kut. Within a fortnight the price had soared up to 50 cents in Didst and 55.6O in Sungei Kut. This peak was not maintained but the price has since remained steady at 45 in Dalat and 52 in the Sungei Kut. This is a relative high price for sage and the Melanau sago workers are definitely seizing their opportunity.
Island Club St. Leger Sweep, 1934.
The Draw.
