BANKS—REED. On 6th March, 1984, at St. Mark’s Church, Newport, by Canon Isaiah Roberts, assisted by Bev. J. Richards. Edward, younger eon of Mr. and Mrs. R. Clare Banks, 27, Stow Park Circus. Newport, to Marjorie, youngest daughter of Mr. C. H. Reed and the late Mrs. Reed, Cheddleton, Fields-rood. Newport.
At Sibu, on Saturday. 7th April, 1984. Abang Abdul Latip, 
second son of Abang Abdul Hamid, to Dayang Lela, eldest
daughter of Inspector Abang Adeng, Sarawak Constabulary,
Sibu. Dayang Lela is the eldest grand daughter of the late
Abang Haji Usop (late Datu Bandar of Sibu).
Local and personal
APRIL.
The twenty-fourth Meeting of the General Council of Sarawak was held at Astana on the 21st April. An account of the pro¬ceedings is included in our columns.
We are informed that the christening of the Earl and Countess of Inchcape's son will take, place on 3rd May. The names chosen are Simon Brooke.
A most enjoyable dance was given at Astana by His Highness the Rajah on Monday, 23rd April. Dance music was provided by "G. Solosa and His Band” and in spite of the strenuousness of the last day of the. races, dancing was carried on into the early hours of the morning.
The Spring Meeting of the Sarawak Turf Club took place on the afternoons of the 21st and 23rd April. Except for the last two races on the Second Day, the weather remained fine and a very enjoyable Meeting was experienced by all members of the community. We publish elsewhere full details.
On Tuesday the 24th April, the Datu
Shahbandar, gave a reception at his resi-
dence “Darol Kornia.” Haji Taha Road, to
the European and Native Members of the
General Council and representatives of the
European and Chinese communities. After
the arrival of His Highness the Rajah,
refreshments were served while the band of
the Sarawak Constabulary rendered an
excellent programme of music.
On Tuesday, 24th April, a dance was given by the Resident, Mr. W. F. Dick, and Mrs. Dick, at the Residency. H.H.M.Y. Maimuna was leaving early the following morning with a considerable number of the guests, so the festivities continued far into the early hours. Mr. and Mrs. Dick are to be congratulated on providing a very happy ending to a1? ’^tiorable race week. We note from the Sarawak Government Gazette of 3rd April, 1934, that Mr. E. Parnell joins the Sarawak Civil Service as an Officer of Class IA (Supernumerary) as from 1st April, 1934.
Mr. A. A. Rennie, Treasurer of Sarawak, left Kuching by m.v. Marudu on 21st April. Mr. Rennie is proceeding on leave prior to taking up his appointment as Agent for the Sarawak Government in London. Mr. H. M. Calvert left by this same vessel on seven months' leave. We wish them both bon voyage and an enjoyable leave.
We welcome back to Kuching Mr. and Mrs. R. E. Edwards, Mr. and Mrs. B. Summers and Mr. and Mrs E Banks. Mrs. Summers and Mrs. Banks are newcomers to this country so we take this opportunity to wish them a long and happy stay amongst us.
We are informed that the following have been appointed Cadet Officers, Sarawak Civil Service:—Mr. J. R. Outram who sailed from London on the 27th April by s.s. Kaisar-I-Hind. Mr. A. R. Snelus who is expected to sail from London by s.s. Ranchi on 25th May.
An exhibition of Arts and Crafts was given at the Maderasah Melayu on the 19th and 20th April. We understand that this is the first school exhibition to be held in Kuching. The Maderasah had been taste¬fully decorated and each class-room was given up to a particular subject. Pupils from the Permaisuri School exhibited a varied and colourful selection of embroidery in many forms, and groups of girl pupils demonstrated their skill with the needle and embroidery frames. In one room, more girl pupils were busy at wooden looms manu¬facturing "tenun” sarongs. Next door classes of boys were engaged in carpentry, turning table legs on native lathes, which, though extremely simple in construction appeared to work very effectively. Basketry, net and mat making was also demonstrated. The number of visitors to the exhibition exceeded all expectations and it is to be hoped that outstation visitors, who were in Kuching to attend the Meeting of the General Council, and others who had come to attend the races, on returning to their towns and villages will encourage the pupils of their local Malay Schools to persevere in attaining proficiency
in these subjects, which are suited to the normal conditions of their lives. His High¬ness the Rajah visited the Maderasah on Friday 20th, and after inspecting all sections of the exhibition witnessed a display of physical drill by squads of boy and girl pupils.
Sea Fever.
(With apologies to the oilier complaint as celebrated
by Mr. John Masefield.)
["The tendency in ship furnishing is to eliminate as far as possible the idea chat a passenger is on board a ship."—Significant pronouncement made at Liverpool.]	,
I must down to the seas again, to the lonely sea and the sky, And all I ask is a ship done up to look like the land that’s dry, With a palm lounge and a ballroom floor end the loose legs shaking.
And a bedroom suite with a bath complete and a bed for the morrow's waking.
i must down to the WAS again, for the call is come from afar.
I can hear the tinkle of ice again in Ye Olde Englyahe Cocktaile Barre;
And all I ask is a man's hand (say, "three no trumps" or over),
And a partner with sense to understand that we're both of us well in clover.
I must down to the seas again, to the mariner's restless path. Where the radiators line the way to the Cafe and Turkish
Bath;
And ah I ask is for marble halls with an orchestra skilled and tireless.
And a square meal and an armchair and the news of the day by wireless.	
Lucio.
OLD SARAWAK.
From the Sarawak Gazette
47 Years Ago.
THE
SARAWAK GAZETTE
1887, TUESDAY. 1ST MARCH. 1887. [Price 10 cents]
OUR NOTES.
We are getting the London mails much more regularly and quickly, from Singapore, than we did. thanks to the managers of the s.s. Ranee. the last few mails having been : delivered in Kuching on the 29th day from London.
The Resident, accompanied by Mr. Jeffreys, visited Paku. Upper Sarawak, on the 26th and inspected the new Gov- . ernment bungalow, building at that place. It is now nearly I completed and will he ready for use in the course nf the month. Furniture has been ordered for it from Singapore.
The Orang Kaya of Poi, near Simatan, has just died from the injuries received from a bear. The Oram.’ Kayu allot a she bear dead, but was immediately attacked by the mala. Not having time to re-load he took refuge on the buttress of a large tree. To this position the bear followed him and was met by a spear thrust from the Orang Kaya. The bear, however, Succeeded in groaning the spear and pulling at it, the Orang Kaya lost his balance and fell on top of the bear. His son luckily came up and rescued the Orang Kaya, but not until he had been severely handled, he died of his wounds soon after. Orang Kaya Lodong was a Sambas Dyak who had removed to Poi. and received the title of Orang Kaya from the Government in 1882.
The Council Negri.
TWENTY-FOURTH TRIENNIAL SESSION OF THE GENERAL 'COUNClL.'
AT 9 a.m. all members of the Council Negri assembled at Astana, while the drum and file band of the Sarawak Constabulary played on the front lawn. Soon after 9 a.m. all members had taken their places in the Council Hall At 9.15 n.m. the end doors of the Hall were thrown open and His Highness the Rajah was announced by the Clerk of the Council. After the playing of the Sarawak Anthem His Highness took his seat on the dais and addressed the Council in the Malay language. We print below an English translation of His Highness speech and also print the speech in the original Malay.
At the conclusion of His Highness' speech the new members of the Council were sworn in, the oath being administered to the Europeans by the Venerable the Archdeacon of Sara¬wak, F. S Hollis, and to the Native members by the Datu Hakim, Abang Haji Moasili. The Council then terminated and His Highness descended from the dais and shook bands and conversed with every native member of the Council
Refreshments were served in tile verandah and after a group photograph had been taken members returned across river
That same evening at the invitation of His Highness the Rajab, European and Native Members of the General Council and representatives of the Malay and Chinese communities, dined at Astana. During the dinner music was rendered by the Sarawak Constabulary band, baler in the evening a display of Malay dancing, "berzapin" and "gendang lama.” took place on the Astana lawn, while at short intervals series of ornamental rockets were fired over the river. The Astana had been beautifully picker out in a blaze of coloured lights, which, with flood-lighting, created a most beautiful spectacle wind: was admired by huge crowds of sight¬seers. A most enjoyable evening was spent by all, a truly lilting ending to the importance of the occasion.
MEETING OF THE COUNCIL NEGRI—21ST APRIL, 1984.
ASSEMBLED AT ASTANA, KUCHING.
Present:—His Highness Sir Charles Vyner Brooko, C.C.M.G., Rajah of Sarawak. First Division :—Mr. C. F. C. Macaskie, Government Secretary, Mr. T. S. Boyd, Chief Justice, Mr. W. F. Dick, Resident. First Division. Mr. E. Farnell, Treasurer of Sarawak, Dr. E. M. Marjoribanks, Principal Medical Officer, Mr. IT. M. Calvert, Commissioner of Trade and Customs, Capt. C. P. Lowe, Director of Public Works, Mi. R. E. T.e Sueur, Secretary for Native Affairs, Capt: 0. D. Tie Gros Clark, Secretary for Chinese Affairs, Mr. N. A. Middlemas, Superintendent of Lands and Surveys, Mr. J. P. Baird, Municipal Commissioner, Abang Haji Abdillah, Datu Shahbandar. Abang Haji Morshidi, Datu Imam, Abang Haji Moasili. Datu Hakim, Inchi Mohammed Zin, Datu Mentri, Abang Suleiman, Datu Amar, Haji Hassim, Datu Bentara, Hiji Nawawi, 'Tuan Khatib, Haji Ampuan Narudin, Kampong Penglima Seman. Abang Samsndm, Tabekang, Abang Alek, Sebangan. Second Division :—Mr. I’. M. Adams. Resident. Second Division, Mr. R. L. Daubeny, District Officer, Simanggang, Abang Zin. Simanggang, Abang Bujang, Kabong, Abang Dranp, Belong, Abang Abu Talip, Lubok Antu. Third Division:—Mr. C. D. Adams, Resident. Third Division, Mr. E. O. Bruce, District Officer, Sibu, Datu Abang Haji Mohideen, Sibu, Abang Enjah, Sibu, Abang Abdul Gapor, Kapit, Datu Awang Udin, Mukah, Abang Haji Bahaudin, Mukah, Pengiran Haji Mohammed, Dalat, Abang Ahmat, Kanowit. Fourth Division :—Mr J. B. Archer, Resident, Fourth Division, Mr. F. H. Pollard, District Officer, Baram, Bujang bin Anchi, Miri, Tuanku Mohammed, Baram. Abang Hamdan, Limbang, Tuanku Taha. Baram, Datu Haji Suhaili, Bintulu. Zin Galan, Baram, Abang Ali, Lawas, Abang Haji Spi-ee, Abang Madaut.
PROCEEDINGS BEFORE THE COUNCIL.
His Highness addressing the members in Malay said :—
(Translation.)
"I have great pleasure in welcoming you to-day to the twenty-fourth triennial assembly of the General Council. The last meeting of the Council was held on the 29th December, 1930, and the intervening period has been one of economic stress for the people of every country in the world. I am glad to think that the general impoverishment has been less felt in Sarawak than elsewhere and that now we are able to look forward with some con¬fidence to renewed prosperity.
“It is my melancholy privilege at every meeting of the Council to pay deserved tributes to members who have died since the previous meeting. We have to deplore the deaths of Abang Haji Halil, Datu Imam, Abang Haji Abdul Rashid, Datu, Pengiran Mohammad, Datu, Tuankn Haji Drahman, Datu, and Orang Kava Pemancha Raman, Datu, all of whom were esteemed friends and valuable Government servants.
‘‘The outstanding feature of the last three years has been the shrinkage of world trade and the disastrous fall in the prices of raw materials, due to no natural causes but to the inadequacy of the world's monetary systems. The movement had already shown itself on the occasion of our last meeting and you will remember that I then foretold that we should have to face some very lean years. The extent and duration of the world depression has exceeded expectations, but so has the capacity of the people of Sarawak to adjust themselves to changed conditions. The trend of events is well illustrated by the revenue and trade returns. In 1929 revenue amounted to over 6 1/2 million dollars—exports were valued at 63 million and imports at nearly 28 million. In 1932 by a progressive decline the revenue was less than 4 1/2 million—exports came to 13 1/2 million and imports to 9 1/2 million only. The lean years had come indeed.
"The decline in revenue was so rapid that it was difficult for economies in public expen¬diture to keep pace with it, but at the cost of some sacrifice that difficulty has been overcome and a balance has been reached and I am happy to be able to inform you that during 1933 revenue amounted to $3,559,580.10 and expenditure to $3,549,074.31. I greatly regret that this result could not be attained without a reduction in Government establishments and in the pay of Government servants, and by an increase, although happily only a small increase, in taxation. The two latter measures are temporary ones and I hope to be able gradually to restore the pay of Government servants io its former level and to reduce taxation. Already I feel justified in announcing that the road tax payable by Malays will be abolished at the end of this year, and that deductions of salary on the first $300 a month of all Govern¬ment servants will cease as from the 1st May.
"It is not my policy, and was never the policy of my predecessors, to increase the revenues of the State by inviting any influx of foreign capital. No doubt had such a policy been adopted the total wealth of the State would have been greater than it is, but the distribution of the wealth would inevitably have shown disparities that would have militated against the happiness of my people. If their interests are to be safeguarded then develop¬ment of the resources of the country must be gradual and so far as possible carried out by the people of Sarawak themselves. Time must be given for the more backward of the country’s races to adapt themselves to higher standards of life, and fit themselves to share in the increased wealth which a steady, slow development will bring.
rA very important industry of the country is rice growing. I am glad that my advice to you in 1930 to impress upon the people of .your districts that they should concentrate on rice cultivation and produce enough for the needs of the country has borne fruit. The  quantity of rice imported in 1932 was one-half of the amount imported in 1929. But there  is yet much to be done. My Agricultural Department is experimenting with different varieties of rice and 1 hope that these experiments will help rice growers to obtain the best results from their land.
“J wish to stress to-day the need of continuing your efforts to increase the food pro¬duction of the country, because there is a danger that the better prices now ruling for rubber may again attract cultivation from the rice fields to the rubber gardens, and the future of the rubber industry is by no means assured. The rise in price during the latter part of 1933 has been due almost entirely to rumours of impending rubber restriction. Negotiations have been proceeding between representatives of producers in all the great rubber growing countries of the world in order to devise some means of restricting the out¬put of rubber and so raising the price to a figure which would give the producers a fair return upon the money they have spent on their plantations. I do not know if these negotiations will lead to any concrete results, but if it becomes advisable to impose some limitation of output I desire, the members of thia Council to do their utmost to ensure that the regulations which may be made shall be carried out faithfully. Only by loyal obedience can a policy of restriction be enforced in such a way that the benefits are. shared equally by all producers. If restriction does not come into force, then producers must not expect the price to remain at its present level. It is indeed a choice of evils.	
"Since I last addressed you, the pepper growing industry has made considerable strides. In 1929 191 thousand piculs of pepper were exported. In 1932 exports had risen to 71 thousand piculs. In 1930 Sarawak pepper became established under its own name in the world markets, and the system of grading pepper at the Customs has helped greatly to enhance its reputation.
"During these difficult years that I am reviewing the revival of the gold-mining industry in Sarawak has done much to relieve unemployment, which fortunately never became acute. In 1929 the value of gold exported was $35,000 only, and in 1932 it had risen to over $400,000. I am informed that the mines are of a temporary nature and that the industry is not likely to be long lived, but its activity has come at an opportune moment.
"The trade in other products of the country has declined in value but not, generally speaking, in bulk. That is to say. the decline has been due to world conditions and not to any cause which could be remedied by local action. There is one important exception. The export of jelutong which for long was one of the most important of our products shows a continuous fall and there is little doubt that the trees are being destroyed more rapidly than nature can reproduce them. Experiments are being made to cultivate the trees and I shall watch their progress with interest.
"Although the programme of Public Works has been curtailed by the financial situation yet the past three years have seen some handsome additions to the permanent buildings in the towns. Particularly worthy of notice at Kuching are the Mosque, the new Government Offices in Rock Road, the new Police Station in Barracks Road the new Government Lay School, and additional wards to the General Hospital, and elsewhere new Government Offices at Simanggang, and the concrete wharves at Sibu, Sarikei and Binatang. Progress has also been made with the projected Kuching-Simanggang Road and Kuching-Lundu Road.	
“In many countries of the world the recent years have been marked by civil disturbances and a great increase of crime and social unrest. I am profoundly grateful that no such symptoms have marred the recent history of Sarawak, and I know that the patience with which my people have borne these years of adversity is due largely to the example of wisdom and loyalty which the members of this Council have set. It has been a period of anxiety for me but I have been sustained by the knowledge that the trust I put in you is not misplaced.
"I will briefly refer to two family matters. As you know my eldest daughter, the Dayang Leonora, was married last year to the Earl of Inchcape, and on the 30th March this year a son was born to them. Mr. Anthony Brooke, the son of the Tuan Muda, has now attained his majority, and has completed his education in England. He will accom¬pany the Tuan Muda to Sarawak in June this year and after a tour of the country will be attached to the Government of Malaya for two years in order to gain experience which will fit him for the responsibilities he will later have to bear. I hope that when ho comes to Sarawak he will have an opportunity of meeting all the members of this Council and beginning many life-long friendships.
"Now, in conclusion, I wish to thank you all for the loyalty and help you have always given me, and I hope that you will take away with you pleasant memories of your stay in Kuching and give to the people of your districts my confident assurances that the times of distress are passing and that they can look forward to a long period of increasing well-being.”
Survey in Johore.
CAPT. II. BAGOT, B.E.
[Note,—The extracts printed below are taken from the Journal of the Royal Geographical Society. Apart from being of great general interest, the extracts will particularly appeal to those of our readers who are administering the Dyak districts mentioned.]
In May 1933 an inch-to-the-mile topographical map of part of the State of Johore was completed by a Colonial Survey Section. Royal Engineers, which had been working in Johore for ten years: I was fortunate enough to be a member of it during its last three years there. In 1927 a paper entitled “Johore in 1926“ was read by Captain W. S. Kirby, U.K., who commanded the Section in its early days in Johore and began the survey which now covers all southern, eastern, and central Johore in twenty-five quarter-degree sheets.
On (he edge of the jungle we were sometimes lucky enough to gel the loan of a temporary bungalow on a rubber estate as headquarters, For several months we had a riverside house built by Dyaks, of logs, roofed and walled with leaves. This was a delightful place, but had to be abandoned when the north-east monsoon and its heavy rains arrived : the river rose 30 feet in three days and the Hoods
reached the roof. In the jungle we normally lived intents, and in spite of mosquitoes, sandflies, ants, and other unpleasant insects, made ourselves fairly comfortable. Occasionally leaf shelters were all we had for a night or two. Our Dyaks were experts at building camps. A party of a dozen could in two hours dear a site and have the lent up. built on a raised platform of logs with a floor of strips of bark, with tables and chairs of logs, bark, and rotan, and an excellent bathhouse of leaves. If the nearest stream were good and the camp to be used for any length of time, they made a bathing pool.
Throughout our time in Johore the Section employed Dyak labour, at times as many as two hundred. I have referred to Dyaks as coolies, but wrongly, as the Dyak is too intelligent and too much of an individual to be considered a coolie. At
first they worked under the supervision of Malay headmen, but gradually we replaced all the Malays with Dyak beadmen. and found that an all-Dyak labour force was much more satisfactory, easier to feed and handle, and more economical. During my time with the Section, most of the men were Sea Dyaks from the villages on the Katibas, Balleh. and Saribas rivers in Sarawak, recruited for us by the District Officer at Sibil, of course with permission
of the Sarawak Government, in parties of about twenty. Each party came from one house, and we found the best results were obtained by keeping them together and making them work as indepen¬dent gangs. We also employed Dyaks from the districts near Simanggang, but found them rather troublesome. They had a little education and were most intelligent, but inclined to be lazy, argumenta¬tive, and not amenable to discipline. The best we had were a party from Dutch Borneo, who had come over from Pontianak to look for work. With very few exceptions the Dyaks were very hardworking, strictly truthful, honest, and really intelligent. They were always happy, and were content with any kind of work. In a very few weeks some of
them became really useful to us. learnt to use a prismatic compass, to measure with a chain or tape, and to take a genuine interest in our work. Being jungle people they had a wonderful sense of direction and a good idea of distances-invaluable to us in central Johore' They were at their best and hap¬piest when allowed to have a day's hunting. They did not bring their blowpipes to Johore, but used spears and our shot-guns. Sometimes, after a suc¬cessful day, they were too happy, and would sing all night.

They are most amusing people to deal with, but expect a good deal of individual attention are full of curiosity, and have a thirst for knowledge. In the evening, after work, parties of curious Dyaks would come to our tents, examine everything, and ask endless questions. They were easy people to feed: we supplied them with rice and small quantities of sugar, onions, and dried peas, which they supplemented with jungle plants and fruits, honey, fish, turtles, and any animals or birds they could trap or shoot. In the hills they often spent their weekly holiday Tuba fishing, which is done by pounding the 			 Tuba root, pouring the
juice into a stream, and collecting the stupefied fish farther downstream. It is not a sporting way to fish, but really is good fun when the fish are only partly poisoned and are ban! to catch in hands or net and harder slid to spear.
When our field work was finished two of us were able to visit Sarawak while repatriating the Dyaks. Captain Wansorough-Jones visited Dyak houses near Sibil, from which ninny of our men and como, and there he was feted mid was aide to get several photographs. one house lie saw postcards of the Sultan and the Crown Prince of Johore, and photographs of the various commanding officers of the Section hung in a place of honour, flanked by baskets of the dried heads of enemies, which, we must assume, were ancient family treasures, as head-hunting has been slopped by the Sarawak Government. I took part in a feast nt a Land Dyak house, a most embarrassing affair, as the food was far from inviting, and the chiefs insisted on giving me presents of live chickens. Some of my head Sea Dyaks had taken me there, but they were most particular to point out frequently that these Land Dyaks were a vastly inferior race.
Sarawak Library.
First Division News.
UPPER SARAWAK DISTRICT.
March, 1934.
The Assistant District Officer, Mr. R. G. Aikman, reports:—
Agriculture.—The Dahan Rubber Estates, Ltd., harvested 26,500 lbs. of dry rubber during the month.
Gold Mitring.—There have been ft number of complete failures amongst the gold mines operating by the cyanide process. In every case this would appear to be due to ultra-optimism at the start and to lack of thorough prospecting of the' whole area to be worked. It is to be hoped that these unfor¬tunate failures will serve as a warning to other mining companies about to open up, and it should be emphasized that all areas must be most thoroughly prospected and the ores tested before any money is spent upon the erection of a plant. Forty-four General Prospecting Licences were issued during the month and ten applications for Exclusive Prospecting Licences were received.
The actual cold obtained by the following com¬
panies for the month of February
ricket.
KUCHING vs. OUTSTATIONS.
As the Padungan ground was unplayable this game was played on me ground of me General Hospital, by the courtesy of Dr. Marjoribanks. As this ground is still new bulb the wicket and the outfield were rough, but fortunately no damage was done, all body-line tactics being frowned on by captains and spectators alike.
Kuching winning the toss naturally seized the chance of fielding In the Comparative cool of the morning. The Outstations Went off in tremendous Style, Selons hitting well and confidently and 69 was on the board before the first, wicket fell, 8ehnis, the retiring batsman, hit two 6’s and five, 4's. The hundred was hoisted without the fail of another wicket ami it looked as if the Outstations were in for a mammoth score, but Hannigan lose to the occasion and look a couple of quick wickets The outgoing bat-men both served then side well. Scott-Dalgleish playing polished and attractive cuc- kel, and captain hitting hard. Later Melaine lost his wicket in trying to hit the Cover off the ball and Archer declined his innings closed at 124 The bowling and fielding were variable, bill Or. Marjori- banks took a good catch. Hannigan, though differing front a severe odd, WAS Kuching's best bowler Banks was steady, and Mitchell, who bowls with a nice action, looks as if he might be dangerous. Some of the bowlers at times found the limitations of the mailing too cramped for their own particular style. Middlemas kept wicket well.
Kuching made a confident reply, the first pair hoisted 35 before Middlemas was bowled after hitting two sixes. Runs continued to come   steadily and
the hundred Was on the hoard with only four wickets down, I larding and Mitenell halting well. Hanni¬gan started in lively fashion bill was out to a very fine eaten. Harding and Taylor WERE both unlucky, the former being mil to a cunning ball from the R. H. D., which broke sharply on the third bounce, while the latter played a hall on to Ins font which bounced brek on t.» the wicket.
With Mitchell going strong it looked as if Kuching
would again carry the day, despite loud complain
from certain fielders as io the length of time they
were being kept out in the silo. The tail, however,
collapsed badly. Selmis taking the last own wickets
with consecutive balls, and the Outstations scrambled
borne by two runs.
The f shown all over was quite good. Hanni-
gan is still our best bowler, and if Chaplin handy
touched the same form that he showed in the last
race week gone, he is still a force to be reckoned
with Scott-Dalgleish stood out easily first among
Che batsmen and Muchell showed himself a useful
recruit. It was a thoroughly enjoy thin game and
as the dear old vicar says if the annual Sunday
School treat, "a pleasant time was had by all
The excitement of the day do not finish with the
fall of the last wicket, as no sooner had the game
been declared a victory for the Outstations, than H
vigorous protest was bulged by one of our mer-
chant princes that a four he had hit had not been
Credited to his account. Some force was lent to this
argument, for, as the statistically-minded reader
Will note, the total runs by the bowling analysis
differ from the total runs from the batsmen by four
runs. To find another parallel in first class cricket
to this extraordinary "impasse" one must go buck
to 1783. when runs were scored by cutting notches
on a stick. ON that occasion one willy scorer lost
his stick when the matter was called into question
Here the score-book is open to inspection by any
Board of Survey duty appointed as per Financial
Regulations para. 180 but despite this was fear that
the point of who actually was the match will
forever remain wrapped in mystery. and the great
mystery of “The Care of the Scorer's Blunder" will
go down to history as another of ihu long list of
undetected crimes.*— (Cont/ributed.)
Good start,. Burong Gruda and White Label took
the lead at once and maintained to the finish, the
rest of the field being bunched with Flamingo in
the rear. Coming into the straight Akai closed up
to get third place.
5 lengths, 2 lengths.
Time—1 minute 39$ seconds.
Tote: $2.80.
September started off in the lead but was im-
mediately overhauled by Rhubarb, who then set
the pace for September and Casunoea. Kijang,
however, came up on the outside and led at the
3 furlong post, Rhubarb falling back. At the road
Kijang led by 6 lengths, with Cosanooa. Jorrocks
and September bunched behind. Kijang increased
his lead in the straight to win by 10 lengths,
Casanova spurted to beat Jorrocks on the post by
a short head for second place.
10 lengths, short head.
Time—1 minute 22$ seconds
Gruda and Manis made the running from the start, the field being strung out with Wafer Polo last. Manis led at the 3 furlong post, but at the road Gruda took the lead, increasing it down the straight to win by 7 lengths, Manis only getting second place from Workman by a short head with Mudahan and Nasib close up.
7 lengths, short head.
Time—1 minute 42$ seconds.
Tote: $3 10.
Cash Sweep: First prize §320.00 Ticket No. 767
A good start after difficulty with a restive field.- Anybody's race at the road with Silver Blaze. slightly ahead. Burong Gruda came up very strong in the last 50 yards to dead heat with Silver Blaze for first place, 1 length ahead of Mickey Mouse who just managed to beat White Label for second place by J length.	•
Dead beat, 1 length.	’ '
Time—47 seconds.
Kijang had a slight lead at the start with Sabar. and Radio close up. At the road Sabar gave place to Casanova, who challenged Radio but could not overhaul him. Kijang increased his lead to win comfortably by 5 lengths in spite of 7 lb. penalty. 1| lengths between second and third.Good start with field well-bunched. Pengarah led at the road but was caught by Gruda on the post to dead heat, with Beaver 4 lengths behind. Workman overhauled Papyrus and finished third. Objection by Pengarah's jockey against Gruda’s jockey was ruled out.CORRESPONDENCE.
[The Editor is not responsible for the opinions
of Correspondents.
The Editor,
Sarawak Gazette,
Kuching.
DEAR MR. HARDING,
I write to acknowledge with sincere thanks receipt of your letter of the 2nd ultimo, covering draft value £71.17 7 being the very welcome coti- tribution from Sarawak (excluding Miri) to the Earl Haig's 1933 Rememberance Day Appeal.
i led sure that you and, those who have assisted you will have derived great encouragement from this excellent response to your efforts, which while very slightly less than last year, represents a wonderful average
MUCH again our kind friends in Sarawak have shewn by their ready generosity on the anniversary of Armistice Day the depth of their sympathy for the survivors of the Great War who are in need, and with my very grateful thanks to all who have contributed so very generously or helped the appeal in other ways, I can with confidence couple the gratitude of those who will benefit by this practical expression of their sympathy.
I have pleasure in enclosing herewith our official receipt W4986, and with renewed thanks end very best wishes to you all.
Believe me.
Yours sincerely,
W. WILLCOX, Captain
