TUESDAY, JANUARY 2nd, 1934.
1933.
1933 will chiefly be remembered in Sarawak as the year in which the dark clouds of depression at last began to lift. Although the sky is not yet clear, the position at present does justify the hope that the worst is over, and that prosperity—not the sensational and unstable prosperity of boom times, but real prosperity—is at last in sight. There was a slight but definite improvement in trade conditions during the year, and the good effect of this is reflected in the fact that not only is unemployment now negligible, but that in some districts there is even a shortage of labour.
Rubber, our most important agricultural product, began to rise in price in April. The rise continued until June when the price steadied, only to rise again in December. At its present figure this commodity is now definitely profitable to small-holders owing to their very low overhead costs. The price of sago was maintained on a reasonably profitable level, thereby ensuring a livelihood for the large Melanau population of the coast, and jelutong rose sharply in July and August, enabling Dayaks and other natives to earn some much-needed ready- money. Pepper and copra are both in the doldrums, but this is partially offset by the striking increase in the cultivation of tobacco. During 1932 imports of this product showed a marked decrease, and the demand for the local product continues to be satis-factory and to give employment and small profit to a large number of Chinese. There was also a large increase in padi-planting, and just before the harvest the largo areas of Chinese-planted padi, around Sibu and in the Rejang generally, provided a most gratifying sight. It can safely be said that this crop has proved the salvation of many Chinese, particularly those in the Third Division whose rubber gardens are not yet in bearing. As regards trade in general, although statistics for the current year are not yet available, there is little doubt that the figures for 1933 will be better than those for 1932.
No survey of the year’s trade would be complete  without a reference to the gold mining at Bau and Bidi. In October there were no less than fourteen establishments in these districts mining for gold by the cyanide process, and it is interesting to note that the total monthly production of gold by all the mines is very nearly equal to the Borneo Com¬pany’s monthly output during the latter years of their operations in upper Sarawak. This gold mining has incidentally been largely instrumental in solving the unemployment problem in the First Division.
As regards native affairs, the Dayak troubles were finally settled in March, the police patrols being withdrawn from the Kanowit area in April. As a result of the attitude of the Ulu Ai Dayaks, Lubok Antu was re-opened as a station under a European officer in January, and was garrisoned by a detach¬ment of Constabulary. Penghulu Kana came down to Kuching in February to answer for his conduct in connection with the Asoon affair, and was dismissed his poet by His Highness the Rajah in November, Both he and Asoon were then informed that they would be kept permanently in the Kuching Constabulary area across river, and would never be allowed to return to their own country. It is hoped that this punishment—a severe one for Dayaks— will prove a warning to any other Dayak chiefs whose loyalty to His Highness the Rajah is not as firm as it might be.
The Chinese throughout the State were unaffectd by political disturbances elsewhere, and with the exception of a resurgence of secret society activities in the Third Division, remained quiet and con¬tented. The secret society alluded to was discovered in March, and the ensuing prosecution resulted in the conviction of nineteen persons who will be deported on the expiration of their sentences. It is hoped that this last ease may end for the time being the incessant gang feuds that have occurred in Sibu and other districts during the past few years.
A number of important administrative reforms took place during the year. On May 24th the Fourth and Fifth Divisions' were amalgamated, a senior District Officer being appointed to Limbang, and the former Fifth Division being placed under the control of the Miri Residency, which was raised to a Class IA appointment. In October the European officer was withdrawn from Matu and posted to Sarikei which station became the centre of the administration of the Lower Rejang. So important has this district now become thiat it is understood that a third administrative officer will shortly be appointed to Sarikei. It may be men¬tioned in passing that on one occasion the monthly trade figures for Sarikei exceeded those of Sibu
There were two major departmental re-organi¬zations dining the year, the Land and Survey Departments being amalgamated during February, and the Education Department being abolished on April 1st. The work of this Department was divided between the Secretariat for Chinese Affairs and the Secretariat for Native Affairs, the former assuming control of all the Chinese schools in the State, the latter taking charge, through the Divi¬sional Residents, of native education.
Perhaps the most important new legislation was the enactment on August 1st of the Criminal Procedure Code, the need for which had long been felt. At the same time, a new Courts Order was brought into force; this Order unified all previous Orders and Notifications relating to court work, and revised the powers and scope of existing Courts. Magis¬trates were divided into four classes. the Police Court was substituted for the previous Magistrate’s Court, and a new Court entitled the Petty Court created. On the date of the enactment of this Order a Notification was published for the first time granting magisterial powers to a number of Native Officers. This step is important as it marks a definite advance in the policy of granting to natives an increasing share in the Government of the country.
Other important Orders include the Land Settle¬ment Order, which lays down the future land policy and procedure, the Municipal Order, the Adminis¬tration of Deceased Persons' Estates Order, and the Prisons Order. Each of these brings into action reforms which were undoubtedly necessary and which will do much to facilitate the efficient administration of the State. The year also saw the publication of the new General Orders and the collation-of all State Orders and Notifications now in force into two volumes, with an appropriate index. It may be stated that the slump, if it has done nothing else, has triumphantly vindicated the policy of the Rajahs of Sarawak, which has been consistently adhered to since it was laid down by Sir James Brooke. This policy, which has before now been described by those not conversant with the true nature of traditions of the country as "backward,” has now most signally proved its worth. At the end of three years of one of the worst depressions in history, Sarawak emerges with no unemployment. a balanced budget, and no debt.
In the light of present circumstances it is fortunate that this country did not succumb to the temptation—so prevalent a few years ago— to institute ambitious and spectacular "development” programmes, which would now be proving not assets, but definite liabilities. As it is, it is possible to look on the position of this country and the achievements of the past year with real satisfaction.
To turn to more personal matters, the chief event of the year was the marriage on June 1st of Dayang Leonora to the Earl of Inchcape. All communities in Sarawak joined in wishing Her Highness all happiness and good fortune in the future.
Among the visitors welcomed during the year were Mr V. L. O. Sheppard, O.V.E., and Mrs. Sheppard. Mr. Sheppard arrived in connection with the re-organization of the Land and Survey Departments, and the Land Settlement Order is largely due to his advice. In November Dr Khalid Sheldrake and Mr. Khalid Simpson, both well- known as leaders of Mohammedan thought in the West, arrived at Kuching, and were given a warm, welcome by the Mohammedan community. 
Local and Personal
DECEMBER.
Under the patronage of His Highness the Rajah, a tuba fishing was held in the Santubong River on Saturday, 16th Decem¬ber. His Highness the Rajah, accompanied by Her Highness the Ranee, Dayang Valerie and party, left for Santubong on Friday 15th. Except for occasional light showers the weather was fine and a very enjoyable day was spent by all communities. Many hundreds of Malays, representatives of all Kampongs, attended the fishing. The catch was not plentiful at the start but increased in quantity and size towards the afternoon, when a number of magnificent malang were caught.
His Highness the Tuan Muda left for Singapore by s.s. Vyner Brooke on  20th November. His Highness left Singapore for England by s.s. Comorin on 24th November. We take this opportunity of wishing His Highness bon toyage and au revoir. We are informed that The Countess of Inchcape is Chairman of the Ball Committee for the “Prosperity” Ball, which will be held at Grosvenor House On 17th January, in aid of the All Saints Hospital, Southwark.
A most enjoyable dance was given by the Acting Government Secretary, Mr. C. D. Adams, and Mrs. Adam's, at the Residency on Saturday the 23rd Mr. G. Solosa and his orchestra rendered an excellent programme of music and dancing was continued until the early hours.
As usual any party given by Mr. and Mrs. C. D. Adams is a success, and this was no exception.
Seven guns were fired front Fort Marg-herita at 6 p.m. on 17th, to announce the start of Bulan Puasa.
Mr. and Mrs. J. S. W. Bean left for Singapore on 20th November on their way home to England on leave to be followed by retirement. We wish both Mr. and Mrs. Bean good luck and long life.
Beginning with the plane leaving Singa¬pore on Sunday, 31st December, Imperial Airways will maintain a weekly service between London, Alor Star and Singapore. The planes from London are due to reach Alor Star at 5.30 p in on Mondays, staying overnight, and reach Singapore at 10 a.m. on Tuesdays. Planes are due to leave Singa¬pore, on the homeward journey, at 12.30 p.m. on Sundays and Alor Star at 6 a .m. on Monday s.
We welcome to Kuching Mr. F. R. K. Kitto, who has joined the Land and Survey Department. Mr. Kitto arrived by m.v. Marudu on the 4th December.
Amongst. visitors for the Christmas and New Year festivities were Mr. J. B. Archer, Resident of the Second Division. Mr. P. M. Adams, Resident of the Third Division, Mr. and Mrs. W. S. B Buck. Mr. and Mrs. W. H. Kelley, Mr. Nigel Hughes, Mr. R. G. Aikman, Mr. E. H Elam and Mr. S. G. Hansom.
New Year’s Eve.
On New Year's Eve Their Highnesses the Rajah and Ranee entertained the whole European Com¬munity to a dinner and ball at Astana. Fancy dress was worn, and as usual the ladies came in such charming and original costumes, that our reporter was quite unable to divert his glances from such a galaxy of beauty. For that reason we are unable to tell one readers much about the mens’ costumes
Rohin Honda. Fairies, and other dainty apparitions flitted about, and dancing and cards passed the time away until just before midnight, when an immense circle was formed. On the stroke of midnight “Auld Lang Syne" was played and the customary salutes exchanged. ft is perhaps impossible to think of a more depressing year than 1933—although our leader writer apparently thinks otherwise—so there is every hope that 1934 will bring good luck to all—at least that is our earnest hope. — (Contributed.)
Obituary.
It is with deep regret we have to announce the death of Captain H. de Windt at Bournemouth on 30th November. Captain De Windt served in Sarawak from 1872 to 1873 as Private Secretary and A.D.C. to His Highness the Rajah. He was a brother of Her Highness the Ranee Margaret and accompanied Their Highnesses the Rajah and Ranee on their first visit to the Baram River in July, 1872. We beg to tender our sincere sympathy to Their Highnesse the Rajah. Ranee and Ranee Margaret at their sad loss.
HARRY DE WINDT.
Our London correspondent cables news of the death of Harry de Windt, a former A.D.C. to bis brother- in-law. Rajah Charles of Sarawak. Harry de Windt was nearly 80 years of age and during bis long and restless life had travelled probably further than any other man of his time When be was 20 years old, having just left Cambridge he went out to Sarawak and his many expeditions into the interior created in him the spirit of wandering in strange ways and in strange places Leaving Sarawak be went to China and marie his way from Peiping to France by land. Two years later he went to Russia and getting on horseback rode into India by way of Persia. After a time wandering in Siberia, de Windt attempted to travel from New York to Paris by land. He nearly perished in the Behring Straits, but was rescued by a whaler which lauded him back in North America. Hethen explored the Klondike goldfields and in 1900 was back again in Russia tonring the country for the Daily Express His articles in that newspaper were so popular that the next year he was sent off on the journey he bad once before attempted, from New York to Paris by land. This was his last ambitious and successful journey for on bis return to civilization be was knocked down by a taxicab at Marble Arch which left him crippled as an  adventurer The loan who was most at home in great spaces and unbeaten tracks then settled down in Switzerland and contented himself with writing of bis experiences and the dangers he had undergone.—Straits Times.
The Administration of the Mandated
Territory of New Guinea.
G. W. L. TOWNSEND.
[Note.—The article printed below is taken from the Journal of the Royal Geographical Society. Apart from its great general interest, it has a peculiar appeal for those directly engaged in the administration of primitive tribes in Sarawak.]
The Territory of New Guinea, which is adminis¬tered by Australia as a “C” class Mandate, comprises all of the former German New Guinea Protectorate south of the Equator except the island of Nauru. The total area is approximately 91,000 square miles, 70,000 of which are on the mainland of New Guinea, the remainder being made up of out¬lying islands. For administrative purposes, the Territory is divided into seven districts, those on the mainland being Sepik, Madang, and Morobe; those
of the islands, Manus. Kieta, New Britain, and New Ireland. In only two districts are all the native inhabitants under complete Government control, Manus and New Ireland. New Britain and Kieta have still small areas of unknown country; but the greater portion of the mainland has yet to he explored.
From 1914 until 1921 the Territory was in military occupation by Australian naval and military forces. With the advent of civil administration in May, 1921, a policy of exploration and extension of Government influence by means of peaceful penetration was adopted. District Officers were to prepare maps of their districts in areas under the following five degrees of influence : (1) Area under complete Government control; that is. an area into which an unarmed native constable could go for the purpose of arresting a wrongdoer and where he could call upon the natives generally to assist him. (2) Area under partial Government control; that is, an area into which native constables could go in order to arrest a wrongdoer, but where assistance from the other natives could not be relied upon. (3) Area under Government influence; that is. an area where a European officer and his native police would not be resisted if affecting arrests, and where the lives and properties of visiting Europeans and natives would be quite safe. (4) Area penetrated by patrols; that is, an area where Government patrols had penetrated without encountering opposition, but where proper contact with the natives had not been made. (5) Unknown area.
For the most part, the coastal ranges of the main¬land lie back but a few mites from the sea, and the inhabitants of the narrow coastal plains had almost all been brought under control by the German administration. The task which confronted the present Service was to get into touch with the mountain peoples; and this proved very difficult, mainly on account of the very wild and rugged country. The mountain population was not large  and had therefore all the more country to move about in. As practically every village distrusted its neighbour, houses were always built in almost inaccessible positions, and two sections of a village which could call to one another across a ravine might be 6 to 8 hours distance by road. The language problem complicated matters, for one might say that every 10 miles found a different tongue or dialect being spoken. District Field Staffs were small, usually consisting of a District Officer, an Assistant District Officer, and two Patrol Officers, and it was rarely possible, owing to heavy routine work, to allocate more than one officer for penetration work. The normal length of a district coast-line would be 300 miles, and at odd intervals along the beach would be coconut plantations, mission stations, trade stores, and other centres of European acti¬vities. District headquarters would also, of course, be on the coast.
All natives working as labourers in plantations, or working as personal servants, are employed under an indenture system; and there must be regular inspection by the District Staff of all places of employment to see that the conditions of indenture are being observed by both employer and employee. All villages under complete and under partial control must be visited at least once a year for general administrative purposes. In addition to the field routine, office work is considerable. A district¬ magistrate, cither the District Officer or his assis¬tant, must always be available for Court duties. A
District Officer is Coroner, Authorised Justice for Marriages, Collector of Customs, and Senior Inspector of Police. Since only one officer at a time may be available to open up new country a system of base camps is devised. An officer, accompanied by ten or twelve native police constables and with sufficient carriers for- the transportation of camp equipment and supplies, proceeds to that portion of an area under influence which has been selected by the District Officer. A site for the camp is selected, and there the carriers erect rough leaf-and-timber shelters for the personnel and stores. If the officer were to establish himself in a village the enemies of that village naturally would decline to receive the patrol, and it would be impossible to persuade any strange natives to visit. A site must be chosen therefore which does not indicate friendship for any particular village, but to which all may come.
The patrol is not dependent on villages for supplies, but it is not long before natives begin trading their field fruits for steel goods, salt, cloth, and other trade articles. As soon as contact has been established in this way with the surrounding villages, the officer begins to patrol the area. Natives, like all other human beings, loathe inter-ference in domestic matters, and quickly see the point when urged to build a rest-house on the village outskirts in which Government officials and other visiting Europeans with their foreign native sonants may stay without inconveniencing the villagers. Native huts in mountain country are always built on the ground for the sake of warmth; but it is desirable that the rest-house, like the huts of the base camp, be built, European fashion, some feet off the ground, and the result generally is that the services of a constable are called is to act as an  instructor.
When a rest-house has been completed, the patrol visits the village and remains there a few days, distributing small presents to mark the occasion. The patrolling officer is in constant touch with head¬quarters on the coast by means of police runners, and receives a constant supply; of lemon and orange cuttings, and pineapple and banana suckers, and these are planted out at the rest-house. The village is made responsible for the care of the plants, and all fruit eventually borne is put at the disposal of the natives. Visiting Europeans are entitled to purchase, fruit, and all such payments are usually made by means of trade twist tobacco.
Although there is no system of hereditary chief-tainship every village has one authoritative man who leads in warfare and also in village dancing festivals, and this is the man who receives the Government appointment of luluai, or village headman. His authority over the village is confirmed and he is issued with a cap of rank, blue-peaked with one wide red band around it. He is entrusted with the Village Book in which is entered his name and the date of his appointment. In time it will contain the names of the men. women, and children for census purposes. When possible, a tultul is chosen from the village. A tultul is appointed to assist the luluai, and he is the official interpreter for his village. It is essential therefore that he speak pidgin English, which is, so to speak, the only common language in New Guinea. Should there not be available a native of good character with this qualification, the luluai is asked to select a man to go to headquarters to be taught. Four or five months are sufficient, and upon appointment he is given a blue-peaked cap with two narrow red bands around it.
Within a few weeks of the establishment of the base camp the news has gone around the whole country-side that the Government has established a village and is ready to exchange many valuable things for native foods; moreover that it is a peace¬ful camp and willing to make friends with every one. One day a small party of armed natives appears at the camp, and it is obvious that they are from the unknown area. They have no sooner arrived than they are anxious to depart, so are given a few gifts and told to come back again and bring as many friends as they like. Within a week they will return, perhaps with representatives of other villages. Neighbouring luluais are sent for, and should there be any outstanding quarrels they are there and then adjusted. The party is not so anxious to clear out this time, and very probably before the strangers depart the leader is asking his erstwhile enemy where he got his beautiful hat.
Within a few weeks the officer receives an invitation to visit the strange people in their village, and then commences a little by-play. It is doubtful whether the patrol will have time to go and visit, because there are such a lot of presents to be distri¬buted, for one thing. "Why not come and distribute them in my village?" says the old man. How can I get there." says the officer, "when there are no roads?" With this cupidity aroused, the old man makes light of that difficulty, and it is finally arranged that a visit will be paid when a road has been cut from the camp to the village; and when this has been done, the first step towards the opening up of new country has been made.
 On the day appointed, a feather-bedecked party of natives arrives to guide the patrol to the village.
 They still carry arms, because after all the Govern¬ment is only a new friend and has for some time been living among their enemies. The police carry loaded rifles, because after all they have only seen these natives in the camp, and the road might easily lead through a ravine or under a cliff. However, the village is reached without incident, and on its out¬skirts the warriors, some of whom have been keeping parallel to the patrol.’ hidden in the bush. for the last half-hour, are assembled. The patrol halts, clothing and equipment are fingered and examined, and the white skin of the officer pinched, scraped, and tested with a wet finger to see if the colour is lasting. It is as well if the officer is not ticklish, because chuckings under the chin and pairing of navels come next. These signs of friendship given and received, the village is entered, and the women in turn satisfy their curiosity.
Under a large tree are many wooden bowls heaped high with cooked yams, taro, and sweet potato, smoking hot from the earthenware pots, and garnished with scorched pig—one could not call it roasted—and pathetic-looking smoked flying-fox. The police are all smiles, hut the officer experiences a dreadful sinking feeling, for he knows that some or all of it most be attempted. After a lot of scrambling and pushing guests and hosts seat them¬selves on the ground around the bowls. It is noticeable that there is not room for some of the hosts, who stand, with their bows and spears, a little apart; as it happens, one of the constables, feeling sick and unable to eat, leans on his rifle with his back to a broad tree, immediately behind the officer. He is observed to wink at the sergeant opposite him.
The chief guest tries not to see that his host flattered himself upon his powers of ejection when attempting to send a stream of betel-nut juice
beyond the food bowl in which he was at that moment raking for a succulent but very foul-looking piece of taro for his guest. Trying to keep his mind oil the food and watching with interest the men and women, only a sudden warmth on his bare knee draws the officer's attention to an impossi¬ble piece of guts being pressed upon him. However, a show of eating it has to be made until the watchful sergeant creates the necessary diversion which enables the dreadful piece to be slipped to one of the prowling dogs. Another portion of the pig is handed to one of the constables, and though what is Raid cannot be heard, the expression on the face of the recipient together with the roars from the men and the giggles from the women make it obvious that another "smoking-room” joke has been born. Baked sweet potato and fresh sugar-cane need no apology, and these round off the feast. With much licking of fingers and appreciative belch¬ing the front row moves back, and there is then room for the standing men. The sick constable declares himself to be well again, and sits down with them.
Persuading the chief host to smoke a cigarette, and then lighting one for himself, allows the officer to refuse, without discourtesy, the much-sucked bamboo pipe. During the period of digestion, a count is made of the houses and the number of the inhabitants is estimated. With the old man to point out and name the villages on the mountains beyond, a rough sketch-map is prepared. Later the whole village would be addressed, perhaps through two or even three interpreters, and the aims and objects of the Government made clear, and the assertion that they would materially gain by "belonging to the Government" is given point to by the distribution of gifts. Care is taken to see that the old women are not forgotten. Care is also taken to see that the new road is traversed before dark.
After perhaps three months, the lime comes for the base camp to be broken up and a return made to headquarters on the coast. An invitation is issued to all villages with whom contact has been made to came and feast and dance at Government expense. The one condition laid down is that no weapons shall be brought into the camp, those carving them on the road must cache them before coming in. Luluais and tultuls of the villages which will be passed through en route to the coast are sent for. because there is more likelihood of the natives of the interior coming ont to the coast if they have already met the officials of the villages through which they must pass.
When all the natives have assembled at the camp on the day fixed, each village gives a display of its own particular distinctive dance, and the bird of paradise feather headdress worn would turn many a collector green with envy.
After the dancing comes the feast of pigs and native foods purchased from neighbouring villages, and in this the officer is thankful that he need not participate. When the feasting is done, all those natives from the area under influence and probably some from the uncontrolled area who had promised to accompany the patrol to the coast to see for themselves the many wonderful things the white man did and made, are assembled in the centre of the camp and the other natives made a wide circle. Down the centre are aligned the luluais of the villages on the route out, each in his proper order; and the stage is set for a pantomime of the trip out.
Each lululai represents his village and the sergeant
pretends to be the District Officer at headquarters.
The officer then assembles his party and they go
as far as the first luluai, who steps out to meet
them and gives them a hearty welcome. The
officer pretends to inspect the village and is pleased
with its cleanliness and order. The party then
moves on to the next "village,” where the same
performance is repeated. When the luluai of the
village which would mark the normal end of a day's
march is reached, he pantomimes sleeping for the
night; and thus the watching natives, by counting
the number of "sleeps,” know how many days the
journey to headquarters would take. Upon arrival
at "headquarters." the sergeant welcomes the
travellers with extravagant gestures of delight, and
the next few "days" are spent in eating and sight-
seeing. At this stage the officer withdraws from
the party, and when the time comes for the natives
to return to their villages, the sergeant calls a con-
stable and instructs him to escort them home.
Back along the line of luluais the party goes,
being this time welcomed as old friends: perhaps
two "villages” might dispute for the honour of
entertaining them for the night. Finally the party
reaches “home" and the escorting constable adds
his mite to the play. He mimics the return to bis
village of one of the natives from the unknown
area, and takes the squatting circle of onlookers to
be his own countrymen gathered to bear of his
experiences. His eyes bulge with the recounting
of the wonderful things he has seen and bis stomach
distends when telling of the good things he has
eaten. Amids roars of appreciative laughter he
draws forth from an imaginary bag and hands
around for wondering inspection the many gifts ho
has received.
All the guests are sent home before dark, but at
intervals; and at least one armed constable accom-
panies each party until the cached weapons arc
reached. The natives from the coast who carried
in the camp equipment in the first instance have
long since returned home, and it is now the duty
of the nearest village to provide sufficient carriers
to transport the patrol gear to the next. The work
is not heavy and each carrier, of course, receives
payment. After the return of the patrol to head-
quarters. small detachments of native police visit
the new area at irregular intervals, so that touch
should not be lost. It is not long before European
recruiters of labour work through, and in the next
few years each village has members who have
worked for white men, and are strong advocates of
the white man's Government.—(To be concluded.
The “Landas” in Full Swing.
EXCEPTIONALLY ROUGH WEATHER
OFF THE SARAWAK COAST.
The past month has been remarkable for the severity of the weather all along the coast. Heavy seas, rain and high winds have been the rule, and conditions have in general been so bad that shipping has suffered considerably. In several cases it was found impossible to adhere to normal sailing schedules.
The s.s. Auby left Kuching on 16th December, and arrived at Poll Point at 6 p.m. On clearing the point very heavy seas and a gale of wind were encountered, and Captain Belson considered turning
back to Kuching for shelter, since his vessel was
making only 4 knots. Since he wished to catch the
tide at Bintulu and Belait, however, lie decided to
carry on; constant heavy rain reduced the visibility
to no more than a mile in all directions, and Captain
Belson states that the weather was the worst he has
ever experienced off the Sarawak coast.
Shortly after noon on 17th December, when, as
far as could be ascertained, the vessel was off Oya,
he decided that the small headway he was making,
coupled with the increasing rain, wind, and sea,
rendered it impossible for him to make Bintulu on a
dead lee shore. He therefore hauled up for Miri,
but at 6 p.m.. being uncertain of his position, he
was compelled to anchor in thirteen fathoms.
The vessel lay at anchor all night, and at dawn
on the 18th. the weather having improved slightly
(though still raining). Captain Belson weighed
anchor and steamed in the direction of the Tatsu
river; he was able to pick up Kuala Balingian, and
thence he proceeded to Bintulu, arriving there at
1 p.m.
As an indication of the "dilating" the Auby
received, it may be mentioned that her awnings and
screens were smashed, that seas shipped across the
after-deck did considerable damage to deck cargo,
and that a water-barrel was washed off the fore-
castle-head. With the exception of this slight
damage, however, s.s. Auby,—whose seaworthy
qualities are well-known—came through her ordeal
unscathed
The m.v. Marudu, which was due at Pending
during the afternoon of 16th December, arrived off
Poh Point after dark and anchored about five miles
 out, expecting to enter the river during the after
noon of 17th December At ten o'clock in the'
 morning, however, a message was received that the
ship was unable to cross the bar and was proceed-
ing direct to Singapore. Among the passengers
 who were carried on to Singapore were Mr. R. K.
 Hardwick of B.N.B.. Mr. W. J. Chater and Miss
Olver. They returned to Kuching by the Marudu
 on 25th December.
On 20th December, the s.s. Gladys was unable to
. load any cargo at Miri, and the m.l. Chin, which
left Bintulu on 17tb December, bound for Mukah,
 had a narrow escape, from capsizing, but managed
 to get back to Bintulu safely.
A sago-schooner which left Oya on the 16th bound
for Kuching was wrecked off Kedurong, but for-
tunately without loss of life, the juragan and crew
successfully reaching Bintulu. Another schooner
which left Oya on the same day had a very bad time,
but was just able to crawl into Miri,— with all
sails missing.— (Contributed.)
Sarawak Library.
OLD SARAWAK.
From the Sarawak Gazette
61 Years Ago.
THE
SARAWAK GAZETTE
No. 64 FRIDAY. 16th MAY. 1873. Price 5 cents.
Further accounts from Acheen give particulars of the late engagements. The Dutch were twice repulsed in their attack on some outlying mud forts, with which they first came in contact; a third attempt, made in great force, was successful, but the fort when captured was found to be deserted. This earthwork mounted twelve large guns. The Sultan’s palace, strongly fortified, resisted all the attempts of the Dutch to carry it by storm. General Kohler WAS shot through the breast while lending one attack upon it. and his death is said to have had a most discouraging effect upon the troops. It is said that the Achinese force near the palace amounted to 10,000 fighting men. and their whole army to upwards of warriors. They are reported to be well armed with serviceable guns and to have plenty of ammunition. The Dutch troops, by last accounts, had entrenched themselves on the beach, under the guns of their ships-of-war. but the reckless bravery and superior numbers of the enemy occasion some apprehension of the security of the force.
Five white men are said to have been seen inside the Sultan's palace during the Dutch attacks. The Sultan himself, with his wives, had gone to the hills, leaving orders to light to the death. The tribes on the West coast of Sumatra are reported to have sent 18,000 men to add the Achinese, and the Dutch difficultly had been increased by the desertion of some native troops from Java and convicts sent with the army to make roads.
First Division News.
DISTRICT COURT.
November, 1933.
The Officer-in-Charge, Mr. E. A. Moore, reports;—
Appointments.—1 arrived from Sibil on 7 th November, aud took over the District Office from Mr. W. S. B. Buck, who sailed on transfer to Lundu on 11th November. Mr. W. H. O. C. Morice proceeded to Lower Rejang on 21st November
General.—His Highness the Rajah, accompanied by Her Highness the Ranee, Dayang Valerie, and Mr. E. S. Holl, Private Secretary to His Highness, arrived at Kuching on 13th November.
Mr. and Mrs. H A. Adams and MISS Adams also arrived at Kuching and are the guests of His Highness the Rajah.
His Highness the Tuan Muda sailed for England on 20th November.
The offices were closed on Armistice Day, 11th November
Upper SARAWAK DISTRICT,
November, 1933.
The Assistant District Officer, Mr. R. G. Aikman, reports -.
Agriculture.—The Daban Rubber Estates harvest¬ed 31,000 lbs. of dry rubber during the month. The rainfall at Bau was 585 inches. The highest recorded in 24 hours was 75 of an inch and the daily average was 17 of an inch. The rainfall for the mouth at Dahan Rubber Estates was 13'74 inches.
Staff.—Mr. E. H. Elam was gazetted to do duty in this district and he took up his duties on the 14th.
General.—Armistice Day, the 11th, was observed as a Public Holiday and the Government Offices were closed.
Gold Mining.—The Kim Huat Gold Mining Company, Limited, at Lobang Angin, Bidi Road, commenced leaching on the 20th. This brings the number of companies now operating by the cyanide process to fifteen. There has been a veritable flood of applications for gold-mining land during the month, and it may be said that interest in the mining business has never been so keen as at present. The general trend at present is in the direction of the Left-Hand Branch, though areas are still being taken up all over the district. Sixty-five General Prospecting Licences were issued during the mouth. Twenty applications for Exclusive Prospecting Licences were received and seven such licences were issued Two Provisional Mining Leases were issued during the month. The actual gold obtained by the following Companies for the month of November, 1933, was .
The Assistant District Officer, Mr. W. S. B. Buck, reports 
General.—I arrived from Kuching on M. L. Betty on 11th and look over the affairs of the district from Mr. E. H. Elam the following day. Mr. Elam left for Bau via Kuching by M. L. Betty on 13tb.
SADONG DISTRICT.
November, 1933.
The Acting Assistant District Officer, Mr. S. G. Hansom, reports: —
Agriculture.—The planting of padi bas now been completed everywhere and the area under cultivation is larger than usual. Delays in burning-off have not been general, as in last season, and given favourable weather, without abnormal depredations of pests, the output next year should be large.
Second Division News.
November, 1933.
Extracts from the Second Divisional Reports by Mr. .I. B. Archer, Resident:—
Mr. D. C. White arrived in Simanggang on 2nd November, to replace Mr. J. C. B. Fisher, who left for Kuching on 7th November.
I visited Engkilili from the 7th to the 9th. The bazaar was full of pepper and looked most prosperous. It is said that 1,200 Chinese have left Engkilili during the year.
The swamp padi in the Division is expected to be good, although there is the usual damage by pests. The Batang Lupar crops especially are looking splendid.
Simanggang DISTRICT.
November, 1933.
The District Officer. Mr. R. L. Daubeny. reports:
General.—The Resident, Second Division, left for a tour of the substations (Saribas and Kalaka) on 27th instant, and was still away at the end of the month.
Mr. Arundell, Assistant District Officer, Lubok Ante, visited the station from 21st to 25th instant in connection with upriver affairs.
Saturday, 11th November, was a Public. Holiday, Armistice Day. The two minutes' silence was duly observed, at the conclusion of which the Constabulary Buglers sounded the Last Post.
LUBOK Antu DISTRICT.
	November, 1933.
The Assistant District Officer. Mr. G. R. H. Arundell, reports:—
P. H'.D.—The bridle paths from the Ulu Engkari (N. Engkramoh) to Nanga Mujan by way of R. Bungkong in Lubang Haya is now under construction, as also is that from Nanga Sumpa to Nanga Miran on the other side of the river.
The Badau and Engkilili roads have bean cleared during the month.
Regatta at Simanggang. On Christmas Day there was a Regatta at Simang-gang, and in spite of the darned dull depression of these slump days most of the onlookers managed to have a most enjoyable day.
The whole proceedings were run entirely by the people themselves, and very well they did it too. There were no lack of entries and most of the races were, well contested.
There were the usual sideshows, including a terrifying bath in which little boys ducked their heads in order to pick up with their teeth the coins at the bottom of the bine mess. Other urchins fell off the greasy pole with never failing energy, whilst the wily celestials gradually tore the money off the Dyaks at such games as an oriental version of crown and anchor and other race-course gambles.
The victorious Constabulary football team were at last beaten—and the scratch eleven which did it convinces one that the days of miracles are not yet passed.— ( Conti ibuted.)
Third Division News.
SIBU AND KANOWIT DISTRICT.
November, 1933,
The District Officer, Mr. W. F. Dick, reports;—
Miscellaneous.— Mr. F. A. Moore left on 6th for Kuching where he has been appointed to do duty.
The offices were closed on 11th November, Armistice Day, and two minutes' silence observed at 11 a.m.
Lower Rejang.
November, 1933.
The District Officer, Mr. H. E. Cutfield, reports:—
Agriculture—The last of the pepper was reaped during the mouth, for this season, but there is still a lot in the bazaar, he traders being loath to ship while the price remains so low.
Trade;—Sarikei and Binatang.
The returns for the year up to date are quite satis-factory considering the low price of produce exported.
Oya AND DALAT.
November, 1933.
The Acting Assistant District Officer, Mr. N. E. Hughes, reports:—
Trade. The whole district is noticeably more pros-perous than it was even a year ago. This may bo attributed chiefly to the continuance of a reasonable price for sago. but also to the small rise in rubber and jelutong price*.
Large numbers of jelutong licences arc now being taken out by the Melanaus.
Kapit AND SONG.
November, 1933.
The Acting Assistant District Officer, Mr. F. L. Crossley, reports:—
Agriculture The Balleh, Gaat. and Mirirai padi is looking very fine, and a successful and early harvest is anticipated: The Sut and Mujong farms arc not very good, chiefly owing to incomplete burning.
Prospects for an engkabang crop are practically nil, pollenation having been prevented by the very heavy rainfall during the flowering period.
Trade.—As is usual at this period of the year, the export of rottans and damar has been heavy, most Dyaks taking advantage of the slack period between planting and harvest to work jungle produce Prices have been low.
Travelling.— I left Kapit with Abaug Abu Seman, N.O., on the 12th for an extended tour among the upriver Dyaks. In spite of very high water, Rumah Penghulu Temonggong Koh, some sixty miles above Kapit, was easily reached in a day in the new Government outboard, running time being a little under nine hours.


