WEDNESDAY, AUGUST 1st. 1934
Death.
BOYD.—At 13. Glencairn Crescent, Edinburgh, on 27 th July. 1931, Beatrice Rachel Boyd, U.B.K., widow of the late P. J. Stirling Boyd, D.L., and daughter of the late Professor Thomas Laycock, M.D„ Physician in Ordinary in Scotland to Her Majesty Queen Victoria, and beloved Mother of T. Stirling Boyd, Chief Justice of Sarawak. Aged 77 years.
Announcement.
PEREIRA.—Thin is to certify that on the 22nd April, 1934, I, Cecil William Pereira. Eurasian, ex-Chief Clerk of the Sibu Medical Department, had embraced the Faith of Islam mentally, morally and physically, and henceforth my Muslim name shall legally Mohammed Ali Pereira as from 22nd April, 1934.
JULY.
By kind permission of His Highness The Rajah, the Autumn Race Meeting of the Sarawak Turf Club will take place on the 1.3th and 15th October. 1934. We publish in the columns of this issue the provisional programme and other details.
Mr. A. R. Snelus and Mr. A. F. R. Griffin arrived at Kuching by m.v. Marudu on 24th July. Mr. K. H. Digby proceeded to Miri on the same boat. All three gentlemen have joined the Sarawak Civil Service.
Mr. O. T. Dussek, Principal of the Sultan Idris Training College, F.M.S., accompanied by Mrs. Dussek, paid a short visit to Kuching by s.s. Vyner Brooke on 6th July. While at Kuching Mr and Mrs. Dussek were the guests of the Resident, Mr. W. F. Dick, and Mrs. Dick.
During the month Mr. A. W. D. Brooke, accompanied by the Secretary for Native Affairs. Capt. R E. Le Sueur, toured the Second and Third Divisions.
The following announcement appeared in the British Official Press of 16th July:
The Admiralty reports that a sailing boat belonging to H.M.S. Devonshire con¬taining three officers of that ship was heavily fired on by Turkish sentries on the mainland opposite the island of Samos at about 3 p.m. on Saturday. Surgeon- Lieutenant Dentist J. W Robinson, R. N., was hit and lost overboard His body has not yet been recovered. Lieutenant T. A. K. Maunsell. R.N., received a flesh wound in the shoulder. H.M.S Devonshire is at present on a visit to the Greek island of Samos which adjoins the Turkish coast. The matter is being urgently investigated through the usual diplomatic channels.” The marriage of Lieutenant T. A. K. Maunsell to Miss Elizabeth Brooke, second daughter of His Highness the Tuan Muda, took place in August, 1932.
Work on the foundations of the new Cinema, nc.tr the Government Printing Office, was started on June 18th, and the work is now proceeding rapidly. We are informed that the work will be sufficiently far advanced by the end of September to permit of the installation of the electrical equipment and the most modern sound apparatus. The Theatre, the construction of which is in the hands of Messrs. Gammon (Malaya), Ltd.. Singapore, will have a seating capacity of live hundred and seventy- eight.
M.V. “Rejang.”
An interesting event during the past month was the arrival in Kuching on Saturday, 2lst. July, of the Sarawak Steamship Co.'s new motor vessel Rejang.
On Sunday, 22nd July, at 11.30 a.m.. His High ness the Tuan Muda and a representative gathering of Europeans were shown over the ship by the Directors of the Company, and Mr. K. N Black in a short speech proposed the toast of ' Lon' life and prosperity to the Rejang. In the afternoon the Malay community, represented by the Datu Shah Bandar, Abang Haji Abdillah, Datu Imam. A. H. Morshidi, Datu Hakim. A. H Moasili. Datu Mentri. Inchi Mohammed Zin. Datu Amar, Abang Suleiman and Datu Bentara. Haji Hashim were taken round the vessel, and at 1.30 p.m. the ship was thrown open to members of the Chinese com¬munity.
For her size and construction, it would be no exaggeration to say that the Rejang embodies all possible comfort with a maximum of speed and commercial utility.
The first-class accommodation consist of six two-berth cabins fitted with a “cot’ type of bed. also an overhead folding "Pullman" bed. A dress¬ing-table, arm-chair. wash-basin with running water, and a wardrobe complete with full length mirror are included in the furnishings of each cabin. All fittings and fixtures are either finished in chro- mium-plating or bronze. Every cabin is fitted with an electric fan, and each berth has a reading lamp fitted above it which can be controlled from the bed itself.
The floors of the cabins are laid with rubber tiles, while two of the cabins are fitted with "Dunlopillo” rubber mattresses made by a special process from Malayan rubber.
The first class accommodation also includes bath-rooms and lavatories fitted with shower-baths and tiled floors, all fittings being chromium-plated.
A spacious and well-lit lounge and dining-room forward complete the first class accommodation.
The second-class has accommodation for twelve passengers, there lining four three-berth cabins, each with an electric fan and running water.
Large cooking galleys to meet both European and Asiatic requirements have been constructed on the main deck, a small lift from the European galley carrying food to the first-class serving room.
The crew's accommodation is situate in the fo'c'sle forward, while the captain and gunner have cabins on the bridge.
For cargo purposes. Rejang has two hatches, a large one forward and a smaller one aft. The derricks for the foremost hatch are driven by a double crude oil engine-driven winch of the "Deutz" type.
In addition the ship is specially filled with deep tanks to carry palm oil when required. This space can also be used for carrying fuel oil in bulk as cargo; which cm be pumped into shore containers or other ships at will.
The ship has been well supplied with modern life- saving and fire-fighting appliances, steel lifeboats and copper life buoys being carried, also a sufficiency of fire extinguishers and hoses.
The overall length of the Rejang ia 134' 6", moulded breadth 26', moulded depth 9' 3". The propelling power is obtained from a, six-cylinder
Deutz" Diesel engine of 260-B.H.P. which, when on trials, developed a speed of 10 3/4 knots; this engine. a very compact and workmanlike construction, is of the direct air-reversing type.
A 20-B.H.P. Diesel engine is also fitted as an auxiliary for driving a 10 Kilowatt dynamo for ship lighting and auxiliary water-pump.
A special three-throw plunger pump for fresh, sanitary and bilge water is driven oil the main engine, also a spare dynamo which supplies ship lighting while at sea.
The Rejang was built in Singapore by the Singapore Harbour Board who can certainly he con¬gratulated on having made an excellent job of her.
While still on the stocks, H.H. the Rajah inspected REjang and showed great interest in her construction. .
H E. the Officer Administering the Government, Mr. A. Caldecott, mid a large party were on board when the vessel ran her acceptance trials, and expressed their approval of the design and comfort of the ship. in fact we feel it safe to assert that there are few. if any, ships of the snipe size in Kashin water- that equal the Rejang.—(Con- tributed
We publish the following notice, which may be of interest to our married readers.—Ed.
School at Cameron Highlands. Opening date, July 6th.
A Branch of the Tanglin Preparatory School, Singapore, will open at Cameron Highlands. This school will be known as “Tanglin"-Cameron Highlands' Boarding School for European Children.
The object of the School is to provide education for European children up to the age of 13 years and to prepare them for Common Entrance examinations, so that it will be possible for them to pass directly into Public Schools on their return to England
Sati.
The sun had sunk fierily behind the town, and the high-noted confusion of Singapore's traffic had become subdued. Only in the main streets a few single-deck trolly trams went on their way, and motors hurried towards the cinemas and big hotels where there was dancing."
Thus picturesquely R.A.L. introduces to readers of the Birmingham Post a description of his first experience of sati. On his way to the banquet he did not see many women. "Only a few of the sad, pretty ladies passed slowly in their noiseless rick¬shaws. We walked across the quiet open space sur¬rounding the cathedral, and along the sea front, passing small companies of young men, often walk¬ing hand-in-hand. Here and there were groups, squatting on the well-kept grass at the sides of the road, playing cards in the light of a street lamp. An occasional seller of sweetmeats lingered in the hope of a few customers	" His stroll took him
to the short street which runs down to the sea  opposite Raffles Hotel and there : "We sat down on a foot-high plank bench long enough for two. in front of the diminutive counter The cheerful youth grinned as he plied his pain-leaf fan over the glowing embers. How many would the loans eat ? The cook's hand hovered over the pile of tine bamboo skewers stuck into morsels of meat roiled in thin spiced paste. Ten? Twenty? We would start with ten. So, spreading them out five at a time. he held them over the charcoal, fanning it to greater heat, while he dexterously turned and cooked our meal. Meanwhile, a still more youthful assistant had peeled and sliced into our plates a fresh cucum¬ber. On the counter were two basins of thick curry sauces—one with red chillies, the other sweetened —and into these we dipped our meat and ate. It might have been mutton or goat, but was chicken that night, and perfectly cooked and tender The sauces were delicious and the cucumber crisp and cooling. We did not stop at ten. " That is one of the most pleasantly faithful descriptions of the local scene that we have read in a Home newspaper for a long time.- Straits Times. 
Taxis Oust Rickshaws.
A FLEET OF FORDS IS SINGAPORE.
The problem of travelling short distances in Singapore was, until recently, distressing to all who were not car owners. Although the disappearance of the rickshaw may be regretted by sightseeing visitors, its obvious disadvantages, particularly as regards speed and lack of protection against rain, have rendered it unable to compete with a newer form of public passenger transport first introduced into Singapore during May. 1933.
This consists of a fleet of over sixty 8 h.p, Ford saloons which may be hired in much the same way as London taxi-cabs. The standard rate is appro¬ximately 6d. for the first mile, and 3d. for each subsequent half-mile or part thereof. These charges are a good indication of the low running-costs of the 8 h.p. Ford, for not only do they allow a reason¬able margin of profit, but they permit Universal Cars, Ltd., Ford dealers of Singapore, who are responsible for this organization, to insure then- patrons to the extent of nearly ±600 per passenger.
This is not the only way in which this new taxi¬cab service in Malaya can give points to the more haphazard methods which obtain in England, and
in London especially. The practice of tipping the driver, which is not infrequently a source of embar¬rassment or annoyance here, has been eliminated. The drivers (who, incidentally, are all natives of Malaya) are given ten per cent, of their takings, over and above their regular wages. The taxi-cabs can be ordered by telephone, the fare being reckoned only during the time the vehicle is occupied by its hirer. Again, London taxi-cab drivers please note!
The fleet covers a total of some 170,000 miles per month. Each vehicle is given thorough inspection at the end of each 1,000 miles' running, and is washed and serviced every day.
We understand that the popularity of this service in Singapore has made it possible to organize similar facilities in Penang and Ipoh, and that it will not be long before Malacca and Kuala Lumpur are also provided with fleets of 8 h.p. Ford taxi¬cabs. or "Yellow Tops," as they are known locally, because of the colour scheme adopted. The Ford Times.
Mr. E. E. F. Pretty.
MARRIAGE to Miss M. J. BOUGH-HISSEY.
The wedding look place yesterday at st. Mar¬garet's, Westminster, of Mr. Eric Ernest Falk Pretty, of the Malayan Civil Service, and Miss Merrall Josephine Bough-Hissey, the only child of MRS. Franklin Dyall, wife of Mr. Franklin Dyall the well known actor, who gave her away. 	
The Bev. L. N. de Burgh took the service which  win fully choral. The bridesmaids were the Misses Brooke, daughters of Her Highness the Bailee of Sarawak, Miss Epstein, daughter of Mr. Jacob Epstein, Miss Diane Vickery, Miss Susan Wilson and Miss June Melville.
Mr. Pretty joined the Malayan Civil Service ns a Cadet in 1914. His present appointment is chat of Secretary to the High Commissioner, He returned from home leave recently and obtained special leave in order to fly home to be married. On his arrival home, however, the wedding was postponed for a short while on account of family illness.
The bride's stop-father, Mr. Franklin Dyall, is one of Britain's foremost actors and played the leading part recently in "The Limping Man." —Straits Budget.
Endurance.
We have heard it said that 20 miles is a fair day's journey for a pony. Does this mean that 20 miles IS Its limit and that 21 may kill it'? Or that 20 is just sufficient to make it feel tired? We favour the latter. Returning from Ranau every month, our ponies are called upon to do 22 miles one day and 27 the next. On one occasion we did Rendagong- Tambunan (that is about 35 miles) in the day with¬out a change, and our arms were nearly pulled out of their sockets, trying to hold the pony in along the last 7 miles of plain.
On another occasion, while we were sliding up and down Perenchangan lulls, our syce at Hanan heard that his wife was ill in Tambunan, and without so much as a by your leave, left Kanan on’ one of out ponies at 5 30 a III and arrived in Tambunan at 5 p in. Distance 50 miles. We didn’t know this till some time afterwards, and certainly the pony showed no signs of fatigue when we arrived Iwo days later. Strange to say, "the syce is still alive'—H,N B. Herald
OLD SARAWAK.
From the Sarawak Gazette
47 Years Ago.
THE.
SARAWAK GAZETTE
1887. FRIDAY, 1ST APRIL, 1887. Price 10 cent.
First Division News.
DISTRICT OFFICE.
May, 1034.
The District Officer, Mr. R. L. Daubeny, reports:—
General — On 1st June the Samarahan District was taken over by the Assistant District Officer, Sadong. taxes, etc , still being paid in at Kuching.
UPPER SARAWAK DISTRICT.
June, 1934.
The Acting District Officer, Mr. R. G. Aikman, reports:—
Agriculture.—The Dahan Rubber Estates, Ltd, harvested 25,000 lbs. of dry rubber during the month.
The rainfall at Bau was 2’81 inches. The highest recorded in 21 hours was '54 of an inch and the daily average was 09 of an inch.
The June rainfall at Dahan Rubber Estates was 5’81 inches, 
Golf Minings—The Kim San Gold Mining Syndicate at Jebong commenced leaching on the 1st. This brings the number of companies operating by the cyanide process to twenty-eight. Probably On account of the deplorable failure of companies there has been a decided slump in gold prospecting activities throughout the district.
Unfortunately it is probable that two more companies will shortly cease operations in the near inture. due to lack of ore and to careless prospecting and faulty assaying in the early stages.
The monthly output of gold, however, continues to be steady at an average of over 2,000 ozs. a month whilst the price remains very high.
Four General Prospecting Licences and four Exclusive Prospecting Licences were issued during the month.
The actual gold obtained by the following com-panies for the month of May, 1934, was: 
The following Gold Mining Statistics for the first half of 1934, which I have compiled, may be of interest.
The complete 1932 and 1933 figures are also given for purposes of comparison.
General — On 20th, Mr. A. W. D. Brooke, accom¬panied by the Secretary for Native Affairs, Captain R. E. Le Sueur, arrived on H.H.M Y. Maimuna to pay a short mid informal visit to the station The visitors walked out to Lundu Sebuyau Kampong where they were received by Orang Kaya Jumat and returned through the. Malay Kampong of Siling. The Maimuna sailed again early next morning for Kuching.
SADONG DISTRICT.
June. 1934.
The Acting Assistant District Officer, Mr. S. G. Hansom, reports: -
General. — I was absent from Simunjan during the first half of the month, when I visited Kuching, from whence I made a tour of the Samarahan River. From Kuching, I proceeded overland to, Serian. where several days were spent settling outstanding matters. While at Serian, I took the opportunity of inspecting the three miles or so of constructed road on the far side of the Sadong River. I reported the result of my inspection to the Resident, First Division, as it appears that, owing to serious landslides at the Rasau Pass. and the apparent deviation or alteration of natural watercourses since this part of the road was constructed, it may be considered desirable to abandon the existing pro¬posed route of the road on the Simanggang side, in favour of a possible route which would involve the construction of the bridge further up-river than Serian. This in turn, would involve a complete alteration in the present scheme for the position and sites of the proposed new Government Station and Bazaar at Serian. I am awaiting a decision from the Resident, in collaboration with the Director of Public Winks, before taking further action in this  matter.
Kuching Amateur Association
Football League.
A casual glance through the League Tables as enumerated below will find the Medical A standing is the only unbeaten team in the First Division, followed by the Municipal Team in the Second Division who are also undefeated so far.
The First Division match played between the S.C.F.A. and the Constabulary A was most unin¬teresting and the display fell far short of expectations. The spectators were filled with the greatest surprise when they found the former team badly beaten by a wide margin of 8—4 It was quite noticeable that through the absence of their two good players, Weng Sheng and Kheng Hai. the strength of S. C. F. A. had weakened down considerably. Most of the goals scored for the Constabulary team were achieved by Michael Juan, who carried out the attack well With this defeat it looked as if the S.C.F.A. were going to encounter a heavy drop on their goal average, but they managed to make up the shortage by winning 8—1 at the expense of the Alang Alang, whom they met m the second round.
One of the biggest games that is worth any mention is the match between Medical A. anil Constabulary A. Both sides gave an excellent ac-count of themselves and a display of a really good game was enjoyed by all from beginning to end. A penalty was awarded to the Medical A, when, unfortunately for the Constabulary A, Deli handled the ball within the goal area. Francis Tan took the kick and netted the ball without making any mistake. This gave the Medical A. a lead of 1—0 in the first half. On the resumption of the game both teams were playing evenly with many chances of scoring
General — On 20th, Mr. A. W. D. Brooke, accom¬panied by the Secretary for Native Affairs, Captain R. E. Le Sueur, arrived on H.H.M Y. Maimuna to pay a short mid informal visit to the station The visitors walked out to Lundu Sebuyau Kampong where they were received by Orang Kaya Jumat and returned through the. Malay Kampong of Siling. The Maimuna sailed again early next morning for Kuching.
SADONG DISTRICT.
June. 1934.
The Acting Assistant District Officer, Mr. S. G. Hansom, reports: -
General. — I was absent from Simunjan during the first half of the month, when I visited Kuching, from whence I made a tour of the Samarahan River. From Kuching, I proceeded overland to, Serian. where several days were spent settling outstanding matters. While at Serian, I took the opportunity of inspecting the three miles or so of constructed road on the far side of the Sadong River. I reported the result of my inspection to the Resident, First Division, as it appears that, owing to serious landslides at the Rasau Pass. and the apparent deviation or alteration of natural watercourses since this part of the road was constructed, it may be considered desirable to abandon the existing pro¬posed route of the road on the Simanggang side, in favour of a possible route which would involve the construction of the bridge further up-river than Serian. This in turn, would involve a complete alteration in the present scheme for the position and sites of the proposed new Government Station and Bazaar at Serian. I am awaiting a decision from the Resident, in collaboration with the Director of Public Winks, before taking further action in this  matter.
Kuching Amateur Association
Football League.
A casual glance through the League Tables as enumerated below will find the Medical A standing is the only unbeaten team in the First Division, followed by the Municipal Team in the Second Division who are also undefeated so far.
The First Division match played between the S.C.F.A. and the Constabulary A was most unin¬teresting and the display fell far short of expectations. The spectators were filled with the greatest surprise when they found the former team badly beaten by a wide margin of 8—4 It was quite noticeable that through the absence of their two good players, Weng Sheng and Kheng Hai. the strength of S. C. F. A. had weakened down considerably. Most of the goals scored for the Constabulary team were achieved by Michael Juan, who carried out the attack well With this defeat it looked as if the S.C.F.A. were going to encounter a heavy drop on their goal average, but they managed to make up the shortage by winning 8—1 at the expense of the Alang Alang, whom they met m the second round.
One of the biggest games that is worth any mention is the match between Medical A. anil Constabulary A. Both sides gave an excellent ac-count of themselves and a display of a really good game was enjoyed by all from beginning to end. A penalty was awarded to the Medical A, when, unfortunately for the Constabulary A, Deli handled the ball within the goal area. Francis Tan took the kick and netted the ball without making any mistake. This gave the Medical A. a lead of 1—0 in the first half. On the resumption of the game both teams were playing evenly with many chances of scoring
IMPENDING VISIT OF MIRI SOCCER TEAM.
The Association was especially requested by the Miri people not to field a real Selected Kuching XI to play against them ns the visiting team is not representative of the Miri League Teams. Their visit here is purely in connection with Cricket matches against the Kitching Europeans. The Association is therefore fielding a team of medium strength co play the first match against the visitors on Saturday, 4th August, and will put up a Selected Kuching XI to play the second match on Monday, 6th August, against Miri and the Rest combined. It is anticipated that the latter will turn out a more interesting game.
Owing to the impending visit of the Miri Football Team who has arranged to play two matches here on the 4th and the 6th August. 1934, the League Fix¬tures, viz Medical .4. v. S.C.F.A. and Medical B.p. Gersik originally fixed to lie played off on the above dates will be postponed to the end of the League Competition as hereunder:—
Second Division Medical B. o. Gersik to play on the 29th August, 1934.
First Division Medical A. v. S.C.F.A. to play on the 1st September, 1934.
THE "JAMES BUCHANAN" CUP COMPETITION.
Applications are invited from Government Depart-ments and Mercantile firms to compete in the above Cup Competition, 1934.
There will be no entrance fee. Applications should be sent in not later than 12 o'clock noon on 20th August, 1934. A meeting of those who have entered the competition will be held later.
The competition will commence from the first week of September, 1934.— (Contributed.)
SARAWAK TURF CLUB.
PROVISIONAL PROGRAMME FOR THE AUTUMN
MEETING, 1934.
FIRST DAY, SATURDAY, 13TH OCTOBER, 1934.
RACE NO. I [2.30 p.m.
THE TUAN MUDA'S CUP.
Value $250. A piece of plate of the value of $106. Presented by His Highness the Tuan Muda with $150 added. Second to receive $100. Third $40.
A handicap for Division I ponies. Distance 6 furlongs. Entrance Fee $10.
RACE NO. 2	[3.0 p.m.
THE SATOK STAKES.
Value $250. Second to receive $100. Third $40.
A handicap for Division II ponies. Distance 5 furlongs. Entrance Fee $10.
RACE NO. 3	[8.30 p.m.
THE B.C.L. STAKES.
Value $250. $50 presented by The Borneo Company. Limited, with $200 added. Second to receive $.100. Third $40.
A handicap for Division HI ponies. Distance 6 furlongs. Entrance Fee $10.
RACE NO. 4	[4.0 p.m.
SIMPANG TIGA STAKES.
Value $350. Second to receive $100. Third $40.
A handicap for Division I ponies. Distance 3 furlongs. Entrance Fee $10.
RACE NO. 5	[4.30 p.m.
THE MATANG STAKES.
Value $250. Second to receive $100. Third $40.
A handicap for Division II ponies. Distance 4 furlongs. Entrance Fee $10.
RACE NO. 6	[5.0 p.m.
THE PENDING STAKES.
Value $250. Second to receive $100. Third $40.
A handicap for Division III ponies. Distance 8 furlongs. Entrance Fee $10.
RACE NO. 7	[5.30 p.m.
THE RANEE'S CUP.
Value $250. A piece of plate of the value of $100 presented by Her Highness the Ranee with $150 added. Second to receive $100. Third $40.
A handicap for ponies of any Division. Distance 1 mile. Entrance Fee $10. $5 refunded to non¬acceptors. Handicap published on the Course. Post Entries allowed at $20 but no refund.
SECOND DAY, MONDAY, 15TH OCTOBER, 1934.
RACE NO. 1	[2.30 p.m.
THE SLUMP STAKES.
Value $250. Second to receive $100- Third $40.
A handicap for Division I ponies. Distance 5 furlongs. Entrance Fee $10.
RACE No. 2	[3.0 p.m.
THE COUNTRY STAKES.
Value $250 presented by the Turf Club. Second to receive $100. Third $10.
A handicap for Division II ponies. Distance 6 furlongs. Entrance Fee $10.
RACE No. 3	[3.30 p.m.
THE SARAWAK STAKES.
Value $250. Second to receive $100. Third $40.
A handicap for Division III ponies. Distance 5 furlongs. Entrance Fee $10.
RACE NO. 4	[4.0 p.m.
THE TURF CLUB STAKES.
Value $250. Second to receive $100. Third $40.
A handicap for Division I ponies. Distance 4 furlongs. Entrance Fee $10.
RACE NO. 5	[4.80 p.m.
THE STATES SPRINT.
Value $250. Second to receive $100. Third $40.
A handicap for Division II ponies. Distance 8 furlongs. Entrance Fee $10.
RACE No. 6	[5.0 p.m.
THE GOLD-MINERS’ PURSE.
Value $250. Second to receive $100. Third $40.
A handicap for Division III ponies. Distance 4 furlongs. Entrance Fee $10.
RACE NO. 7	[5.30 p.m.
THE RAJAH'S CUP.
Value $300. A piece of plate value $150 presented by His Highness the Rajah with $150 added. Second to receive $100. Third $40.
A handicap for ponies of any Division. Distance Round the Course (about 1.1/3 Miles.) Entrance Fee $10. $5 refunded to non-acceptors. Handicap published on the Course. Post Entries allowed at $20 but no refund.
REGULATIONS.
Penalties.—Winners of any race at this Meeting after publication of weights shall carry a penalty of 7 lbs. for each race with a maximum of 11 stone 7 lbs.
Allowance.—Professional Jockeys who are Sara¬wak subjects and have not ridden more than two winners under Sarawak Turf Club Rules, may claim an allowance of 7 lbs.
Entries.—All nominations, accompanied by Entrance Fees, description of ponies, and declaration of colours, to be made to the Secretaries not later than noon, 22nd September, 1934.
Scratchings.—Owners scratching ponies before 5 p.m. on 12th October for first day and 5 p.m. on 14th October for second day, will receive back half their entrance fees.
Handicaps.—For First Day will be posted on the Notice Board at the Sarawak Club at noon on 29th September, and for the Second Day at noon on 14th October.
Course.—Will be open for training on 1st September, 1931, at 5.30 a.m.
Ponies.—Must run on the First Day to be eligible for entry in Races on Second Day.
Any Borneo Pony of not more than 14 hands in height may be imported from B.N.B. and shall be eligible for entry in Races open to Sarawak Ponies provided that their sires and dams were foaled in Borneo.	
All new ponies shall carry top weight on the first day in the division in which they are classified, which shall be as follows :—
Division	I over 13.2 hands to 14 hands
II 13.0 hands to 13.2 „
III under 13 hands
Owners.—Are requested to see that their syces and jockeys obtain necessary badge for entrance to Paddock.
Totalizators and Cash Sweeps as usual.
Prizes 20% reduction if under 6 entries.
Communications to be made to
THE BORNEO COMPANY LIMITED,
Secretaries, Sarawak Turf Club.
Members are requested to apply to the Secretaries for necessary Badges or obtain them at the Grandstand.]
Fourth Division News.
MAY, 1934.
Extracts from the Fourth Divisional Reports by Mr. J B. Archer, Resident
His Highness the Rajah, and party, landed in Miri at 4 p.m. on the 26th. A guard of honour was furnished by the Sarawak Constabulary, under the command of Mr. W. L. Sochon. Assistant Commissioner. On landing His Highness was met by the Government Official., Mr. and Mrs. Noble, and the leading Natives and Chinese. The next day His Highness visited the Government Offices. His Highness, and party, left for Haram, via Kuala Baram, on the 28tb. I aocompanied His Highness during his tour of the Division.
Baram was reached in the afternoon of the 28th. His Highness left again on the 31st, calling in at Bakong, where the Vameo Co.'s Sawmill was inspected. This is a flourishing concern, and the Manager. Mr. Sam Cook, informed ns that the mill was working to its full capacity. The night of the 31st was spent anchored al Kuala Baram.
No matters of importance were brought before His Highness. At Baram large numbers of Kayan and Dyak chiefs and others were collected and a tuba fishing, regatta and a display of dancing were arranged for His Highness and his party.
June, 1934.
On the 1st of the month His Highness the Rajah and party were at Kuala Baram in H. H. M. Y. Maimuna. After inspecting the lighthouse we left for Kidurong, arriving there and anchoring at 9 at night. The next morning His Highness made his official landing at Bintulu. In the afternoon His Highness inspected the Government and Chinese Schools and walked round the bazaar, and at night His Highness watched the illumi¬nations. His Highness left for Sibu at noon on Sunday
MIRI DISTRICT.
Mau. 1934.
The Acting District Officer, Mr. J. O. Gilbert, reports
BINTULU DISTRICT.
May, 1934.
The Acting District Officer, Mr. J. G. Anderson, reports
General.—His Highness the Rajah, accompanied by the Resident, Fourth Division, and party, visited the station on 2nd June, leaving for Sibu on the following day.
His Highness visited the Malay and Chinese schools, walked all round the kampongs and, at night, drove round the station and kampongs by car. The kampongs and roads had been tastefully decorated and illuminated by the Datu and the kampong people, who turned out in large numbers to welcome His Highness,
BARAM DISTRICT. 
May, 1934.
The District Officer. Mr. F. II. Pollard, reports:—
Agriculture- -Rainfall amounted to 6-86 inches in eight days. As was feared the upriver padi crop is practically speaking, a complete failure.
Trade the Vamco Timber Company turned out 45 40 tons of hardwood and 163.17 of softwood. This is the best month’s output so far and it is anticipated that there will be a considerable increase shortly after certain alterations to the mill have been carried out. Timber from upriver was beginning to arrive at the end of the mouth.
Foreign trade returns are as under
General.— His Highness the Rajah, and party, accom¬panied by the Resident, Fourth Division, Mr. J. B. Archer, visited the station from 28th to 31st. On 29th a successful tuba fishing was held at Luagan Tujoh and a Regatta took place the following day. His Highness the Tuan Muda's Challenge Cup being won by P. Sadi Kedut (T. Tiri) of Long Miri.
On 11th, accompanied by N.O. Tuanku Mohamad and Forester Lumber. I visited Beluru. The new bazaar is nearly finished and the kampong is now flourishing.
LAWAS DISTBICT.
May, 1931.
The Assistant District Officer. Mr. I*. M Scott, reports:—
Agriculture.—The Lawas (Sarawak) Estates. Limited, exported 32,928 lbs. of dry rubber during the mouth of April.
Rainfall.—The following rainfall WAS recorded
Agriculture.— The Lawas (Sarawak) Estates Limited exported 37,408 lbs. of dry rubber. during the month of May, 1934.
Rainfall.—Lawas 23'26 inches.
