THURSDAY. NOVEMBER 1st. 1934
Engagement.
Mr. P. M. SCOTT and Miss M. F. BACKUS.
The engagement is announced between Petar Murray Scott, Sarawak Civil Service, and Mary Frances, daughter of Mr. and Mrs. J. G. Backus, of Fordingbridge, Salisbury, England.	
Local and Personal
OCTOBER.
His Highness the Rajah, accompanied by Her Highness the Ranee, Dayang Elizabeth, Dayang Valerie and"Mr. J. C. V. C. Brooke, arrived at Kuching on Monday, the 1st. This is the first visit to Sarawak of Mr. Brooke, son of the Tuan Bunsu, the late Captain H. Brooke.
We take this opportunity to extend a hearty welcome to Their Highnesses and to Mr. J. C. V. C. Brooke.
His Highness the Tuan Muda left Kuching fur England via Singapore on Sunday, the 7th. His Highness sailed by s.s. Rawal¬pindi from Singapore on the 12th. We wish His Highness bon voyage and an enjoyable leave.
The Autumn Meeting of the Sarawak Turf Club took place on Saturday and Monday, the 13th and 15th October. Among the visitors to Kuching for Race Week were Messrs. C. D. Adams, P. M Adams, J. J. Hill, A. Macpherson, F. L. G. Crossley, F. A. Moore, D C, White and G. Farrelly.
We welcome back to Kuching Mr. F. G. Day and Mr. N. E. Hughes by T.S.S. Vyner Brooke on 31st and Mr. H. E. Cutfield by M. v. Marudu on the 15th and Mr. and Mrs. James Scott, accompanied by Miss Scott, by T.S.S. Vyner Brooke on the 4th.
We publish a notice of the engagement of Mr. P. M. Scott, Acting District Officer, Lawas, to Miss M. Backus, niece of Capt. and Mrs. C. P. Lowe We take this oppor¬tunity to wish them both long life and every happiness.
A dance was given, at Astana, by Their Highnesses, the Rajah and Ranee, on Monday 15th. An excellent programme of dance music was rendered by G. Solosa and his dance orchestra. In spite of a long and rather wearing afternoon at the races, danc¬ing continued until the early hours. A most enjoyable and fitting ending to race week.
A most enjoyable dance took place at the Residency on Saturday the 13th. The host and hostess, the Resident, Mr. W. F. Dick, and Mrs. Dick, are too well known for the success of their parties to need further com¬ment here.
All flags on Government buildings were half-masted on the 18th October, the day of the funeral of the late King Alexander of Yugoslavia.
Since the publication of our last issue, in which was included the obituary of Mr. C. H. Willes Johnson, we have received further details, as follows:—
Mr. Charles Hope Willes Johnson died suddenly on the 18th September at Droit- wich. He had had a very severe attack of sciatica and been under treatment in a London nursing home. He had recovered sufficiently to leave for Droitwich on the 13th September, but on the evening of the 18th he passed away suddenly from heart failure.
Mr. Johnson was born in March 1871 and after being educated at Marlborough and Jesus College, Cambridge, he became a solicitor and entered the firm of Torr & Co. as a partner. After a short time in their Bedford Row Office he took charge, in the beginning of the present century, of their Westminster Office and acted as a solicitor and parliamentary agent there for many years. He acted as Government Agent in London from 1912 until his retirement in 1930.
In 1931 Mr. Johnson was made one of the Trustees of the Rajah of Sarawak Fund and was appointed Chairman of the Trustees.
He was Honorary Secretary and Treasurer of the Sarawak Association in London, and had held this post since its inception.
The funeral took place on the 22nd September and he was buried in Chipstead parish church cemetery. The following were present at the service.
Mrs. Willes Johnson (widow), Miss Willes Johnson (daughter). Mr. C. Willes Johnson (son), Mrs. E. R H. Pollard (sister), Mr. II. C. Brooke Johnson (brother), Miss Pollard (niece), Mrs. H. C. Brooke Johnson (sister-in-law), Mrs. Harold Cooper (sister-in-law), Mr. John Cooper (nephew), Mr. Vivian Cooper (nephew), Mr. G. F. Alexander. Mr. F. F. Boult, Sir Percy Cunynghame, Mr. & Mrs. Angus Irwin, Mr. T. A. Kirkham, Mr. J. C. W. MacBryan, Mr. A. F. Pollard, Mr. & Mrs. R. Pawle, Mr. A. A. Rennie, Mr. J. A. Smith, Mr. A. B. Ward, and wreaths were received from the following, amongst many others :—His Highness The Rajah, His Highness The Tuan Muda, The Sarawak Association, The Sarawak Oilfields, Messrs. Torr & Co., Society of Parliamentary Agents.
We are informed that the first performance of the Kuching Amateur Dramatic Society will take place at the Sarawak Club on Saturday, 17th November. We look forward to this event with pleasurable anticipation.
Echoes of the Past.
(We publish the following copy of a letter written in Sarawak in the stirring days of 1869 which may be of interest to our readers.—Ed.)
Details of John William Moy’s Service are as follows:—
John William Moy arrived in Sarawak, February, 1864. left again March, 1864. Came out again 19lh June, 1866. He joined the General Service as from 1st January, 1864, apparently unpaid. On 1st June, 1866. be was granted a salary of $50 p.m. On the 1st August, 1866. be was appointed Sub-Inspector of Police, his pay was increased to $55 in September, 1867, when he was appointed "in Charge of Police,” which post he held for two years and resigned in 1869.
SARAWAK,
April 29th/69.
Mr DEAR TED,
1 send you a few lines trusting they will meet you all well and happy at home as thank God we are at present, although not quite so quiet as one could wish.
Our fellows have had a brush with some Pirots on the Coast at Bintulu a Pirot boat hove in eight and took a few prisoners arid then two Chinese boats bound for Sarawak laden with Stores and $5,000 which they tbe Pirots took wounding five of the crew and making the rest prisoners. But through their ignorance of the Coast they fell into the trap.' They mistook our headland for another and at day-light found themselves in front of the Bintulu Fort, but still out of range of the guns. Mr. Sinclair, the Assistant Resident of Bintulu, got together some of our Malays and put to sea in chase and succeeded in sinking the Boat and Killing all the crew except two small boys who are now in Sarawak one being wounded by a spear wound in the side. I am sorry to say the $5,000 was lost with the Boat. The Captive boys state that they have robbed many other small boats and taken money and anything of value from them not forgetting to Kill or make slaves of the crews—And they tell us their are ten other Boats Armed and well manned with Pirots on the cruise but they are afraid to come near us until they know the Government steamers have other work on hand, a thing Possible but still not very Probable. A few days ago I received private intelli-gence of a gang of Chinese forming a secret society to get together a lol of men and come down and take Sarawak from us. I sent men into their Company and found tome truth in the news. I have two of the Ringleaders in Prison and hope to get more before long. If they come we are well prepared tor them, extra sentries on duty at the Fort and all Handswell Armed. Under my Pillow I have twenty rounds of Rifle Cartridge fifty rounds of Revolver Cartridge my revolver loaded Rifle to and sword. I think I am allright. I believe they know we are on the look out for them all the natives are on the watch so that we have not much to fear. I have not time to send much news this time.
You must send our united love home and I should like to see Alfred's and Bessie's Cart de Visit very much. Now with kindest love from us all.
We remain, Your loving Sister and Brother. (Sgd.) J. L. A. MAY. 
Ravings of Remus.
The other day a Young Lady said to her Boy Friend "Let's go somewhere quiet, where wo won’t be disturbed," and he said "Bight ho, the Museum's the place, no one ever goes there !"
When the Museum heard about it, it was dread¬fully annoyed, had all the cases cleaned up, the exhibits polished, burked the ones it didn't want any one to see, spread the others out and labelled them with such full instructions that the place was soon swarming with people quenching their thirst—for Knowledge.
They saw great Lizards racing across the walls— because it was Race Week—and the Crocodiles followed suit. The Fishes got all het up, and the Turtles squabbled about how many eggs the Curator had eaten at Lundu, which sounded like a Grim Fiery Tale.
Two old chaps came along clad in a few yards of cloth lots of long hair and a stray mosquito or two. "Tuan,” they said, "this place isn't what it use to be. When we were here before, that was here and this was there, and where's the Milano Egg Whisk that used to be over-by-there ? We no longer know our way about here, and we're going home. What do you want to put everything out clearly for, so that we can see it without any trouble—its too easy, there's no fun at all. Now what have you got in there? Come on, out with it, lets have a look	That's
what we like to see, something we've got to look for because it isn’t on show."
So the man put everything back as it was but the Lady Fren wouldn't have any more to do with Mm because he had ever altered them at all and years later ho retired with a broken nose when he tripped over the cobwebs and tell down Lis spiral staircase.— (Contributed )
Tauchnitz.
What Briton travelling on the Continent without the ability or the inclination to read books in a foreign language has not felt gratitude to the firm of Bernard Tauchnitz? For many years until quite recently that firm which was established a 100 years ago, issued regularly each fortnight a contemporary English novel for Continental readers. Five thou¬sand such volumes stand to Tauchuitz's credit, and now the firm has been sold to a big company in
Leipzig, after a failure in the regularity with which the books in English had been issued for so long. All business houses dealing with foreigners have been affected by Germany’s new and stringent currency regulations, and the difficulty of making payments to English publishers is believed to have been at the bottom of the break in Tauchnitz's punctuality and the subsequent sale. There have been authors who have believed that this cheap Continental edition of their works was detrimental to their own royalties mid who disliked the firm in consequence. It is more likely that the opposite is true, and that Tauchnitz introduced many new readers to writers whose names would never have become known outside their own country,— Straits Times.
OLD SARAWAK.
From the Sarawak Gazette
62 Years Ago.
THE
SARAWAK GAZETTE
No. 45 TUESDAY. 10TH JULY. 1872. Price 5 cents
ITEMS.
We hear that the proposed new hotel is unfait accompli, that a contract tor the building has been made, and that the house will be finished in four months from now. and that extensive orders have gone to England for stores and wines.
We wish the undertaking all success and hope that it may receive substantial support from Singapore. We cannot count how often we have heard the reason given for not having paid a visit to Sarawak that "there was no place to stay." Certainly those more adventurous spirits who have trusted to chance have had no reason to complain of wants of hospitality, and we have hoard of no ono having to sleep in the streets, yet Englishmen, when a pleasuring do like independence and don’t care to be beholden very much to friends for board and lodging to Ray nothing of strangers.
We expect shortly to have an advertisement of the hotel in our columns, and will print the tariff of charges as soon as made known. The name is the “Rajah's Anns” and the sign a Badger.
The following books are offered for sale in the Library (or one month from date. Price twenty-five cents per Volume to subscribers and non-subscribers.
First Division News.
UPPER SARAWAK DISTBICT.
September, 1934
The Acting District Officer, Mr. R G. Aikman, reports :—
Agriculture—The Dahan Rubber Estates, Limited, harvested 22,200 lbs. of dry rubber timing the month. The rainfall at Bau was 8’43 inches The highest recorded in 24 hours was 175 inches and the daily average was 28 of an inch. The rainfall at Dalian Rubber Estates was 6'89 inches.
The Land Dyaks around Bau and Jagoi have burned off their farms for the coming year and padi planting will shortly commence.
The Left-Hand Branch Dyaks us usual are behind¬hand and are not likely to be ready to plant for some weeks.
Gold Mining. No fewer than four companies commenced leaching for gold during the month.
The Kim Loong bold Mining Syndicate at Jebong commenced on the 5th, the Ban Ilin Lee Gold Mining Syndicate at Ginning Kapur on the 17th. the Seng Lee Gold Mining Syndicate also at Gunong Kapur on the 19th, and Thye Tick Gold Mining Company at 1st mile Bidi Road on the 23rd
This brings the number of mines actually leaching for gold by the Cyanide process to twenty-three, eight mines having closed down.
The total production of gold for Upper Sarawak for the month of August, 1934. amounted to 2,360 ozs.
Eight Exclusive Prospecting Licences and four Mining Leases were issued during the month
The actual gold obtained by the following com¬panies for the month of August. 1931. was:—
Lundu DISTRICT.
September, 1984.
The Assistant District Officer, Mr. G. F. J. Pegler, reports
SADONG DISTRICT.
September, 1934.
The Acting Assistant District Officer. Mr. S. G. Hansom, reports:—
Agriculture. The burning off and planting of padi lands is now practically completed everywhere. It is noticeable that larger areas at land come under padi cultivation each successive year, particularly in the Malay parts of this district, between Gedong and the Coast. Every effort has been made to stimulate the Natives in this respect, and to impress upon them the relative superiority of this land for purposes of padi planting, and the large potential market that Kuching affords for locally-grown rice, which should most, certainly, and no doubt even-tually will, be exported from Sadong.
General.—The Regatta attracted a considerable amount of local attention. Racing Boats attending from the Samarahan, Moyan, etc., and one 30-paddle Dyak boat from the Batang Lupar. A very success¬full day was spent, which was thoroughly enjoyed by everybody.
The number of genuine racing boats which attended WAS not large, as Sadong Natives have discontinued the building of these in recent years, when there has been no Regatta Excellent sport was however obtained with Balok, Bandong Ikan and Dyak Bong.
Dyaks and Malays from all parts of the district, attended in large numbers, and the local bazaar cannot have been so crowded for some years.
The Meeting took place on Saturday, 13th and Monday, 15th, October. The weather was for from kind, a shower of rain on the First Day and a deluge on the Second, but in spite of it all a most enjoyable Meeting was experienced Large crowds thronged ’he course on both days and the lines of “dangau’' on each side of the course presented the usual gay spectacle of bright, "sarongs” and scarves.
Many improvements have been made to the course by the Turf Club. The Judges' box, rather resembling the forward cockpit of a super Air Liner, and a large additional shelter for spectators beyond the Cash Sweep Offices. Their Highnesses, the Rajah and Ranee, Dayang Elizabeth, Dayang Valerie and Mr. J.C V.C. Brooke were present on both days. At the end of the races on the second day Her Highness the Ranee presented the prizes to successful owners.
Also ran:—September 7.11, Silver Blaze 9.7.
Kijang was in the lead when the field came in sight with Flying Fox net Far behind.. The two appeared to he level at the bend. hut Flying Fox fell back. Kijang won comfortably though Flying Fox made a great effort in the last furlong.
Third Division News.
SIBU AND KANOWIT DISTRICT.
September, 1934.
The District Officer, Mr. E. 0. Bruce, reports:—
Trade.— Local market price of Para rubber averaged $25 per picul. White pepper $47 per picul.
There is evidence that the Lanang Road and Selalo Sawmills are becoming less interested in timber export trade owing to demand for sawn timber locally.
OYA AND DALAT.
September, 1934.
The Officer-in-Charge, Mr. D. R. Lascelles, reports:—
Trade.—The price of raw sago has fallen a little, but it still remains fairly steady at 42 cents a passu in Dalat and 60 cents in the Kut. This is still a paying pro- position for the Melanau.
Fourth Division News.
MIRI DISTRICT.
August, 1931.
The Acting District Officer, Mr. J. O. Gilbert, reports 
September, 1934.
General.—The Miri regatta should have boon held on Monday 24th but owing to very rough weather the visiting boats were not able to arrive, so the regatta was postponed till 30th which turned out to be a perfect day The honours in the large races were mostly divided between the Brunei and Awat Awat boats. In the Championship race. Snipe I of Awat Awat and Napa Terabang of Brunei dead-heated for the first place.
On the evening of the 24th at 10 p.m. 26 shops of the Sibuti Bazaar were burnt to the ground. These shops were all roofed with leaf-attaps, and all in one block without any fire gaps, so once the fire started it was a hopeless task to do much salvage work. The 8 wooden shops in blocks of 2 with proper fire gaps were all saved.
BINTULU DISTRICT.
August, 1934.