FRIDAY. JUNE 1st. 1934.
Death.
CHAKRAVERTY.—At Kuching General Hospital on 15th May, 1931, at 1.50 run., after a very short illness, Sreejukta Kurnudini Devi, the dearly-beloved wife of S.C.S- Chakravarty, of Messrs. The Borneo Co., Ltd., Kuching, age 37. Deeply mourned and sadly missed.
Acknowledgment.
S.C.S. Chakraverty thanks all friends and relatives who sent wreaths and letters of condolence and all those who wore present at his wife’s funeral on the 15th May, 1934.
Local and Personal
MAY.
His Highness the Rajah, and party, left for a visit to the Fourth Division by H.H. MY. Mnimuna on Thursday, 24th May.
His Highness the Rajah will be sailing for England in s.s. Rawalpindi, scheduled to leave Singapore on the 22nd June, 1934. His Highness will be leaving Kuching by T.s.s. Vyner Brooke, on Monday, 18th June.
His Highness The Tuan Muda, accom¬panied by Mr. Anthony Brooke, will arrive at Kuching on Tuesday, 12th June.
H.M.S. Herald, Capt. E. F. B. Law, arrived at Satang Island on 18th May, and landed a party of thirteen, under the com¬mand of Lieutenant W. N. Fetch. We are informed that H.M.S. Herald will pick up this party on 30th of June, and then proceed to Kuching for a week-end visit.
Mrs. C. D. Adams left for Europe by s.s. Corfu on 25th May. Mr. C. D. Adams ac¬companied Mrs. Adams as far as Singapore. We take this opportunity to wish Mrs. Adams bon voyage and a pleasant leave.
Mr. R. F. Sinclair of the Customs Depart-ment returned from leave on 28th May, by s.s. Darrel. Mr. J. R. Outturn arrived by the same vessel. Mr. Outram has joined the Sarawak Civil Service and is, for the time being, doing duty in Kuching.
Mr. B. A. Trechman returned from leave by T.S.S. Vyner Brooke on 14th May.

In the last number of the Sarawak Govern-ment Gazette, dated 1st June, 1934, Mr. G. F. J. Pegler and Mr. D. C. White arc gazetted as having passed the Higher Stan¬dard Examination for Government Officers, and Mr. R. G. Talbot the Lower Standard.
We print the following extract from The Morning Post, Saturday, April 7th
“The wedding of Lieutenant-Commander Alfred Marcus Hughes, son of Mr. and Mrs. Edgar Hughes and grandson of Sir Alfred Hughes, Bt., and Miss Hope Francis Hope- Pritchard, daughter of Mrs. M. A. Hope- Pritchard, took place yesterday at St. Saviour’s Church, Walton street, S.W., Pre¬bendary Osborne officiated.''
Many of our readers will remember Lieu-tenant-Commander Hughes, when serving in H.M.S. Herald, and join us in wishing him and his bride long life and every happiness.
Mr. F. S. Drage.
TWENTY YEARS IN SARAWAK GOVERNMENT.
The death occurred in the General Hospital on Frida}’ of Mr. Frederic Sheldon Drage, who was for some years in the service of the Sarawak Govern¬ment.
Seventy-six years of age and active to the last, Mr. Drage was a well-known figure in and about the Arcade. Since his retirement on pension in 1900 he had held interests in many different Malayan concerns. Mr. Drage leaves one son.
Mr. Drage’s experience of life in Government service in Sarawak was spread over nearly 20 years. He joined as a Cadet in 1831 and his last appointment was as Ofiicer-in-Charge, Tatau
The funeral took place at Bidadari Cemetary on Saturday afternoon at 4 p.m. when the Ven. Arch¬deacon Graham "White officiated.
Among those present nt the graveside besides the son, daughter-in-law and granddaughter, were the following: Messis. C. V. Miles, N. T. Sagar, W. "Wilmot, II. E. Trenerry, A. M. Misso, Mr. and Mrs. C. A- Phipps, Mrs. Boudewyn, Mrs. Holmes. Mrs. Thompson and others.
Wreaths were received from his loving son Alec, his loving daughter-in-law Ethel, his loving grand¬daughter Fil, Mr. J. B. Myles and Mr. and Mrs. C. A. Phipps
Rubber Restriction.
The long negotiations over rubber restriction have been concluded at last, and the Governments con¬cerned. namely the Governments of the Straits Settlements, the Federated Malay States, the Un- federated Malay States, Labuan, Brunei, Nether-lands, India, French Indo-China, Ceylon, India, Burma, North Borneo, Sarawak and Siam, have agreed to limit the exports of rubber from their territories.
Each country has accepted a basic quota, that is to say a figure which shows the estimated* potential production 'if the country ; ami has agreed to appoint a representative to an I liternational Rubber Regulation Committee, which will settle from time to time what percentage of the basic quota may be exported by each country The percentage will be the same for all. with an exception in favour of Siam.
The basic quota for Sarawak is as follows:—
Former exports cannot be taken to be any indica¬tion of the potential output as the greater portion of the rubber of the country has never been tapped. It is estimated that at the end of 1933 there were 101,709 acres of mature rubber and 163,203 acres of immature rubber, most of which is rapidly approach¬ing maturity In 1935 it is probable that 250,000 acres of rubber will be tappable. On the low yield of 300 lbs. an acre the potential output would be over 33,000 tons as against a quota of 28,000 tons. The quotas, which at first sight appear generous, on examination seem to be fair in the absence of reliable statistics of the age of plantations, but they are assuredly by no means excessive. There is, however, a severe shortage of tappers in Sarawak, and this shortage, while it endures, automatically restricts the amount of rubber which can be produced
The main points in the Restriction Agreement are:— the restriction of exports to the given per¬centage of the basic quotas, the prohibition of the export of rubber unless it is accompanied by a certificate of origin, the prohibition of the import of rubber unless it is accompanied by a certificate of origin.the prohibition of the possession of stocks by any rubber grower exceeding 20% of the quantity of the rubber wholly grown, produced and removed from his holding during the preceding 12 months, or alternatively, a quantity equivalent to twice the amount ho is entitled to export during any one month, the limitation of the total of all other stocks of rubber in the territory to a quantity not exceed¬ing 12.1/2|% of the permissible exportable amount, the prohibition of the planting of rubber until 31st December, 1938, the prohibition of the export of any living portion of any rubber plant that may be used to propagate it. 
The vast majority of the rubber gardens in
Sarawak are owned by small holders, many of whom
are illiterate and who keep no written accounts of
their output. Very little data exist as to the poten-
tial output of individual gardens, and it will take
a considerable time to obtain such information.
The undertaking to limit exports and stocks
amounts to an undertaking to limit production, and
His Highness the Rajah has decided that the only
way in which this ean be done without causing
immense inconvenience and expense both to govern-
ment and to every one concerned in the rubber
industry in Sarawak will be to limit production by
declaring periodical tapping holidays by notification
in the Gazette.
Since a large measure of restriction is already
enforced automatically owing to the shortage of
tappers—a shortage which is not likely to be made
up because Government has no intention of relaxing
its present immigration regulations—it is improb-
able that long holidays will be necessary for some
time.
 Under the scheme there will be no interference
with the natural flow of rubber to the market after
it has left the tree. Dealers will be permitted to
buy and export ail the rubber they can. The
restriction by enforced holidays will be at the very
source, and the rubber grower will have no vexations
forms to fill up or licences to obtain. His duties
will be merely to stop tapping during declared holi-
days, to store uo large quantity of rubber in his
garden and to plant no rubber. Planting for
experimental purposes and re-planting of areas
already carrying rubber plants will be permitted
under licence.
Dealers will be required to render monthly
returns of their stocks and will be prohibited from
accumulating unusual quantities. Exports and
stocks will be closely watched, and. if the export
allowance is being exceeded, notice, usually one
month's notice, will be given of a tapping holiday.
This system has the merit of being the simplest
that can be devised and one which will spread the
incidence of restriction fairly between all producers.
It could not lie enforced in a country where there
were many employers of large tapping forces, or
where the compulsory tapping holidays would have
to be many or prolonged, and it can only be success-
ful in Sarawak—
if restriction by shortage of tappers con-
tinues, and
if the tapping holidays are loyally observed.
The Rubber Restriction Order published in the
Government Gazette of the 16th May, 1934, contained
an error in section 9 (ii) which has been corrected
in the Government Gazette of the 1st June, 1934.
The subsection should read "No person shall re-plant
rubber plants on any land carrying rubber plants on
the 1st June, 1934, provided that the Government
Secretary may license the re-planting of specified areas under conditions to be specified in the licence." In section 2 of the Order "re-plant" is defined aa "planting more than 30 rubber plants on any acre of any area carrying rubber plants at the commence¬ment of the Order." The effect of this definition on section 9 (ii) is that there is nothing to prevent a rubber grower from replacing individual trees which have been destroyed by accident or disease so long as the number of replacements does not exceed 30 per acre.

Amsterdam to Kuching in 12 days.
A few years ago the suggestion that the distance between Amsterdam in Holland and Kuching in Sarawak could be traversed in the space of 12 days would have been met by derision ; but it is now a fact, and anybody availing themselves of the excellent service put forward by the K.L.M. air-line can leave Amsterdam on a Thursday and find themselves in Kuching on the following Monday week—nine days in the air and 21 days by Ixiat between Singapore ami Kucuing
One invariably hears such protests as—the expense —uncomfortable and noisy means of transport—small amount of luggage permissible—the probability of crashing.
To deal with the first, the single fare from Croy¬don to Singapore is £180—less 1(1% if one is a Government Official, that is £162—again one de¬ducts the passage money allowed by Government ami the actual fare comes down to just over E100- Agaiu one must remember that the fare includes all accommodation and transport on route and what one expends outside that is entirely up to oneself. Admittedly such places us Home, Athens, Cairo, Baghdad, Calcutta ami Bangkok rather lend them¬selves to a hectic night but there is always the refuge of a good dinner and an early and comfortable bed, especially as the aeroplane invariably leaves at dawn and more often than not the aerodrome is some distance from the town.
Undoubtedly the noise inside the machine is rather trying al fust but one soon gets used to it and the continual roar is a great inducement to sleep at least that was what was experienced by the writer.
The amount of luggage allowed is 45 lbs. and the Company supply special suit cases, almost negligible in weight, and when filled with clothing and other necessities just turn rhe scale at 45 lbs.—it is amazing the amount of clothes one can take for that weight. It is very easy to send the heavier stuff by an earlier boat so that it is awaiting one in Singapore.
There always is, of course, the chance of crashing but how many times does one cross the streets of London without coming to harm, and the percent¬age of street accidents and deaths cannot be compared with the number of air accidence- the former are innumerable whilst the latter compara¬tively rare.
The scenery is impossible to describe, at. least the writer feels that it is beyond his scope, but the Gulf of Corinth, parts of the desert. Pyramids. Jerusalem, Persian mountains, Burma and Malayan jungle when seen from 12—15,000 feet leave an everlasting and not to he forgotten memory on the writer, together with the hope that the exchequer will stand the strain of a return journey by the same means of transport.—(Contributed )
Batu Kitang Road to Bau.
As from 1st June, 1934, all restrictions previously enforced regarding the use of the Balu Kitang Road to Bau are cancelled and the following substituted. All motor vehicles using the road must be in possession of a permit issued by the Public Works Department. The permit will be available for one year and will be issued to all applicants whose vehicles fulfil the conditions laid down. From 1st April to 31st October the maximum dimensions of cars permitted to use the road are:—
Track 4 feet.
Wheelbase 8 feet 10 inches.
Unladen weight 20 cwt. From 1st November to 31st March the maxi¬mum dimensions of cars permitted to use the mad are :—
Track 3 feet 9 inches.
Unladen weight 15 cwt. Four cylinder cars exceeding If) H. P. (R.A C. rating) and cars of more than four cylinders and exceeding 12 H.P (K. A C. rating) are not eligible for permits. From 1st April to 31st October the ferry charges to be
Cars	... 50cts [single crossing.
Motor cycles 25 .. 	b From 1st November to 31st March the ferry charges to be:
Motor cycles
(71 No cars exceeding 3 feet 9 inches track and 15 cwt. unladen weight to be licensed to ply lor hire over tins mad.
OLD SARAWAK.
From the Sarawak Gazette
47 Years Ago.
Price THURSDAY, 1st DECEMBER, 1887, 10 cents
OUR NOTES.
On Monday the 14th ultimo, Mr. Awdry. Dr. Stone and Captain Peek, representing the Buntal Batchelors, tuba-ed the Sungei Taboh, one of the mouths of the Sarawak river. Nearly all the Europeans residing in Kuching were present though unfortunately a few did not arrive until the sport was almost at an end. A party of nine, including Mrs. Jeffreys and Miss Cadell were most hospitably entertained at the Buntal Bungalow on Sunday evening so as to be ready for an early start next morning. This was made at 7.30 am. and the party arrived al the scene of the fishing about an hour later after a walk of two miles along the wind and through a mangrove swamp. The tuba was put into the waler al 9 and shortly after sport commenced and for about two hours was very brisk, though owing to the exceptionally strong tide which was running it did not last quite so long as usual. The fish, in great variety, were large and very lively giving good fun. The best bag wo saw was made by Captain Peek who scored the largest fish taken. An Alligator and a shark made their appearance but unfortunately were not secured. About 40 boats took part in the proceedings so there was no inconvenient crowding such as takes place at the large public Tuba-ings. Altogether the excursion was most successfull and the usual afternoon squall kindly kept of till all had gained the shelter of the steam launches Young Harry and -Vyoniok, which were kindly lent by the Govern¬ment and the Borneo Company for the convenience of the bachelor's gnesta and which were anchored some miles up the river. The Young Harry, carried those who went to Buntal on Sunday evening whilst the Nyamok left Kuching early on Monday morning with Mrs. Maxwell and others who were unable to get away on the previous day.
First Division News.
UPPER SARAWAK DISTRICT.
April, 1334
The Assistant District Officer, Mr. R. G. Aikman, reports. —
Agriculture. —The Dahan Rubber Estates, Limited, harvested 26.500 lbs. of dry rubber during the month. The rainfall at Bau was 9'30 inches. The. highest recorded in 24 hours was 1'48 inches and the daily average was 31 of all inch. The April rainfall at Dahan Rubber Estates was II 97 inches
Gott Mining Three companies, the Jambusan Gobi Mining Company at Jambusan, the Thye Thoong Gold Mining Syndicate al 3rd mile Bidi Rond, and the United Gold Works, Limited, at Johara, commenced leaching on the 1st, 9th and 26th respectively. This brings the number of Companies now operating by the cyanide process to twenty-four. Coincident with the sharp rise in the price of rubber considerable numbers of workmen employed in the mines have retained to the more congenial task of lapping rubber in gardens throughout the district.
There is likely to be a considerable shortage of gold-mining labour so long as the pi ice of rubber continues at its present level. Nine General Pros- pecting Licenses were issued during the month and ten applications for Exclusive Prospecting Licences were received. The actual gold obtained by the following companies for the month of March, 1934, was:—
SADONG DISTRICT,
April, 1934.
The Acting Assistant District Officer, Mr. S. G. Hansom, reports: —
Agriculture. The harvesting of padi is not yet completed. Crops everywhere, have fallen short of the great promise shown towards the end of 1933, due, in the main, to abnormally heavy and persistent rain As far as can be seen, there should be a sufficiency of padi in most areas.
P.JF.D.—The construction of the subsidiary road from Serial! to Tebakang has now been completed
General. —On the 26th instant, 1 left Kuching for Tebakang, completing the journey overland, via the new road, in less than three hours. An Austin "Seven” car was used, winch negotiated the sub¬sidiary road without difficulty. Very careful driving is, however, necessary in several places, and it is not intended to open the road for public traffic except by special permit The surface of the road is dry and sandy, and should be suitable, eventually, for light ears, without any considerable cost of maintenance. This was the first, occasion that a car had penetrated to Tebakang, and it caused quite an appreciable amount of excitement.
Kuching Amateur Association
Football League.
The above league season commenced on Saturday 5th of May, when the S.C F.A. met th.- Alling Alang at the Padungan Ground, on which all league matches are to he played three days ill a week, i.e., every Monday. Wednesday and Saturday There are altogether eleven teams participating in the league, live in the First Division and six in the Second Division,
The Alang Alang team, consisting mostly of Europeans, voluntarily offered themselves to be promoted to the First Division in order to make up the insufficient number of teams in that division
Both the S.C.F.A. '2nd XI. who were the Champion team in that division last year, and the Perhimpunan Setia Club's XT. formerly known as Datil's XI. who were the runners-up, were automati¬cally promoted to the First Division this season
Two new Malay teams joined rhe Second Division this year, viz., the Addinul Islam Club and the Gersik Re-Stia Jaya Club.
Meeting of Committee of Sarawak
Turf Club held at the Sarawak
Club at 6.15 p.m. on 24th
April, 1934.
Present. Messrs. H. Archer (in the Chair), C. F c. Macaskie. C. D. Adams, Ong Hap Leong, Tan Sum Guan. E. S. Holl. P. M. Adams, G. T. Bates and Datu Shah bandar.
Club Badges A letter from Dr. Mnrjoribanks proposing that new Foundation Members Badges be obtained to replace those lost by the Committee some years ago was read. Messrs. Aicher and Bates voted m favour. The other members voted against.
Upkeep of Course.—Mr. C. D. Adams proposed that the Race-Course be upkept on contract. It was agreed to call for tenders
Drawing of Unlimited Sweep — Mr. Tan Sum Guan pointed out to the Committee lb at there was considerable divergence of opinion as to the correct method of drawing; the Unlimited Sweep. It was decided to obtain in formation on this point from the Secretary of the Singapore Turf Club.
Cash Sweep Shed - It was decided to enlarge this as recoin mended by Mr. Tan Sum Guan and to call for tenders.
Car Park. It was decided to call for tenders for a car park at the entrance to the Paddock.
Public Tot' It was decided to make a flight ot steps to lend to the Public Tote.
Judge's Boz It was decided to cull for tenders for a permanent Judge's Box.
Caeli Sweep.—It was decided that Cash Sweeps should be for 81.000 each race in future.
Replica of Championship Cup.- Decided to obtain estimates for replicas from England.
Classification of Ponies
New Ponies.—Mr. C. D. Adams proposed and Mr. E. S. Holl seconded that ail new ponies shall carry top weight in the Division in which they are classified on the first day.Second Division News.
SIMANGGANG DISTRICT.
March, 1934.
The District Officer, Mr. R. L. Daubeny, reports:—
Obituary.—I regret to report the death of ex-Penghulu Ranang of the Batang Lupar, Sada, on 26th instant. He joined the Government service in 1906 and retired in 1930.
Dyaks and Native Affairs generally.—The majority of natives are. now busy harvesting, and few have been in during the month.
Agriculture.— Reports of crops are good from all districts. Penghulu Lambai of the Undup states that ha has never seen such crops before, both of bill and swamp padi.
Third Division News.
SIBU and KANOWIT DISTRICT.
April, 1934.
The District Officer. Mr. E. O. Bruce, reports:—
Obituary. —Tuanku Haji Seman, an old and loyal supporter of Government during Dyak troubles many years ago, died on the 22nd.
Trade.—Local market price of Para rubber reached $22 per picul at the end of April, with a tendency to rise.
Trade figures are as follows :—
Miscellaneous.—His Highness the Rajab completed a lour of the Third Division and returned to Kuching by H.H.M.Y. Maimuna on the 6th.
Three R.A.F. flying boats arrived on the 2nd en route to China via B.N.B. on the 4th. Entertainment for Officers and Airmen was arranged, including a display of native dancing.
LOWER REJANG DISTRICT.
April, 1934.
The Acting District Officer, Mr. A. Macpherson, reports:—
Fourth Division News.
March. 1934.
Extracts from the Fourth Divisional Reports by Mr. J. B. Archer, Resident:
H.H.M.Y. Maimuna arrived in Limbang on the 4th, and on the 6th I sailed in her for Labuan in order to meet His Highness the Rajab. The next day His Highness landed from s.s. Darrel. At noon we pro¬ceeded to Lawas in the Maimuna arriving there at 4 p.m. during a violent rain squall. On the next day Hie Highness landed and met various people in the Court Room.
Lawas Estate was visited the uext morning, where Mr. G. Clifford, the Manager, showed His Highness various small holdings cultivated by coolies on the estate. At 4 p.m. His Highness and party left Lawas and called in at the Vamco Sawmill at Tagal, where Messrs. Montgomery and Colina showed His Highness the most interesting manner in which 3-ply wood is manufactured. The Maimuna anchored for the night off Tanjong Selo.
The next morning His Highness, accompanied by the Assistant District Officer of Lawas. Mr. P. M. Scott, and myself, proceeded to Trusan in m.l. Sylvia, calling in at Sundar on our way bark As at Lawas nothing of importance was mentioned. Both Trusan and Sundar were gaily decorated and large crowds greeted His Highness.
On Sunday morning His Highness landed at Limbang, being escorted up the river by decorated boats. Here again large crowds had assembled.
The next day His Highness visited Brunei and called on His Highness the Sultan. In the absence of the British Resident, Mr. Carey, His Highness was received at Brunei by the Assistant Resident. Mr. A. Glencross.  His Highness attended the offices on the following morning aud left far Kuching the next day.
General— On Saturday, 3rd, His Majesty's submarines Parthian and Phoenix, under Commanders Meyer and Brooks respectively, arrived at Miri from Hongkong. The officers and men were entertained ashore on Satur¬day, Sunday and Monday. A footbell match was arranged with the Gymkhana Club, and resulted in a win for the home team by two goals to one. On Mon¬day Mr. Noble, the General Manager, Sarawak Oilfields, Ltd., kindly arranged a complete tour of the oilfields for the men.
BINTULU DISTRICT.
March, 1934.
The Acting District Officer, Mr. J. G. Anderson, reports: