Vol. LXXXIV
No. 1206
PRICE
KUCHING, Sunday, August 31st, 1958
$1.00
Contents
Page
Birth                   ...	 ...          ...          ...          ...          ...          139
Obituary              ...         ...          ...          ...          ...          ...          139
Selling                 ...          ...          ...          ...          ...          ...          139
Notes and Comments      ...          ...          ...          ...          ...          139
Arrivals and Departures ...          ...          ...          ...          ...          140
The Peoples of Sarawak—IV Land Dayaks          ...          ...          141
In Reply to—"Choose Your Weapons"    ...          ...          ...         144
Kuching Letter     ...         ...          ...          ...          ...          ...          144
A Nutty Problem   ...         ...          ...          ...          ...          ...          145
The Illipe Nut       ...         ...          ...          ...          ...          ...          146
Niah Excavations, 1958   ...          ...          ...          ...          ...           148
The World beyond the Rivers      ...          ...          ...          ...           149
His Excellency the Governor’s visit to Bintulu and
Sibuti—August, 1958   ...          ...          ...          ...          ...          150
Correspondence   ...          ...          ...          ...          ...          ...          151
Recent Books       ...          ...          ...          ...          ...          ...          152
Kuching Market Price List           ...          ...          ...          ...          153
The Sarawak Gazette
SUNDAY, AUGUST 31st, 1958
Birth
Steele—To Eileen and Bill Steele on 29th August, 1958, at the General Hospital, Kuching, a daughter, Jennifer Mary, sister for Jonathan.
Obituary
Wright—We regret to record the death, on 27th August, 1958, of Mr. Francis Wright who died in the Kuching General Hospital after a short and sudden illness.
Mr. Wright, who was 58, joined the Sarawak Government Service as an Apprentice Wireless Operator in January 1918. He was later transferred to the Forest Department and in 1950 was Acting Assistant Conservator of Forests for the First and Second Divisions. Mr. Wright retired in 1953.
Selling
Comments in the press and elsewhere indicate that there appears to be some official disappointment over the slow rate at which the Government Debentures are selling. It is true that there was a full page announcement in the Sarawak Tribune, and even in the Straits Times, and that notices have been posted up and announcements made by radio. And yet people don’t buy.
This really illustrates the very conservative natures of all peoples and also the fact that in general they do not really wish to improve or change if effort is required. It is a naive person who imagines that people will rise as a body to help themselves let alone help their neighbours. Selling, fortunately or unfor
tunately as you wish, is nowadays a matter of advertisement and repeated advertisement rather following the old schoolmaster’s idea that learning was driven in by a pliable cane through the seat of the pants.
Today, in what are called advanced countries such as U.S.A. and Britain, where they have the finest health services to keep people alive and healthy and at the same time the greatest war machines, including atom bombs, designed to wipe out the greatest number in the least possible time, everything is sold on advertisement. Everyone knows that Peter Piper's Pepper is the finest in the world because the advertisements in the papers, tell him so. The notices in the railway stations, on the buses, along the roads, in the shops, in fact, everywhere about him he sees that ‘Peter Piper's Pepper is the Best in the World’. The people may pretend to laugh at the absurdities of the notices but never-the-less at the mention of pepper the name Peter Piper springs to the mind and, ten-to-one, the majority of the people will ask automatically for Peter Piper's Pepper. In fact they are bludgeoned into thinking that way.
If it is urgent that debentures must be sold then someone has to make a business of selling them and the people have to be bludgeoned into buying for few will avail themselves of this great opportunity on their own. High pressure salesmanship is a well developed business—almost an art—in some countries and it is perhaps needed here. Why not sell the bonds like sweep tickets with one free in every book of ten? One must pay, including the government, for what one gets, and one usually gets only what one pays for.
Notes and Comments
It is pleasing to know that, at the end of this month. His Excellency the Governor, Sir Anthony Abell, is progressing well and expects to be back in Sarawak early in September. Sir Anthony left Kuching by the Rajah Brooke on Saturday 16th August, 1958 to consult Dr. Au Kee Hock, the ear, throat and nose specialist at the Singapore General Hospital.
Sir Anthony has been suffering from a chronic sinus infection and as a result of this last examination Dr. Au performed a successful operation on 19th August.
Most of the animals which were in the “Zoo” behind the Sarawak Museum have been given by the Museum to the Taronga National Park Zoo in Sydney. These included an adult orang utan but the second, younger male orang utan has gone to San Diego Zoo, California and two adjutant storks have been released in the Bako National Park.
The animals went to Sydney on the Braeside from Tanjong Mani but, as would be expected of a budding American citizen, the younger orang utan went to California by air. It is understood that he has already appeared on television and made a love match with an already-resident young female maias.
140
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, AUGUST 31, 1958
This interesting, entertaining and free show will be greatly missed by the children (and grown-ups) of Kuching as well as visitors. It is a great pity that some way of carrying on this growing zoo could not have been found.
It was unfortunate that, so soon after the Twin Pioneers had been put on the Borneo Airways routes, a snag should have been found to take them out of service even for so short a time. However, now that the cause of the deposit in the engine has been traced it is hoped that there will be no further troubles.
Among the distinguished visitors to Sarawak this month have been the United States Ambassador to the Federation of Malaya, Mr. Homer M. Byington Jr. and Mrs. Byington, together with a large party of American officials.
The Acting Commissioner-General for the United Kingdom in South East Asia, His Excellency Mr. Angus Mackintosh, c.m.g., also visited Sarawak during the month.
The Honourable Attorney-General, Mr. P. E. H. Pike has been appointed a Queen’s Counsel for Sarawak and a ceremony was held on 9th August in the Supreme Court, Kuching, to mark the occasion. The Honourable the Chief Justice, Sir Ernest Williams, welcomed Mr. Pike within the Bar and Mr. Stephen Yong spoke on behalf of the legal profession.
Mr. Francois Lachance of the WHO Anti-Malarial Project in Sarawak, is to be congratulated on the award of a 'Career Service Appointment’. This appoinment means that Mr. Lachance is now a permanent staff member of WHO. Such appoinments are highly selective and are only given after several years of very successful work and on a showing of exceptional ability.
Mr. Lachance has been a WHO scientist for over seven years and of this time more than four and half years have been spent in Sarawak.
Another successful Model Boat Regatta was held at Bau this month. There were many entries with some very odd-looking rigs. The lack of resident crews, unfortunately, is much in evidence when the wind suddenly changes and the boats, half way down the course, decide to return to the starting line. Some can even do this without turning round.
On this day beside Tai Parit, there is almost all the 'fun of the fair.’ And at Batu Kitang is a long line of waiting cars. There are afterwards the usual crop of complaints about the ferry service but it is doubtful whether one Model Boat Regatta per year is reasonable excuse for erecting a bridge.
A sign of the times in Sarawak was noticed while correcting proofs of the article on Land Dayak in this issue of the Gazette. Where headhunter was intended the printer had put “. . . the community is held together by the fear of common dangers . . .the fear of headmasters . . . who can appear and disappear at will."
In fact even though this “threat is used against the children as a disciplinary measure” we haven't noticed many children in such fear.
An article and descriptive list of Mammals of the Kelabit Plateau Northern Sarawak written by D. Dwight Davis, Curator of the Division of Vertebrate Anatomy of the Chicago Natural History Museum appeared in the April issue of Fieldriana. Zoology which is published by the Museum.
This article was based on a collection made by Mr. Tom Harrisson between 1945 and 1949 which is said to be the first comprehensive collection made in the interior. The only previous report on the mammals of the Kelabit Plateau is by Lömberg and Mjöberg (1925) based on a very small collection made by Mjöberg. As most knowledge had been based on material from the coastal regions this makes the present collection of considerable interest.
The present collection of 202 specimens will be divided between the Sarawak Museum and the Chicago Natural History Museum.
The editorial and article in last month's Gazette on the Brazil Nut has brought out of hiding a number of writers. It is noted that there have been articles and comments in our contemporary the Sarawak Tribune and also in this issue of the Gazette—and about the already established rival, the illipe nut too.
Arrivals and Departures
Between 4.8.58 and 30.8.58
Arrival
Mr. D. St. J. Forrer By air Singapore/Kuching/Brunei on 4 & 6.8.58
Returning from leave.
Mr. G. V. C. Young                          By Auby arriving Kuching on
4.8.58
Returning from leave.
Mr. J. R Dunsmore By air Singapore/Kuching on (Newly appointed Rice 4.8.58 Agronomist)	On first appointment
Mr. B. D. Johnson                            By air Singapore/Kuching on
5.8.58
Returning from leave.
Mr. D. W. Rowbotham                     By air Singapore/Kuching on
7.8.58
Returning from leave.
Mr. M. J. Hurley	By air Singapore/Brunei on 9.8.58
Returning from leave.
Mr. W. I. Glass	By air Singapore/Brunei on 9.8.58
Returning from leave.
Mr. J. Pike	By air Singapore/Kuching on
15.8.58
Returning from leave.
Mr. P. B. Smith	By air Singapore/Kuching on
15.8.58
Mr. M. J. Christie                        By air Singapore/Kuching on
(Newly appointed                       21.8.58
Administrative Cadet)             On first appointment
Mr. R. S. B. McCormick By air Singapore/Kuching on 21.8.58
Returning from leave.
Mr. John Chan Hui Fei By air Singapore/Kuching/Sibu on 21.8.58
Returning from Teacher Training Course in the United Kingdom
 By Rajah Brooke arriving Kuching Mr. Kui Chiong Hoon                        on 25.8.58
Returning from a Teachers
Mr. Lim Eng Khiong                         Training Course in the United
 Kingdom
Dr. W. G. Evans	By air Singapore/Kuching on
26.8.58 Returning from leave
Mr. D. J. Causby	By air Singapore/Kuching on
28.8.58
Returning from leave
Departures
Mr. Balwant Singh By air Kuching/Singapore on 4.8.58
Proceeding on leave to India
Mr. A. C. Eattell	By air Kuching/Singapore on
10.8.58
Proceeding on leave to Australia prior to retirement
Mr. P. J. Rewcastle                           By air Brunei/Singapore on
14.8.58	
Proceeding on leave to the United Kingdom
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, AUGUST 31, 1958
141
Mr. P. Scanlon	By air Lutong/Sibu/Singapore on
19.8.58
Proceeding on leave to the United Kingdom
Dr. T. M. Kraszewski By air Kuching/Singapore on 20.8.58
Proceeding on leave to the United Kingdom
Mr. T. H. Harrisson By air Kuching/Singapore on 21.8.58
Proceeding on short leave to the United Kingdom
Dr. H. W. Harcus By air Kuching/Singapore on 21 and 22.8.58
Proceeding on leave to the United Kingdom
Mr. Wellington Fefus By air Kuching/Singapore on Nanang	28.8.58
Proceeding on a Teachers' Training Course 1958/59 in the United Kingdom
Miss Alian Rose Nanang By air Kuching/Singapore on 28.8.58
Proceeding on Overseas Ward Sisters’ Course 1958/59 in the United Kingdom
Mr. T. M. Ainsworth By air Brunei/Singapore on 29.8.58
Proceeding on leave to the United Kingdom
Mr. R. I. Hughes                                  By Rajah Brooke sailing
Kuching/Singapore on 30.8.58 Proceeding on leave to the United
Kingdom on termination of Agreement
The Peoples of Sarawak*
IV
THE LAND DAYAK
BY
J. F. Drake-Brockman
The people whom we call Land Dayaks live in the hill country of north west Borneo. The majority of them inhabit what is now Indonesian territory, and those in Sarawak live only in the First Division, mostly in the headwaters of the Sarawak and Sadong rivers. In appearance they are superficially somewhat similar to Malays. Though most of the menfolk nowadays can speak some Malay, however, they do not speak it in quite the same way. They are readily distinguishable for several other reasons. They do not tattoo themselves at all, like the Sea Dayak. Except for some villages which have recently moved downriver, they do not build boats, and if travelling in one find a paddle awkward to handle. Most of them have never seen the sea. The women can also sometimes be recognised if they are still wearing brass rings round their legs.
In former days these brass rings were worn on the arms and round the waist, and were not normally taken off at all.
Anyone who has visited a Land Dayak area will have noticed that at every resting place there are what appear to be odd-shaped pieces of bamboo stuck in the ground. These are the serubok, or water pipes. If one stops for a rest the members of the party will probably have a quick smoke to help them on their way. The effect of this type of smoking on the inexperienced, however, can be devastating. The traveller must never interfere with any serubok he finds by the
Footnote:—
*For a general introduction to, and explanation of, this series by their editor, Mr. Tom Harrisson, Government Ethnologist and Curator of the Sarawak Museum, see Sarawak Gazette No. 1204.
wayside, though he may make use of them. They must be left for the use of any spirits who happen to pass by, for if one chanced to call at a resting place and found no pipe to smoke it would be offended and would bring trouble to the village. Heavy fines are prescribed for anyone who damages a serubok.
Before reaching a village, if one has to cross a river that is too deep or wide to wade through one may have to make use of a suspension bridge. These flimsy looking structures are made of bamboo tied with rope made from the fibrous covering of a palm tree, and are quite safe provided that the bamboo is not rotten. Many of these bridges are now constructed on a foundation of wire rope, which gives extra moral and material support.
The majority of Land Dayaks are still pagans, and still live in long-houses. Just outside the village, however, the visitor will pass a collection of small huts. These are the padi stores. They are easily recognisable on account of the large flat circular pieces of wood which are fixed at the top of each post just below floor level to keep the rats away. The actual dwelling houses vary in style from what appears to be a row of farming huts to a well-built bazaar, but it is very seldom that one finds in the large villages a single longhouse. There are nearly always two or three separate ones and they are not likely to be arranged symmetrically. There is one unique feature about Land Dayak villages, however, and that is that they nearly always have another, centrally-situated building which, for want of a better name, may be referred to as the head-house. It usually stands higher off the ground than any other building, and is often the most impressive feature of a village, indicating that the builders have taken some pride in their work. It used to be of course the house in which heads were put, after the appropriate ceremony had been carried out, but its main function now seems to be as a sleeping place for the young unmarried men of the village, and as a sort of rest-house for visitors, and also if it is large enough, as a general meetingplace. Since it is built by, and belongs to, the community it is an institution worth preserving; and it is to be hoped that, even if a change of religion leads to a change in residence of heads, the buildings themselves, which obviously serve a useful purpose, will not disappear.
The Land Dayaks of Sarawak now number about 45,000 people. There are five main groups, each speaking a different dialect, the two largest being in the Upper Sadong district, and in part of Kuching district. The largest of the other three groups live in Bau district, and the two smallest in Lundu. Although these five groups do speak different dialects there are many words common to some or all groups, and there are also many Malay and Sea Dayak words in common usage, according no doubt to the extent to which the various groups have had contact with these other races in the past. It is generally considered that Dayaks of these different groups can usually understand each other to some extent provided that each speaks his own dialect.
There is a similarity in witch-craft connected with sickness, between the Land Dayaks and the Melanaus the word dunkun meaning a witch-doctor and berayun (which means literally swinging) being common to dialects of both languages, though the ceremonies nowadays are probably carried out in a less spectacular and less complicated manner by Land Dayaks than by Melanaus. Briefly, the patient is seated in the swing, suspended by rotan from a beam. The evil spirit causing the sickness is extracted by means of incantations and dancing, and transferred to a specially constructed boat together with suitable offerings to keep it happy on its journey. The boat is then put in the river and allowed to float away down to the sea. If there is no river, a rotan is stretched from one end of the house to the other, the boat is slid along it and simply cast out onto the ground.
142
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, AUGUST 31, 1958
Furthermore the Land Dayaks are to some extent a sago-eating people, like the Melanaus. Sago can be seen growing in the smallest patches of swamp land and although they are industrious rice cultivators, perhaps owing to necessity, they do eat sago because they like it and not only because they are forced to do so for lack of other food; and they cultivate it for sale. It is also evident that the knives which they use, known in dialects of both races as buko, are similar, the handle being bent back at an angle to the blade so that a sago log can be barked and split lengthwise without injury to the hand when the blade sinks into the soft palm.
The Land Dayaks have various stories accounting for their origin, some claiming descent from mythical and historical characters of Malay origin such as Datu Pati; and some claiming descent from devils, fish or animals. One village even claims to have sprung from a hole in the ground. They have also a story, to account for their present geographical separation. Long ago they lived in the coastal areas of Western Borneo, but were continually being attacked and taken as slaves by pirates. When they became too old to work, or were no longer wanted, they were simply put ashore and abandoned. Those who avoided capture retired further and further inland and took to more defensible positions on the tops of hills, and even in caves, from where they could push down boulders on their enemies.
That is how they were living when James Brooke arrived in Sarawak more than a 100 years ago. Since he gradually brought peace to the country the Land Dayaks have multiplied tremendously. Owing to the general barrenness of much of their hill-farming land and the shortage due to increase of population, they are now forced to consider moving back towards the coastal areas,—not in order to revert to a sago-eating economy, but in order to obtain bigger rice harvests by cultivating low-lying land which can be irrigated.
Land Dayaks live in longhouses, they are individualists and the household (which may consist of more than one family) is the main economic unit. In fact a longhouse is rather similar to a row of houses in a village street in other countries. Nowadays there is often a village shop as well. Although the rice farms are usually grouped together, and there is an exchange of labour between households to enable the main work of planting, weeding and harvesting to be done effectively, nevertheless the boundaries of each farm are clearly demarcated and the harvest from that farm, be it good or bad, goes to that particular household. What is it then, that holds the community together? Apart from sentimental ties of relationship, there are firstly common possessions, by far the most valuable of which is land. Rights over farming land are held by the person who originally felled the jungle, and thereafter by all his descendants. When a village has been in existence for some time the rights over any particular piece of land may be held jointly by quite a number of people, and usually the whole village will resist any encroachment on its land, whether as in former days by force, or as in present times by legal action. Every administrative officer knows how-acrimonious land disputes can become, and must have experienced the frustration, (as a magistrate), of being probably the only person who does not know how the dispute should rightly be settled.
Secondly, the community is held together by its fear of common dangers. Even now there is still a fear of headhunters, or penyamun. Every few years such a scare will run through a district, or even through several districts, and in fact usually affects people of all races to some extent. Though penyamun have supernatural powers, in that they can appear and disappear at will, the Land Dayaks generally identify them as Sea Dayaks. There is usually an incident, such as a murder somewhere or other, to start these
scares, but the effect can be considerable because the threat is used against children as a disciplinary measure from a very early age and therefore the fear becomes deeply instilled into them.
There is also danger from all sorts of evil spirits, which can cause sickness or misfortune. They can be guarded against either by taking care not to provoke them; or having provoked them, by taking steps to placate them, which is done by means of a ceremony or feast, called gawai. There are therefore various rules laid down to prohibit the acts which give provocation. Some of these rules, such as the observance of periods of restriction after festivals or after deaths, are common to all villages. These periods of restriction vary considerably, but are usually from one to four days. During this time no one is allowed either to leave or enter the village.
However, the more important festivals with the longer periods of restriction are invariably arranged at a time when there is no urgent work to be done in the farms. There are also rules in some villages that sleeping mats may not be washed, and that clothing may not be hung outside the houses during the period of a festival, as it is believed that the good spirits which have been called down to help the people may be offended.
In addition to action which human beings can take to ward off misfortune there are also the actions of non-human agents, especially various species of birds, to be taken into consideration. One bird, if heard calling from the side of the path, indicates that the bearer will be lucky on that day, whereas if it flies across the track whoever sees it must immediately return home. The same bird, if heard during a hunting expedition to the left is all right, but if it is heard to the right the hunters must change direction to put it on the left. Another bird if heard while hunting is a sign that the party should return for reinforcement. A certain insect, if heard at night when sheltering in the jungle on a hunting expedition, is a sign that the hunters should proceed in that direction. The same insect if heard repeatedly when people are about to build a new house is an indication that the women who live there will have plenty of children, but the people will also be liable to more sickness. If the kijang, or barking deer, is heard on land which is about to be cleared for farming that land must be abandoned.
To some extent these omen birds and animals can be prevented from acting.
The most usual way to deal with them is to placate them by giving them offering at festivals, and at the same time calling upon good spirits, especially the spirits of ancestors, to help drive them away. If, in spite of such precautions, they still manage to cause trouble, either the project in question must be abandoned, or if this is impracticable—such as in the case of a nearly completed new longhouse—then once again they must be placated by means of suitable offerings and ceremonies.
Dreams are also believed to have significance, though they are not considered to be valid if likely to have been influenced by one's recent actions before going to sleep. For instance, a dream in which one is laughing means bad news; but this would not apply if one had just spent a riotous evening at a festival. A view from a mountain-top signifies success, and to dream that one is carrying a dead cock indicates success in hunting. To dream of a fire breaking out means that an epidemic will strike the village; a ripe fruit falling from a tree is a sign that a sick person is about to die.
To dream that a tooth falls out indicates that a member of the family will die. To counteract this omen it is necessary to rise at dawn, without mentioning the dream to anyone, put a grain of maize in
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, AUGUST 31, 1958
143
the mouth and then throw some yellow rice towards the sunrise at the same time spitting out the maize saying to the evil spirits "This is the tooth that you want, do not take anything more".
As well as common possessions and common dangers the community also has common means of protection. The most important are the spirits of ancestors. When a person dies his spirit goes to the place called Sebayan, where conditions are smilar to those prevailing on earth. The spirits are believed still to take an interest in earthly affairs and can therefore be asked for assistance. These are usually invoked in two groups: firstly those of the immediate ancestors of all persons attending the particular ceremony, who are not mentioned by name, in order to avoid the risk of omission which might cause offence; secondly the spirits of ancestors who were actually famous during their lifetime. These are by no means limited to ancestors of any village, or even of the Land Dayak race. The priest on his spiritual journey during the ceremony may travel as far afield as Brunei and Java, and may call upon the spirit of any famous person of any race! So long as he led a good life when he was on earth he will help the people now.
Apart from the ancestral spirits there are also certain objects and places which may have acquired power. These are called guna. They are usually kept concealed in a small house of their own and may not be seen except during a special ceremony which takes place only once in several years. Should they be seen at any other time it is believed that great misfortune, even a death, will occur. At one village there were originally two large stones. After they had been living together for a long time there were one day found to be three small ones as well. In other villages the skull of a wild boar, the skull and horns of a deer, and a large block of belian wood are believed to have magical properties. The existence of such objects within the precincts of a village may be a major obstacle, if it is desired to persuade that village to move to better farming land.
The pagan Land Dayaks have so much in their daily lives to be afraid of. that it might be thought that they would be ideal subjects for conversion to Christianity. In fact they are essentially practical people, living in the present, so there should be no intellectual obstacle to accepting a new religion if they can be convinced that it will deal with their problems better. They are likely to judge it by what it can give, or by what its followers can be seen to have obtained. This means mainly education, and to some extent better medical facilities. But education without economic progress may lead to disappointment, and an increase in the population without a correspondingly higher standard of living will bring discontent.
The spread of Christianity is probably the most important factor affecting the welfare of the Land Dayaks at the present time and it cannot be said that the result of having three different Missions working amongst them has been entirely beneficial so far. In many cases considerable disruption has been caused to village life, for as soon as a few families become converted they separate from the main village and move to another part of their land. Though they often build bigger and cleaner houses, the split does not make for harmony within the community and it weakens the authority of the headman. The land cannot be divided; and as the process of converting a whole village may take a long time, there are likely to be more frequent land disputes.
In fact a general lack of leadership is one of the great obstacles at the present time. No hereditary qualifications are required for succession to the office
of village headman, though a relation of a previous holder is likely to be elected when a vacancy occurs. The rule of the headman is to initiate village action and to direct any activities decided upon. He is also the mouthpiece of government and the village magistrate. He must produce results by persuasion rather than by dictation, and has little incentive to be efficient. This requires exceptional character that cannot often be found. The village headman has power to impose fines, but in practice most fines are inflicted individual ly and many are paid without his assistance or orders being invoked. There is no fixed code and all fines are varied to suit differing circumstances.
Such a legal system may seem weak, but it is greatly strengthened by non-legal sanctions, the punishment inflicted by the evil spirits on wrong doers. But when there is a change of religion, these sanctions are no longer effective, and the maintenance of law and order becomes more difficult. The approved code, especially in matrimonial and religious matters becomes more strict though behaviour tends to continue as before. Offences are therefore more likely to be brought into the open,—that is to say brought to government for settlement—rather than being dealt with in the village, and greater strain is thrown on the legal system as a means of preserving order.
In addition to the spread of Christianity and the lack of leadership there is a third important factor in the life of the Land Dayaks which is bound to affect their future. This is that they have "too much to do". Although there is an exchange of labour to enable necessary work in the farms to be done without delay, there is no real division of labour in a village and every household must be self sufficient. By far the most important occupation is of course the cultivation of padi. This may occupy a person for about half the working days in the year. There are domestic crops, tapioca and sugar cane, and also cash crops such as rubber, pepper, coffee and bananas to be cultivated. To supplement the meagre diet, time must be spent hunting and fishing, and collecting wild vegetables and jungle fruits in season. There is also essential domestic work to be done such as the care of infants, repairs and construction of houses, and the making of tools, mats and baskets. Finally there will be non-productive days, due to absence from the village, sickness, or ceremonies. It should be noted, however, that the time wasted on ceremonies, their preparation and the days of restriction which follow them does not, as is commonly thought, amount to very much; it probably does not exceed half the number of Sundays in the year.
The Land Dayaks, now, are mostly living at a bare subsistence level. Life is difficult; there is a shortage of good leaders; and the influence of new religions is having a disturbing effect on the village communities.
For various reasons: because they have been oppressed by previous rulers, because they like living in rather inaccessible places and because they are essentially law-abiding people,—the Land Dayaks have been neglected and under-administered by government in the past. They have not had the attention that other races have had. This has led to a feeling of apathy and given them "an inferiority complex.” But when given the opportunity, they have no difficulty in holding their own with other races of Sarawak. Easy to teach and willing to learn, lovers of music, they have an infinite capacity for enjoying themselves. Not lazy, but not too energetic; always cheerful and easily provoked to mirth; it is a great pleasure to work amongst them.
144
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, AUGUST 31, 1958
In reply to—“Choose Your Weapons”
SARAWAK GAZETTE—31/7/58
"Dear P.H.
You must aspire to change your race, Dayaks have guns all over the place. That they can neither write nor read Has no bearing on their 'dead'!! But licences are granted them— 50,000 plus, I’ll have you ken!
Whilst you, with all your talent and knowledge Are not permitted what I had at College.
Surely, Peter, to get your gun You must off to Sibu run. Animals in that vicinity Warrant the use of high velocity, Or so it would appear to me For I have seen a murderous weapon This year licensed—and by heaven To a stranger—no resident here— Can you beat it? Let me hear!
By muzzle velocities—did you know?
A gun is judged as lethal—so,
For comparison, here we go.
A shotgun's bore, however numbered, Gives a velocity about seven hundred. A two-two reaches in feet per second A modest thousand three thirty reckoned. But a "Sibu" gun of which I've learned A potent three thou, two hundred has earned! ! Yet the pistol (air) you wish to hand At 100 feet is completely banned.
Withal the moral is clear to see— If shoot you must—join K.R.C.
Deus Meus et Patria
Kuching Letter
I have always disliked young children, holding that until the age of twelve, children are not really human and certainly not bearable until at least the age of sixteen. Nonetheless, I have made it a practice of assisting them in their journeys to and from school Many years ago, when I lived at the Twelfth Mile on the Simanggang Road, it was usual for the urchins from the Tenth Mile school, when they saw me coming, to form a chain across the road and then to pile into my car, the venerable K. 2. which sagged and groaned under the press of youth. I never, however, carry small girls. Years ago, as I was returning late one very wet afternoon with driving rain, at about the Eighth Mile, I overtook two little girls completely sodden and trudging home through the tempest. I stopped my car and opened the door, motioning them to get in. Both little girls dropped their satchels and fled shrieking into the scrub. I reflected that these two wretched brats might well have sworn away my character, accusing me of assult, rape and probably even murder. Since then I have never conveyed small girls. I have passed with equanimity troops of them trudging home in the rain; and the heavier the rain the better.
Since my return to Kuching I have frequently conveyed youngsters to school. On wet mornings especially, all the tottery of Kuching seems to pile into my car. On ordinary days I frequently pick up a brace of tots and deliver them to their school, which is not far out of my way to the office. One morning, however, I picked up the tots and delivered them, at least I opened the door of the car, at their school, but both tots refused to get out and made loud noises of dissent. Although, as I say, I have a low opinion of
young children, this seemed to me the blackest ingratitude, even by their depraved standards. I hailed a passer-by and requested him to enquire what ailed the tots, and why they now refused to go to school. The explanations were prolix, but it appeared that this brace of tots was different from that which I usually conveyed; this one went to a different school some three miles away and was already late. Such as would convey tots should beware. Only by the closest inspection is it possible to distinguish one brace from another.
“The road to Hell is paved with good intentions", thus the old saw. I have always conceived that throughout its entire length of 1,001 leagues (the league being that current in the Ile de France in the late thirteenth century) for lack of scenery it was demarcated “Seventh League", "Tenth League", "Seventeenth League", and so forth. But is there any reason why the Simanggang Road should follow this example? When first a path is pushed through the jungle it is natural for the attap shacks that spring up along it to be described as the Seventh Mile, the Tenth Mile, the Seventeenth Mile, and so forth. When however, the path has become an imperial highway, and the attap shacks have been transformed into spacious townships, what justification is there for this archaic nomenclature? Is it not time that these settlements were given names in their own right? Do we refer to the inhabitants of Kuching merely by their Identity Card numbers? Have not the dwellers along Simanggang Road a right to something more than numerical identification.
Following the local usage in Sarawak one might take the Simanggang Road to be a river and name its settlements according to the tributaries. Thus Long Semengo, Long Lintah, Long Endup and so forth. As, however, the inhabitants of all these settlements are Chinese, such a usage would be mere affectation. Taking example from other nations, one notes the Roman tendency to call towns after emperors, Aelia Capitolina, Constantia, Theodoseopolis etc., but thanks to the virtue of imperial assassination there was a wide nomenclature to choose from. Similar tendencies amongst British colonists have led to Jamestowns Charlestowns, and Georgetowns (Annapolis was a classical aberration) in a monotonously loyal succession, whilst the numbers of Victorias even exceeds the jewels in the celestial crown of that august monarch. Such practices, one hopes, are now outmoded.
The Spaniards, a great race of colonisers inclined to the theological. San Diego, San Juan, Vera Cruz, Concepcion, etc., monotonous perhaps but euphonic. Similarly, though in a distorted sense, the New England colonists named their settlements Salem, Bethel, Zoar etc., after places associated with unsavoury Jewish marauders a few millenia back.
The impact of education on the United States of America was signalised by a Corinth, noted by a startled traveller as consisting of little more than half a dozen saloons, and Athens, which had less reputable constituents. Cairo no doubt sorted better with reality, but why Memphis? These must be dismissed as the vagaries of a precociously youthful nation. The largest number of new settlements made in Europe in modern times are those in the Soviet Union. Here the tendency has been to use the names of celebrities—Leningrad, Sverdlovsk, Stalingrad, Molotov etc. (though these latter two are now somewhat blown upon), or else to appeal to the environment, Red Earth, Golden Corn, Waving Pastures, etc. Neither of these is applicable to Sarawak, the first because of the startling lack of notabilities, and the second because of the monotony of the scene. My own suggestion is that the settlements along the Simanggang Road be called after abstractions, e.g. "Celestial Harmony", “Virtuous Recompense" “Benign Forbearance", such things sound well in Chinese, and indeed, in any language. They cannot but provoke the inhabitants to virtue or their neighbours to ridicule.
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, AUGUST 31, 1958
145
The examination season will fast be upon us when the subject of age will be much laboured. It is odd that whereas the moralist applauds the bald pate, the educationalist impugns even the downy beard; the one sees the salvation of the state in mature age, the other in squalling puerility. Be that as it may, such as would compete in examinations must vindicate their chronology. In Europe this matter is settled in a moment by reference to official registers, but in Sarawak it is a matter for solemn perjury and mendacious asseveration.
In despair of ever equating man and time, some have thought that the solution lay in grading urchins according to height. This has .lready been tried in some connections, but its value is dubious, even allowing for marginal variations caused by shaving the head and shrinking the urchin in a cold bath beforehand. In any case, there is the valid objection that such a criterion heavily favours the bazaar urchin as against the undernourished ulu urchin, indeed it would wholly preclude the latter, who tend to be much shorter. Grading by weight, on the other hand, which has been strongly urged by many, would favour the ulu urchin practically to the exclusion of the bazaar urchins; added to which it would be much open to abuse, for ambitious parents would inevitably resort to the extensive use of purgatives, which could not be other than deliterious to the health of the urchins concerned.
Latterly, there has been a clamour that the whole question might be settled finally by testing the teeth, even as Mr. Harrisson can now date the previous inhabitants of Niah. This is one of those facile generalizations fostered by science fiction. A practical appraisal of the proposal reveals glaring defects. The labour involved in correlating a sack of teeth with the entry forms would involve an increase in clerical staff beyond anything that the country could afford at the present time. Further, what guarantee would there be that Tooth No. 1914 was in fact part of the human frame of Urchin No. 1914 in the entry form. The system would be open to gross abuse; small urchins would be held down while much older brothers extracted a tooth to despatch with their own entry forms. To preclude such deception, the 4,000 teeth would have to be extracted departmentally and under supervision, but for this, facilities are simply not available. St. Francis Xavier warned his Japanese converts that their heathen parents were inevitably in Hell. Judging by the present rate of perjury, it appears that many Sarawak parents will continue to make the Supreme Sacrifice, until the registration of births and deaths is better organised.
The conversion of the Hollywood film magnates by contemporary evangelists has caused no small concern to the upholders of the more conventional standards of morality. Previously, it was usual to present the more nakedly erotic themes as “From the French classic of ........" Today the impact of religion on Hollywood is such that actors of eminence have discarded vesture for a volume of the scriptures, and a pocket edition at that, so those who seek in the cinema an outlet for the erotic attend only films which are certified as authentically biblical. We are now enjoying primordial love in the nude and are promised “Sodom and Gomorrah" (in Ultra-Blue). Where will it all end? How right was the medieval church in preserving the Bible strictly as a tilt-yard for trained theologians with no access to the general public.
ROBERT NICHOLL
A Nutty Problem
Dear Bertholletia How you excelsa, But in that article Was there a particle Of truth?
Is it excused When it's perused In your last number; Was it a blunder Or not?
The proposition That the nutrition Of the Rejang delta Is good for excelsa Is fine.
But can we believe That we can retrieve Sarawak's economy With nutty agronomy? I doubt it.
It's true on the Amazon, Or is it the Maranon. That both Hevea And Bertholletia Will grow.
If Ridley and Kew Got seeds, though few, Of rubber. Is it still wise That the Brazil nut likewise Will follow?
Wealthy Malaya has no regret But is it not too much to expect That history can be repeated? We will only feel cheated And hurt.
And Brazil has a say Not before but today. Once bitten twice shy, But only just try And see.
Let us have them all. Gluts Of cashews and walnuts, Peanuts, almonds and hazel, Chestnuts, coconuts, Brazil. What muts.
Really is it logical Or just rather comical, Historical, pastoral, illogical, tragical, Tropical nuts!
No, let us leave Para And Bertholletia.
Let Agriculture Try Buenaventura, Not nuts.
P. H.
146
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, AUGUST 31, 1958
The Illipe Nut
1.	What is an Illipe nut?
The term illipe nut, and its product illipe butter, is a loose one covering various groups of oilseeds, as follows: —
(1)	Illipe nuts from India (sometimes called the true illipe); derived from Bassia longifolia.
(2) Mourak nuts from India; derived from Bassia latifolia.
These trees belong to the family Sapotaceae, and the fats have different melting points but are often blended and sold as illipe butter.
(3)	Siak nuts from Sumatra; derived from Palaquium oleosum and P. oblongifolium, which also belong to the family Sapotaceae.
(4)	Illipe nuts from Sumatra and Borneo; derived from certain species of Shorea in the family Dipterocarpaceae. These are big forest trees producing the common utility timber known as meranti or seraya. The nuts are known as Tengkawang in North Borneo. Engkabang in Sarawak. The dried kernels are exported under names denoting origin, size, and colour, e.g. Large Black Pontianak.
In the Borneo territories there are nearly 100 species of Shorea, but only a few of these produce nuts that are large enough to be worthwhile collecting. It seems likely that the nuts of most if not all species could be used, but the fat content of only a few species has been chemically examined.
A list of Sarawak species known as engkabang is given in Appendix I. The nuts of all these species maybe collected, but here we need mention only two.
Shorea gysbertsiana. This species produces the largest nut of all, and also has the advantage of being riverine, so that the nuts are easy to collect and load into a boat. Many nuts can be collected by putting a net or temporary fence across a river and trapping the nuts as they float down. Probably some 80 per cent of the nuts exported come from this one species.
Shorea seminis. This is a small nut but produces an oil of good flavour and excellent quality. It is often collected by natives for their own use, which includes eating with rice as a sort of vegetable butter.
2.	Distribution of illipe nut trees in Sarawak
There has been no survey of the distribution and occurrence of engkabang trees in Sarawak, but it would appear, from observations and exports, that they are most abundant in central Sarawak, in the watersheds of the Rejang and Bintulu and intervening rivers. They are found in the riverine belt on siliceous soils derived from sedimentary rocks. Although trees may be abundant in the ulu Baram, the inaccessibility of this area and the numerous rapids probably limit the collection and transport of nuts. Further north trees are less common and some of the more important species (notably S. martiniana and S. stenoptera) are absent.
Illipe nuts are essentially a wild crop, and there is little cultivation of it by the local inhabitants. The seed either germinates in situ beneath or near the mother tree or is carried downstream on flood water and deposited elsewhere in the riparian fringe. Germination occurs within a few days in the right moisture and temperature conditions and initial growth is rapid. The occasional seed may be heeled in by Dayaks in a manner similar to other fruit trees, but deliberate cultivation in the form of rearing seedlings and planting them out is unknown.
3.	How should the nuts be collected?
(1)	To obtain the fruits in the best condition they should be collected as soon as they fall from the tree. They should not be picked from the tree, nor should tires be lighted underneath to hasten the fall of the fruit.
(2)	After collection the fruits should be examined, and any damgaed or unfit nuts rejected. The nuts are then packed in crates known as ambong, made of split bamboo, and immersed in water. They are allowed to soak until the swelling of the nut bursts the hard outer coat (two to four weeks). The nuts are then removed and husked.
(3)	Nuts are sometimes smoked before immersion. The object of this is to keep weevils away if there is likely to be a delay between collecting the nuts and immersing them.
(4)	The nuts are then spread out on mats and sun-dried on the outside platform (tanju) of the longhouse. It takes five to seven days of good sunny weather. In wet weather they may have to be dried in a smoke house or kiln over a fire. The nuts are sufficiently dry (not above 6 per cent moisture content) when they turn a chocolate colour, or burn when a lighted match is applied to a broken kernel. When dry the nuts are replaced in the crates and stored in a dry well-ventilated place.
4.	Is local manufacture or extraction of the oil possible?
Experiments were carried out some years ago by the Agricultural Department in North Borneo. "Borneo tallow" was manufactured successfully and some was sold in the United Kingdom, but the product was considered inferior to oil manufactured from nuts imported into the United Kingdom. To produce good quality oil requires expensive machinery. The minimum size of plant would cost at least $30,000, and requires steam to work it, and engineering facilities. The sporadic nature of the crop in Borneo would make the installation of a plant uneconomical, unless it could be used for crushing something else when it was not working on illipe nuts. The conclusion is, therefore, that there is no alternative to exporting the nuts to the United Kingdom for processing there.
5.	Which are the best nuts?
Quality of nuts may be due (a) to the species of Shorea from which they derive (b) the processing.
(a)	Species of Shorea. Some samples of five species were tested at the Colonial Products Laboratory in London, Shorea gysbertsiana and S. seminis contained 52 per cent fat, the others 41 to 46 per cent. Unfortunately the nuts were badly prepared, and further research is required on the comparative yields from different species.
(b)	Processing. The trade recognises “black nuts" and "brown nuts".
P. A. Rowaan (Dee Indische Mercuur 1937: 60 416) reported that the black nuts are produced by complete immersion in water for several weeks and average (mean of fifteen samples) 65 per cent fat content on a moisture-free basis. Brown nuts are obtained by gently roasting the nuts for 20-30 days and average (mean of twelve samples) 52 per cent fat content.
These results are confirmed by an examination carried out by the Colonial Products Laboratory of samples of nuts (S. gysbertsiana) sent by the Forest Research Institute, Kepong, Malaya. Twelve samples of about ten pounds each were sent, each sample having been dried in a different way. Only one sample was given the water submersion treatment (for fifteen days) and this yielded 61 per cent fat content. The other eleven samples varied from 48 per cent to
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, AUGUST 31, 1958
147
55 per cent, with a mean of 51 per cent, and showed no significant differences in fat content between kernels dried in a kiln over a wood fire and kernels dried in the sun. Three of the samples had germinated, with radicals 4-6 inches long, but showed no significant loss of fat content.
The method recommended therefore is total immersion in water till most of the fruits have split (about three weeks) followed by drying down to six per cent moisture content (preferably in a kiln which takes about eighteen hours).
6.	What are the nuts used for in the United Kingdom?
Illipe butter is used in the confectionery industry as a cheap alternative to cocoa butter; it is specially suitable for Easter eggs! It is cheaper to use illipe butler if the price is not more than two-thirds of the price of cocoa butter, which costs five shillings per pound today.
Minor uses are for making soap, medical products, and cosmetics (although stearine butter is preferred, some illipe butter may be used in making lipsticks!). The quantity used for these purposes is however insignificant compared with the quantity used for chocolates.
The rest of the nut, after the oil has been removed, can be used as food for livestock, but compares unfavourably with linseed and groundnut meal on account of its lower protein content (9.4 per cent to 12.5 per cent as against 35 per cent and 45 per cent respectively).
7.	Why are good crops only obtained every few years?
Appendix II gives the export figures for illipe nuts from Sarawak since 1908. The figures show that good crops were obtained in 1908, 1912, 1915, 1919, 1923, 1929, 1931, 1935, 1947, 1954, 1958.
(Note : there were no records during the war years 1941-1945).
Exactly what triggers off a general flowering is still uncertain, but there are at least three factors involved:—
(a) Periodicity. Individual trees of Shorea spp. do not normally flower annually. The fact that fair crops of nuts may be obtained in two or even three successive years may be due to variation in the periodicity of individual trees; after such good years there is always a gap of lean years.
(b) Pre-flowering weather. The usual flowering season is in late September and October, lasting into November, blossom being borne for quite a considerable time in a series of overlapping flushes. Provided the tree is coming up to its period, flowering appears to be largely induced by very dry weather in July and August.
(c) Danger from storms. The North-east monsoon normally sets in about the middle of October in Sarawak and early storms may result in widespread destruction before the fruit has set, as in 1927, 1952, and 1957.
For a really good nut year we require—
(i)	A reasonable interval after the last good year (or series of years);
(ii)	Very dry weather in July and August;
(iii)	A mild monsoon up to December and preferably to early January.
These dates apply to Sarawak. The rainfall and climate differ in North Borneo.
8.	What are the prospects for engkabang plantations?
Small experimental plantations have been raised successfully from seed in Semengoh Forest Reserve near Kuching, at the Forest Research Institute at Kepong in Malaya, and in Java. The chief danger is that rodents will eat up the nuts before they have established seedlings. Spacing of 10' X 10' and 12' x 12' have proved successful.
There are, however, very little data on yields either from individual trees or per acre. Shorea stenoptera in Java started to fruit when six years old, and yielded 70-140 pounds of nuts per tree when "fully developed" (age?).
Shorea gysbertsiana planted at Kepong in 1935 fruited heavily in 1952 (after 17 years). In 1955 nuts from the 37 trees on 0.8 acres weighed 2709 pounds when fresh; there was a 58 per cent loss on decortication and a further 12 per cent loss (making 70 per cent in all) on drying to about 10 per cent moisture content, giving a net yield of 813 pounds of dried kernels. This is equivalent to 1015 pounds, say eight piculs valued at $500, per acre.
Shorea seminis was planted at Bogor about 1900, and the trees began fruiting when eight years of age.
To grow well these trees require fertile alluvial soils, such as are normally used for padi cultivation. Another difficulty is that of obtaining seed for planting, owing to the infrequent seed years and the fact that seed looses its viability within a week or two of falling from the tree, and therefore cannot be stored for any length of time.
9.	Proposed research programme.
1.	Study of yield of nuts from individual trees in existing research plots.
2.	Analysis of nuts of all Shorea spp. at University of Malaya as and when they fruit.
3.	Investigation of the factors influencing the flowering and fruiting of Shorea spp.
APPENDIX I
List of Sarawak species of Shorea known as engkabang:
Botanical name
Vernacular name
Remarks
S. artinervosa Sym	E.	tukol	Wood of “balau" grade.
S. ? bracteolata Dyer	E.	rengit	Probably a misnomer
and an inferior nut.
S. ferruginea Dyer	E.	keli	Believed to be inferior.
Wood probably a red meranti.
S. gysbertsiana Burek E. jantong A very large, good quality nut. Wood a poor, light-red meranti.
S. havilandii Brandis E. pinang Mostly on kerangas soil. Little known of the nut. Wood of "balau" grade.
S. hemsleyana (Miq.) E. gading A large nut, but rarely King	collected as the tree
usually occurs in swamps.
S. macrantha Brandis E. bungkus	A large nut.
S. martiniana Schell	E. bintang	A large nut of high
repute. The tree is probably more common than S. gysbertsiana, and appears to be our most important species.
S.	mecisopteryx Ridl.	E.	larai	Nothing known.
S.	palembanica Miq.	E.	asu	A good, large nut.
S.	pauciflora King	E.	cheriak	Probably of little value.
S.	seminis (de Vr.)	E.	terendak;	Not a very large nut
V. Sl.	Tegelam              but reputed to be of
excellent quality. The tree is common in riparian forest. Wood of "balau" grade.
S. Smithiana Sym E. rambai Brunei. Nothing known of the nut.
S. squamata (Turez)                    E. layar                    Nothing known.
B. & H.
S. stenoptera Burek E. rusa; Fairly common on E. kerangas kerangas soils. Nut fairly large. Wood a light-red meranti.
Shorea sp.	E. langgai                A common red meranti
in some lowland forests. and one of the most handsome species of Shorea that I have seen. Nothing known of the nut.
148
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, AUGUST 31, 1958
APPENDIX II
Export of Illipe-Nuts
Tons
Value at $M
1908	2,339	229,519
1909	248	24,540
1910	52	5,622
1911	285	39,354
1912	3,627	470,844
1913	1	139
1914	2,696	476,097
1915	3,206	504,961
1916	6	480
1917	—	—
1918	6	435
1919	6,747	1,617,329
1920	1,055	328,771
1921	—	—
1922	15	2,319
1923	15,060	2,687,136
1924	369	42,631
1925	—	—
1926	363	151,773
1927	6	1,603
1928	883	236,493
1929	7,476	1,556,315
1930	118	15,031
1931	6,188	250,868
1932	98	3,350
1933	—
1934	9	684
1935	4,981	319,710
1936	182	8,388
1937	6	863
1938	16	1,281
1939	31	2,493
1940	480	13,816
1941-45 No records	                 —	                         —
1946	—	—
1947	7,658	1,897,248
1948	22	5,061
1949	752	444,970
1950	—	—
1951	22	9,272
1952	30	15,465
1953	2,807	2,141,873
1954	16,047	12,631,295
1955	1,452	873,213
1956	158	92,198
1957                                    —                        —
B. E. Smythies
Niah Excavations 1958
This year the Sarawak Museum, assisted by generous grants from the Calouste Gulbenkian Foundation of Lisbon, again undertook a season of excavation and exploration in the Niah caves and the surrounding district, lasting from the beginning of February to the end of May. Despite the almost continuous rain which affected the health and spirits of the party, and the difficult physical conditions under which much of the work had to be carried out (at Lobang Tulang,
for instance, equipment had to be hauled up, and specimens lowered down, a two-hundred foot cliff with the aid of ropes and baskets) splendid results were achieved, both the quality and quantity of the work surpassing that of previous years.
The party, under the personal direction of the Curator, consisted of sixteen trained Museum staff, five senior attached staff, twenty-five to forty unskilled local men and seventeen Santubong Malays who had been trained for archeological fieldwork during the excavations carried out by the Museum in the Sarawak River delta during the past few years. These last displayed a high degree of skill and enthusiasm and contributed no little to the success of the season. Several of the local men were also trained to a high standard of proficiency in trench stratification and labelling procedures in the course of the season and they will form a very useful nucleus labour force in future years. In addition the expedition had the services of an Administrative Officer, a Clerical Officer, and two Survey parties.
Excavation continued in the Great Cave to a depth of seventy-two inches where many more burials, dating through file various Stone Ages from about 50,000 B.C. were revealed, confirming and amplifying the tentative conclusions drawn from the work of previous seasons. New ground, however, was also broken this year, when the field of exploration was extended for the first time to the sub-caves of Lobang Tulang, Gan Kira and other sub-caves of the Subis Mountain massif. At these sites the party found cremation and coffin burials and various sorts of secondary burials, all in association with pottery, most of it broken, beads, textiles, carved bone and wood, articles of iron, bronze and gold, all indicating a period of occupation extending from Neolithic, the latest period evidenced in the Great Cave, to about 1000 A.D. with the largest concentration in the T’ang period, about 600-900 A.D., for which, as well as characteristic ceramics, there is the unassailable evidence of datable Chinese coins.
As an example of the great archeological wealth of these caves one may cite Lobang Tulang where in four days fieldwork more than seven thousand listed articles were collected, including about five hundred pieces of pottery, one complete, and more than one thousand two hundred beads. Thus even a few days of fieldwork provide material for many months of laborious analysis and research by the archeological staff of the Museum.
In some of the sub-caves a reconnaissance party found, 200 feet above river level, beautifully carved "boats”, which had been used as coffins, furnished with all the requisites for the after-life. There was no time this year for a more than superficial survey of this important find which undoubtedly links up with the cult of the 'ship of the dead' and other similar funeral observances in South East Asia.
As well as pursuing their archeological investigations the party took the opportunity of continuing the study of the habits of the swiftlets and bats which live in such thousands in the caves, and of extending their knowledge of local Punan beliefs and burial customs. In addition Lord Medway and Benedict Sandin, the Museum Research Assistant, both undertook long subexpeditions into the surrounding country in attempts to answer certain questions raised by the work in the caves.
Next year, when the tantalising possibilities of the sub-caves are more fully investigated, and the deeper levels of the Great Cave, which trial pits have shown to extend at least another seventy-two inches, are explored, we can look forward to an equally interesting and rewarding season.
BETTY SMITH
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, AUGUST 31, 1958
149
The World beyond the Rivers
by
K. G. Robinson, Education Officer,
Third Division
The Third Division has now held vacation courses for both its Chinese teachers and its Native teachers. It is interesting to compare them and to speculate about their impact on people.
The Chinese teachers' course was held in Sibu for one week starting on the 19th June and lectures were given in the Teachers’ Training Centre at Sungai Merah near the airport. All but a handful of the 297 teachers found themselves accommodation in the town, and came in every morning by bus.
The Native teachers course on the other hand was held at Rajang where everybody lived in one of several empty Government bungalows. This course also lasted for a week, but started a little later, on July 24th. One hundred and ninety-four teachers attended from all parts of the Division—a small triumph in co-ordination, when one remembers that even now schools do not have their holidays at exactly the same time because of District variations in the farming year, and also bearing in mind the difficulties of getting about in this Division. The teacher from Long Linau above Belaga, for example, travelled nearly 600 miles there and back and had both the Pelagus and Bakun rapids to negotiate.
The atmosphere in these two courses was quite different. Both were holiday courses, in that they were filled with a cheerful holiday atmosphere. Friends were meeting again after separation: there was a set daily routine, but the routine was new; and something interesting was being done. These are three powerful ingredients for cheerfulness. Yet the nature of the cheerfulness differed. The atmosphere of the Chinese course I would describe as steady, and of the Native course as exuberant.
After all, education is no new thing for the Chinese. The course for them was in the nature of a steady follow-through operation towards a goal which has long been understood. For most of the Native teachers, however, education is a new thing. For many it is a high adventure, and this breeds exuberance of spirit.
Consider what is achieved. People from a Kampong or group of longhouses feel that they must at all costs have a school. They are not very clear why, but they know it is a must. After endless discussions jungle is cut, small roads are made and some sort of a school house is built. Everyone is very happy and proud but the hard-hearted Education Officer won’t let them start unless they can find a teacher who has been to school himself long enough at least to have reached primary 6.
At last such a teacher is found, a boy of 18 or 20 perhaps. The Council gives him a blackboard and some textbooks. The smoke from the firecrackers of the opening ceremony drifts away. His class grows in the excitement of the moment to a quite unmanageable size, and he starts. The school committee and most of the community stay to observe his first lesson-in itself quite a sufficient ordeal. Criticisms of his teaching will thereafter be freely offered. Immediate results are expected. He must be capable of teaching the elements of all subjects: set a good example in hygiene; take a troop of children of all ages to the river every morning to wash and brush their teeth and make sure they come back without any casualties; he must organise games; keep the grass cut and the school clean; start a school garden and make sure something grows; be able to administer first-aid; teach the children some useful sort of handwork; keep the school register; look after the accounts; send in all the official returns;
maintain discipline in his school; look after the children who stay in the boarding house and see they are fed; feed himself; prepare his lessons; correct his pupils’ exercise books . . . and on and on.
Any teacher in this situation would clutch at a straw, so it is not surprising that they are willing to travel some hundreds of miles to attend a course, even if it only lasts a week. For those who make the effort we try to give good value. This includes seeing a good deal of the country they live in. Many Native teachers this year who came to Rajang saw the sea for the first time. Fifty of them were able to look over the Blue Funnel Steamship Atreus. Others saw the logs which have floated down river so many miles being ripped apart by the whirling teeth of the Colonial Timber Company's circular saws. Nearly 90 Chinese teachers saw Sarawak from a new angle when Borneo Airways arranged short flights round Sibu for them before their morning lectures. These were only some of many new experiences.
Too much happened in those eight-day courses to be described here in detail. The question is always whether, in so short a time, to spread the butter thickly over a small piece of bread or thinly over a larger one; that is to say, to try to deal thoroughly with a few topics or briefly with many. At present the former seems desirable for Chinese teachers who are better qualified and can turn for guidance in many matters to tradition, whereas for Native teachers with their many single-handed responsibilities, the latter seems essential. In either case any money spent on running these courses is money very well spent indeed.
It is interesting also to compare the part played by women. In England it is the rule to have women as teachers in primary schools, while there are the exceptions. In Chinese schools in the Third Division it is the other way round, yet the number of women teachers is increasing. In the Chinese teachers’ course the hall was neatly divided by some process of natural selection into two groups—men on the left and women on the right, with the men who arrived too late for a seat in their own camp regretfully finding themselves obliged to join the ladies! The numbers were 111 women and 186 men. In the Native teachers’ course there were only 12 lady teachers altogether, but it is possible that this number will almost double itself each year for some time to come. Nothing could be more important for Native education and I hope that all who can persuade well-qualified girls to take up teaching will do so.
In the long run education in Sarawak will depend on people themselves. The Government, to adapt Sir Winston Churchill’s phrase, can give them the tools, but they must finish the job. In the upper reaches of the Rajang it takes three weeks travelling from Sibu to visit five schools. With such communications there can be no real supervision, only occasional visits to help maintain morale.
The tools of education are the ability to read, write and count. Once children have learnt to apply these three bronze age inventions, nothing can hold them back if they are sufficiently clever, provided they have access to books. The only teacher William Cobbett ever had was an older boy who showed him how to fit the letters together to make sounds. This did not prevent him becoming a Member of Parliament and the author of many books. The Royal Society was founded by a galaxy of scientists who bad emerged from Oxford and Cambridge at a time when the universities were little better than drinking dens for illiterate dons. But without books the strongest intellect will starve. That is why, in the Third Division, we are doing our best to make sure that in every school there is a little library of well illustrated books from which children with fresh and active minds can learn for themselves and teach each other about the world beyond the rivers.
150
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, AUGUST 31, 1958
His Excellency the Governor’s visit to Bintulu and Sibuti—August 1958.
His Excellency, accompanied by the Resident, Fourth Division, (Mr. F. B. K. Drake, m.b.e.), the District Officer, Miri, (Mr. P. Scanlon) and the Assistant Private Secretary, (Mr. Ignatius Yong), embarked on the M.Y. Zahora at Sungei Biawak on 1st August at 5.00 p.m. carrying with them four cases of beer and a drum of Kuching water as a gift to the thirsty people of Bintulu and, after a night stop at Kedurong, arrived off Bintulu at 8.00 a.m. on 3rd August.
After bidding au revoir to the District Officer, Miri, who was to rejoin the party at Kuala Sibuti on the 8th August, the rest of the party transferred to the Lorna Doone and entered the Bintulu river. At the wharf to meet His Excellency on his arrival at 9.00 a.m. was the District Officer, (Mr. R. J. Pole-Evans). On landing, His Excellency inspected a Guard of Honour mounted by the Sarawak Constabulary and, after being introduced to the local citizens, proceeded to the line of school children at the other side of the wharf. A little girl, the daughter of the Chief Clerk, Mr. Chin Syn Yu, presented His Excellency with a bouquet.
After changing in the District Officer's house the party, now joined by the District Officer and the Senior Native Officer (Abang Indeh) left by outboards for Rumah Budit in the Tubau river where it was planned to have lunch at 1.00 p.m. Unfortunately the outboard which carried the cook and boys as well as the provisions was so overloaded that it travelled very much slower than the others and did not reach its destination until about 4.00 p.m. It was fortunate, therefore, that owing to the doubtful state of the river the programme for a visit to Rumah Penghulu Deng, four hours further upriver, had been cancelled in time for the people to come downriver. When the party arrived at Tubau bazaar Penghulu Deng himself, several Tuai2 Rumah and others from ten houses and the Tubau citizens including the blind boy, Seleh anak Anyeh, were there to welcome His Excellency.
In the evening, His Excellency discussed with the Penghulu and Tuai2 various matters of interest and told them that their request for a primary school would be sympathetically considered if there was a guarantee that all parents would send their children to school. Having learnt that the prospect of engkabang crop was likely to be good next year, His Excellency advised them to find out the correct price first before selling their collection.
In spite of intermittent showers, the show given by the Film Unit was very well attended and greatly appreciated by all.
The next morning the party made for Lubang where His Excellency visited both the Local Authority and the Chinese Schools. The latter was apparently in financial straits and would, it was said, be likely to close down at the end of the year unless it received a Government grant. His Excellency advised the two schools to combine and form one big school and then only the question of grant-in-aid might be considered.
At Pandan, the next call, His Excellency visited the Chinese School and walked through the bazaar and kampong before resting in the Forest Quarters. After lunch, the party left for Sebauh. Here His Excellency was met by the Native Officer in Charge. Abang Tairani, who introduced him to the local citizens. His Excellency then walked through the kampong and bazaar before visiting the Chinese School which looked neat and from all accounts well managed.
At 4.30 p.m. the party left Sebauh for Rumah Ruma, a modern looking 40-door longhouse, where Penghulus, Tuai2 Rumah and others from twenty one other houses had fore-gathered to welcome His Excellency who, on arrival, was met and escorted by several maidens in traditional dress to the ruai where a bedarah was performed followed by what was, at first, feared to be a door to door mirieng. The highlight of the
evening was the sumptuous dinner of delicious Chinese food. It was gratifying to observe Europeans, Ibans, Malays and Chinese mingling together in a most friendly and co-operative manner. Not unlike dinner-parties in the towns, there were several speeches. Led by Wakil T.R. Jilan, seven others rose to the occasion. His Excellency replied by thanking them for their warm welcome and congratulating them on laying such an excellent feast. As in Tubau, the film show was greatly appreciated by all.
Next morning, the 5th of August, at 8.00 a.m. the party waved goodbye to the people of Rumah Ruma and sped for Bintulu which was reached at 9.30 a.m. At 10.00 a.m. His Excellency heard requests in Court and then walked around the various offices. He was pleased to see some of the discharged patients of the Rajah Brooke Memorial Settlement waiting to speak to him. After a group photograph had been taken. His Excellency and party proceeded across river to Kampong Jepak where several arches had been put up and fire crackers were let loose by every house. Next the party crossed the river to Pangkalan Sebiaw walking through the kampong. On the way His Excellency stopped at the O.K.M.S. Local Authority School to inspect the school children who were lined up there. After inspecting the school His Excellency thanked the staff and the children for their warm welcome and exhorted the children to be obedient to their parents, who have given them education, and to grow up to be good people and to serve Bintulu and Sarawak. He added that they should follow the traditions and customs of their parents and become friendly people who do not want to make trouble. The party then visited the Local Authority Reading Room which, His Excellency learnt with satisfaction, was made good use of by the community. From here the party walked through the bazaar, which looked well-stocked and prosperous, before driving to the District Officer's house.
In the afternoon a luncheon party was given by the Bintulu community in the Recreation Club. In reply to speeches of welcome made by the District Officer and the Hon. Secretary, Mr. H. P. Buxton, His Excellency touched on the prevailing low prices of rubber, pepper and ramin and the fact that the oil refinery in Miri was not making the money it used to because there was a lot of oil in other countries. He disclosed that his advisers reckoned that next year there would be a serious drop in revenue. He also drew attention to the fact that since the war the Government had spent a great deal of money on social services, Government was spending four times as much on education as was spent three years ago. The same, His Excellency added, could be said of the expansion in medical facilities. It was now necessary to spend any spare money on improving the economic side of the country's development and one of Sarawak's principal crops was rubber. His Excellency said the country could not do without it hence the Rubber Planting Scheme. He congratulated the people of Bintulu for taking advantage of the scheme, the Foochows, the Malays, the Ibans and others. He said that all this would however be of no avail without the Rubber Development Officer and his staff. His Excellency also pointed out that the original scheme was for 40,000 acres throughout the country but that within eighteen months the whole of this had been taken up and Government was now considering the question of increasing it to 60,000 acres. This might entail an expenditure of no less than $22 million— about half of Sarawak's annual revenue. Until this country was able to earn more revenue. His Excellency said, the Government could not afford secondary schools in all the towns in which it would like to see them established, nor could we hope to see piped water in every house, nor a telephone in every bazaar. Sarawak, he said, was going through a rather hard period but it was a blessing in disguise because if prices of rubber, pepper or ramin were higher, the people would not have got down to the Rubber Planting Scheme.
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, AUGUST 31, 1958
151
In the evening there was a cocktail party at the District Officer’s house followed by a gendang at the Recreation Club and a film show on the padang.
After dinner, His Excellency and party left Bintulu at 11.00 p.m. on the Ruai for the Zahora where the night was spent. Early next morning, 6th August, the Zahora arrived off Kuala Tatau and the party transferred to outboards and proceeded upriver arriving at Rumah Tayai at 10.00 a.m., one hour ahead of schedule. On arrival His Excellency was invited to spear a pig at the steps of the house and to mirieng both on the ruai and in the Tuai Rumah’s bilek. Soon the party left and reached Wong Sunan waterfall for lunch. It was evident that a lot of trouble had been taken to prepare the place for the occasion. Tables of round wood tied together and ladders had been made for the convenience of His Excellency who, like the rest of the party, seemed enthralled at the spectacular scene. He climbed to the top of the rock and took several photographs. Needless to say there were mirieng both before and after lunch.
Rumah Penghulu Kana was the night stop. On arrival there at 5.00 p.m. His Excellency was invited to spear a pig the liver of which, according to the longhouse, showed a good omen. There was not a moment for relaxation until the film unit put up its show which again was greatly appreciated. What with cats enjoying a game of ring-a-ring-a-roses pausing at intervals to paw at one’s big toes and cocks crowing a few inches below one’s bed it was quite impossible to get any uninterrupted sleep.
Next morning, 7th August, the party left Penghulu Kana’s house and made a fifteen minute stop at Sangan bazaar before proceeding downriver to board the Ruai which had come upriver to meet the party. Arriving at Tatau at 12.15 p.m. His Excellency proceeded direct to hear requests in the Court after which the party walked through the bazaar and stopped at the Chinese school for light refreshment.
At Kuala Tatau which was reached at 3.15 p.m. His Excellency and party had tea at the Local Authority school. In reply to a speech of welcome by T.K. Ikram, His Excellency thanked the Tua Kampong and the people of Kuala Tatau for their sincere welcome and exhorted them to continue the good work they were doing particularly at the school and said that he hoped they would follow the laws of Islam and the traditions and customs of their fathers.
The Ruai then steamed towards the Zahora and together they made for Kedurong. At 11.00 p.m. the District Officer, Bintulu boarded the Ruai and left for Bintulu while the Zahora sailed for Sibuti.
At dawn on the 8th of August, the Lorna Doone came alongside with the District Officer, Miri, to pick up His Excellency and party for Kuala Sibuti where two outboards were awaiting to take them to the Kedayan village of Kelulit. Here His Excellency visited the Local Authority School and saw the framework of the new prefabricated school-building. His Excellency said that he had seen a similar school building in Bau and thought that it was a little hot inside. It was advisable, he said, when putting on the walls to ensure that enough breeze could come in. The soil in Kelulit was reported to be fertile and the new coconut plantation looked thriving. From Kelulit the District Officer took the party to Jenggalas to see the new Sibuti road and then back to the Lorna Doone which took His Excellency and party to Bekenu where
His Excellency was introduced to the local notabilities behind whom stood the best of the arches seen during the tour.
At 1.00 p.m. His Excellency attended a luncheon party given in his honour by the Subis Rural District Council in the Office followed at 4.00 p.m. by a reception at the Chinese School.
His Excellency then heard a request in Court after which he watched a football match between a team of Kelulit lads and The Rest which was won by the latter, 1 — 0. A cup presented by Mohamad Esa and another prize were given away by His Excellency to the winner and runner-up respectively.
At 8.00 p.m. an inter-racial bangsawan was staged at one of the godowns of this fast developing bazaar. All agreed that it was a most entertaining evening and a fitting close to the much-anticipated visit of His Excellency.
The Lorna Doone then cruised downriver anti anchored for the night at Kuala Sibuti. The night was hot in the cabin and it was with a feeling of relief when the party woke up at dawn to find that they were now crossing the bar and making for the Zahora.
At 6.45 a.m. the party parted company, the Resident and the District Officer for Miri on the Ruai and His Excellency for Kuching on the Zahora.
Except for some six hours between Tanjong Sirik and Tanjong Po on the return trip, the sea was on the whole quite calm. Fishing was poor but just as everybody was giving up hope Mohamed, the engineer, caught a sizeable ikan tenggiri.
The Zahora reached Kuching at 9.00 a.m. sharp on Sunday morning twenty-six hours and fifteen minutes after sailing from Sibuti.
CORRESPONDENCE
The Editor,
The Sarawak Gazette,
Kuching.
Sir,
In the Sarawak Gazette of July 31st, I was interested to read Mr. A. J. N. Richards’ article on the Sea Dayaks.
In this article he suggested a possible origin of the term Sea Dayak in that these peoples where often found, during the 1840’s, in company with sea-going pirates, and had been known to use their own boats at sea.
While not attempting to disagree with this view I should like to offer a further possible explanation which I obtained from my father some thirty years ago. He told me that in the days before James Brooke came to Sarawak, it was common for Malays in Kalaka (at least) to refer to upriver peoples as "SIDA AYA” i.e. uncles or people older than themselves. This was purely a term of respect given to people without any particular name. Surely then is perfectly possible that coastal Malays, on being asked who the upriver people were, would refer to them as "SIDA AYA" which becomes Sea Dayak with very little inflection. This term has now died out, and at present in Kalaka Malays refer to Sea Dayaks as Dayak and to those still Basirat as Ibans, while most Dayaks refer to Malays as Laut.
Your obedient servant,
Thomas Unak
152
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, AUGUST 31, 1958
Recent Books
Additions to the Sarawak Library during the month of August, 1958
Author
Title
Crime & Detection
Burton, Mila	The Moth-watch Murder (1958)
Carr, Antony	The Man In Room 3 (1958)
Desmond, Hugh	Appointment at Eight (1957)
Disney, Doris Miles                         The Case of the Straw Man (1958) Fitt, Mary	Case for the Defence (1958)
Flynn, Brian	The Nine Cuts (1958)
Gardner, Erle Stanley                   The Case of the Angry Mourner (1958)
Garve, Andrew	The Galloway Case (1958)
Gunn, Victor	The 64 Thousand Murder (1958)
Heckstall-Smith,
Anthony	Murder on the Brain (1958)
Innes, Michael	The Long Farewell (1958)
Johns, W. E.	No Motive for Murder (1958)
Kelland, C. B.	The Case of the Nameless Corpse
(1958)
Kendrick, Baynard                       Reservations for Death (1958) Longmate, Norman	A Head for Death (1958)
MacDonald, John D.                     Death Trap (1958)
Motte, Peter	Fall of the Curtain (1958)
Procter, Maurice	Three at the Angel (1958)
Queen, Ellery	The Finishing Stroke (1958)
Stout, Rex	Three for the Chair (1958)
Upfield, Arthur	The Batchelors of Broken Hill
(1958)
Fiction
Ashton-Warner, Sylvia	Spinster (1958)
Arkell, Reginald	The Round House (1958)
Balaam, pseud.	Come Out to Play (1958)
Blight, Leslie	Love and Idleness (1958)
Blish, Jama	Fallen Star (1957)
Bloomfield, Anthony	The Delinquents (1958)
Bottome, Phyllis	Heart of a Child (1957)
Breuer. Bessie	The Actress (1958)
Camus, Albert	Exile and the Kingdom (1958)
Carson, Josephine	Drives My Green Age (1958)
Cocteau, Jean	The Miscreant (1958)
Cookson, Catherine	The Menagerie (1958)
Cozzens, James Gould                    By Love Possessed (1958) Crispin, Edmund, ed.                     Best SF Three: science fiction stories (1958)
Delderfield, R. F.	The Dreaming Suburb (1958)
De Wohl, Louis	The Glorious Folly (1958)
Dostoyevsky, F. M.                        The Double (1957) Duggan, Alfred	Three's Company (1958)
Fraser, Sir Ronald                       A Visit from Venus (1958) Gaite, Francis	Come and Go (1958)
Gibbs, Lewis	Gowns and Satyr’s Legs (1958)
Golding, Louis	The Little Old Admiral (1958)
Goldthorpe, John	The One Talent (1958)
Green, Julian	The Transgressor (1958)
Grierson, Edward	The Captain General (1958)
Han Suyin	The Mountain is Young (1958)
Harvester, Simon	The Yesterday Walkers	(1958)
Hesse, Hermann	Demian (1958)
Heyer, Georgette	Sylvester (1957)
Humphrey, William	Home from the	Hill	 (1958)
La Mure, Pierre	Moulin Rouge: a novel based on
the life of Henri de Toulous-Lautrec (1951)
Legrand, Nadia	The Rainbow has Seven Colours
(1958)
Linklater, Eric	A Sociable Plover (1957)
Maine, Charles Eric                      High Vacuum (1957)
Mallet-Joris, Francoise	House of Lies (1958)
Maurois, Andre	September Roses (1958)
Mittelholzer, Edgar                  The Harrowing of Hubertus (1954) Moore, Brian	The Feast of the Lupercal (1958)
Mottram, R. H.	No One Will Ever Know (1958)
Murray, D. L.	Roman Cavalier (1958)
Naipaul, V. S.	The Suffrage of Elvira (1958)
Ozbekhan, Hasan	The Isle of Princes (1958)
Pirro, Ugo	The Camp-followers (1958)
Prole, Lozania	The Stuart Sisters (1958)
Pudney, John	Trespass in the Sun (1957)
Pym, Barbara	A Glass of Blessings (1958)
Ridge, Antonia	By Special Request (1958)
Robins, Denise	The Untrodden Snow (1958)
Rooke, Daphne	Wizards' Country (1957)
Shann, Renee	Ring for Nurse (1958)
Simak, Clifford	Strangers in the Universe: science
fiction stories (1958)
Slaughter, Frank G.                       The Mapmaker (1958)
Snow, C. P.	The Conscience of the Rich (1958)
Stein, Sylvester	Second-Class Taxi (1958)
Styles, Showell	The Admiral's Fancy (1958)
Fiction
Title
Tchehov, Anton	The Darling and other stories
(1950)
Tranter, Nigel	Balefire (1958)
Wain, John	The Contenders (1958)
Warner, Rex	The Young Ceasar (1958)
Welcome, John	Run for Cover (1958)
White, T. H.	The Once and Future King (1958)
Wildeblood, Peter	The Main Chance (1957)
Wyndham, John	The Kraken Wakes (1953)
Zola, Emile	Drunkard (1958)
Non-Fiction
Baines, Frank	Look Towards the Sea (1958)
Beck, William Samson                  Modern Science and the Nature of
Life (1958)
Brade-Birks, S.	The Teach Yourself consist ency-
Graham, ed.	clopedia of general knowledge,
prepared under the direction of S. Graham Brade-Birks, in association with Frank Higenbottam. 2nd ed. (1957)
Brennecke, Jochen	The Hunters and the Hunted
(1958)
Buckmaster, Maurice J,                 They Fought Alone: British Agents in France (1958)
Bush, Eric Wheler                          Bless Our Ship (1958)
Calder, Nigel	Electricity Grows Up (1958)
Carstairs,G. Morris                       The Twice-born: a study of a community of high-cast Hindus (1957)
Cohen, John	Humanistic Psychology (1958)
Compton, Dennis	End of an Innings (1958)
Cooper, Lady Diana,          The Rainbow Comes and Goes Viscountess Norwich              (1958)
Cowles, Virginia	The Phantom Major: the legen-
dary exploits of David Stirling (1958)
Crouse, William Harry                 Understanding Science (1958)
Darwin, Charles	The Autobiography of Charles
Darwin, 1809-1882, with original omissions restored; edited with appendix and notes by his grand-daughter Nora Barlow (1958)
De Ville, Eric	Electricity (1955)
Ducrocq, Albert	The Origins of Life (1958)
Ellis-Fermor, Una	The Jacobean Drama: an inter-
pretation. 14th ed. revised. (1958)
Gaunt, William	Kensington (1958)
Gordon, Doris	Doctor Down Under (1958)
Hartnell, Norman	Silver and Gold (1955)
Ionesco, Eugene	Plays. 2 Volumnes.	(1958)
Johnson, Paul	Journey into Chaos	(1958)
Le Vay, David	Physiology. 2nd ed. (1957)
Le Vay, David	Anatomy. 2nd ed. (1957)
Mielkee, Otto	Disaster at Sea: the story of the
worlds great maritime tragedies: (1958)
Parkinson, Cyril N.                    Parkinson's Law, or, The Pursuit of Progress (1958)
Patterson, George N.         Up and Down Asia (1958) Ramsey, Guy, compiler        Epic stories of the Second World War: with a preface by Guy Ramsey (1958)
Read, Sir Herbert,	This Way Delight: a book of
compiler	poetry for the young (1957)
Toynbee, Arnold Joseph                 Christianity Among the Religions
                                                of the world (1958)
Tregonning, Kennedy G.                       Under Chartered Company Rule.                                                 (North Borneo. 1881-1946) (1958)
Ward, Herbert and             The Approach to Teaching. New
Roscoe, Frank	                   and revised ed. by F. W. Kella-
                                   way (1958)
Wavell, Stewart	The Lost World of the East: an
adventurous quest in the Mala-yan hinterland (1958)
Wat, Anthony	Principles and Persuasions: the
literary essays of Anthony West                                                  (1958)
Wolff, Leon	Low Level Mission; introduction
by John R. Kane (1958)
Woodrooffe, Thomas The Enterprise of England: an account of her emergence as an oceanic power (1958)
Wynne, Barry	Count Five and Die; told to Bary
Wynne by Colonel William Elisca (1958)
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, AUGUST 31, 1958
153
Kuching Market Price List
AUGUST, 1958
RICE—(per gantang)
Average
Local White Government Milled      ...       1.62
Local White Milled     ...         ...         ...       1.75
Siam "A"	    ...           ...         ...         ...      2.00
Siam "B"	    ...           ...         ...         ...      1.70
Siam "C"	    ...           ...         ...         ...      —
Siam Broken  ...           ...	      ...	     ...      1.68
Rangoon      	  ...	      ...	      ...	      ...     —
SUGAR—(per kati)
While Sugar   ...      ...          ...        ...               .30
Brown Sugar ...	...	...         ...	.40
Nipah Sugar ...	...	...	...	.25
FLOUR/AND BREAD—
Wheat Flour per kati 	...	...	...	.25
Bread per small loaf 	 ...	...	...	.25
Bread per large loaf	  ...	...	...	.50
MILK—(per tin)
(a)	Nestlés    ...           ...        ...          ...          .65
Liberty Brand	...	...	...	.55
Gold Medal ...	...	...	...	.50
Milk Maid   ...           ...        ...          ...          .65
(b)	Local Fresh Milk 	per pint	..	...	.80
EGGS—(each)
Turtle            ...       ...          ...          ...             .08
Duck, fresh	   ...	...	...	...	.14
Duck, salted  ...      ...	...	...	.15
Fowl              ...       ...          ...          ...             .14
EDIBLE FATS—(per kati)
Butter per lb.  ...	  ...	...        ...	2.00
Coconut Oil     ...       ...       ...        ...                .68
Peanut Oil       ...       ...       ...        ...              1.80
Lard No.	1     ...	   ...	...        ...	1.40
Lard No. 2      ...        ...       ...        ...             1.20
Ghee                ...        ...       ...        ...             2.20
Dripping         ...	   ...	 ...	...	.80
PORK—(per kati)
Lean No. 1       ...       ...         ...        ...        2.80
Lean	with Fat No. 2  ...         ...        ...        1.40
Fat                    ...       ...         ...        ...        1.00
Ribs                  ...       ...         ...        ...        2.00
BEEF—(per kati)
Beef, steak	 ...         ...          ...        3.00
Beef, Curry meat	...	...	...	1.60
Buffalo No. 1 ...       ...         ...           ...        3.00
Buffalo curry meat	...	...	...	1.60
Mutton (Australian)	...	...	...	2.80
Mutton (Local)	...	...	...	3.00
POULTRY—(per kati)
Capons          ...	...	...	...          2.38
Chinese Cocks        ...	...	...          1.98
Pullets            ...       ...          ...         ...          2.40
Chinese Hens	...	...	...	  1.48
Dayak Fowls ...	...	...	...	 1.77
Ducks            ...         ...         ...         ...         1.78
Muscovy        ...         ...         ...         ...        1.53
Cross-Breed	...	...	...	1.50
Geese              ...        ...          ...        ...        1.50
FISH—(per kati)
Fresh Fish No. 1	...          ...          ...        1.20
Fresh Fish No. 2	...          ...         ...           .80
Fresh Fish No. 3	...	...	...           .40
Prawns No. 1	...	...	...	1.60
Prawns No. 2	...	...	...	.80
Crab No. 1	...	...	...	...	1.00
Crab No. 2	...	...	...	...	.72
Salted	Fish	 No. 	1      	...          	...	         ...	        2.40
Salted	Fish	 No.	 2      ...          ...         ...	  1.10
Salted	Fish 	No.	 3       ...          ...         ...	  .80
SALT—(per kati)
Average
Coarse        ...	...	...          ...	.10
Fine            ...	...	...	...	.10
Nipah         ...          ...          ...          ...             .80
VEGETABLES—(per kati)
Bamboo Shoots (salted)      ...	 ...          .40
Bandong (Ubikayu)	...	...	...	.10
Bangkuang   ...	...	...	...	.15
Bayam           ...        ...          ...         ...          .22
Bean Sprouts	...	...	...	.30
Cabbage        ...        ...         ...          ...          .68
Changkok Manis	...	...	...	.26
Cucumber (Timun)	...	...	...	.21
Chillies (Red)	...	...	...	.80
Chillies (Green)      ...          ...          ...          .33
Daun Bawang	...	...	...	.95
Ensahi Puteh	...	...	...	.45
Ensahi Besar ...	...	...	...	.38
Ensahi Bunga	...	...	...	.41
French beans	...	...	...	.50
Garlic, fresh	 ...         ...          ...        1.10
Ginger            ...	 ...	...	...           .58
Kachang Panjang   ...	...	...           .35
Kangkong Ayer      ...	...          ...           .20
Keladi Batawi        ...          ...          ...	.15
Keladi China          ...          ...          ... 	  .30
Ketola           ...       ...          ...          ...           .29
Keribang      ...       ...          ...          ...           .15
Kundor         ...       ...          ...          ...           .15
Labu             ...       ...          ...          ...           .15
Labu Duri	...	...	...	...	.22
Ladies Fingers	...	...	...	.55
Lettuce	...	...	...	...	.70
Lobak (Chinese Radish)     ...          ...          .80
Lobak, salted	...	...	...	.60
Onions, Bombay      ...	...          ...           .30
Onions, small	...	...	...	.56
Potatoes, Imported ...	...	...	.30
Priak (Bitter Gourd)	...	...           .60
Sauerkraut, Imported ...	...	...	.90
Sauerkraut, Local       ...	...	...	.60
Tamarind (Buah Assam)	...	...	.40
Tomatoes  	...	...	...	...	1.00
Trong (Brinjals)     ...	...	...	.26
Sauce per bottle No. 1 ...	...	...	1.10
Sauce per bottle No. 2 ...	...	...	.90
Sauce per bottle No. 3 ...	...	...	.40
TEA—(per lb)
Tea, Ceylon	...	...	...	4.80
Tea, Chinese  ...       ...         ...          ...           1.80
COFFEE—(per kati)
Raw, Java No. 1, Local      ...	...           3.20
Raw, No.	2   ...	...	...	...	1.80
Powder         ...	...	...	...	1.00
FRUITS—(each)
Pisang Umbun per kati	...	...	.15
Pisang Tandok          ...	...	...	.20
Nanas            ...	  ...	 ...	 ...	.20 to .80
Buah Betek per kati ...	...	...	.20
SUNDRIES—
Bean curd per piece 	...	...	...	.15
Bean cake white per piece	...	...	.15
Bean cake yellow per piece	...	...	.25
Blachan per kati	 ...	...	...	.65
Charcoal per picul	 ...	...	...	7.50
Coconut, fresh each 	...	...	...	.16
Corned Beef per tin 	...	...	...	1.20
Dried Prawn per kati ...	...	...	1.80 to2.40
Kerosene Oil per tin	...	...	...	5.30
Kerosene Oil per bottle	...	...	.25
Matches Local per box ...   ...         ...	.05
Matches imported per box	...	...	.05
Soap, washing local per bar	...	...	.61
Soap, washing imported per bar	...	...	.96
Salmon per tin          ...	...	...	1.50
Sardines per tin        ...	...	...	.60
Bako Wood, per panchang	...	...	28.00
CIGARETTES—
Players per packet of 10	...	...	.45
Rough Rider per packet of 10 ...	...	.35
Craven "A" ...	...	...	...	.45
Torch Light ...         ...          ...         ...           .35
Slate Express	...	...	...	2.30
Capstan per packet of 20	...	...	.75
154
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, AUGUST 31, 1958 
Printed at the Government Printing Office, Kuching, Sarawak,
W. J. Chater, Government Printer.