Acknowledgement. Mr. Charles Linang tenders his grateful thanks to all re- latives and friends for their kind attendance at the funeral of his late father Mr. Umpang Linang and also to those who sent wreaths and letters of condolence in his sad bereavement. Social and Personal. JULY. We understand that His Highness the Rajah is due to arrive in Singapore on the s.s. Comorin on October 8th, and that His Highness intends to proceed direct to Ponti¬ anak on October 11th, in order to return the visit which the Honourable the Resident of Dutch West Borneo paid to Sarawak during Council Negri week last April. His Excellency the Governor of British North Borneo, Mr. C. R. Smith, paid a short visit to Kuching on the 12th of the month. Ho arrived on the s.s. Darvel and, after calling on the Resident, First Division, proceeded to Sandakan on the same boat. His Excellency assumed duty as Governor of British North Borneo on July 15th. The Officer Administering the Government, Mr. E. Parnell, left for a short visit to Singapore on the s.s. Vyner Brooke on July 12th. Mr. Parnell returned to Kuching on the same boat on July 19th. We regret that in our last issue we omitted to mention that Mr. R. W. Hammond left for Singapore, en route for home, on June 26th. Mr. Hammond, who arrived in Sara¬ wak in June 1936 on a visit to his son, Mr. I. S. Hammond, subsequently undertook the compiling of a report on education in Sarawak, having had great experience of education in Rhodesia. He was engaged 8th this work from November 1936 to June 1937 and his report was presented to the Govern¬  Visitors to Kuching during the month included Mr. L. A. Toone, Assistant General Manager, Sarawak Oilfields Ltd., and Mr. H. E. Cutfield, Acting Resident, Second Division. Mr. Toone, accompanied by Mrs. Toone, arrived in Kuching on the 3rd by the s.s. Darrel, and left again for Miri by the m.v. Marudu on the 5th. Mr. Cutfield arrived from Simanggang on the 8th and left again on the 11th. Mr. and Mrs. L. D. Kennedy returned from furlough on the 5th. Mr. Kennedy has been appointed to act as Commissioner of Trade and Customs in the place of Mr. R. F. Sinclair, who left on furlough on the 6th. Mr. Sinclair, is proceeding home via the coast of China, Japan, and America. Another departure on furlough was that of Mr. and Mrs. A. L. Melaine, who left Kuching by the s.s. Vyner Brooke on July 12th. Mr. A. G. Taylor returned from furlough by the s.s. Vyner Brooke on July 30th, and Mr. F. L. Crossley returned from Singapore, where he has been on sick leave, by the same vessel on July 19th. Mr. Taylor resumes his work as Government Auditor and Mr. Crossley has been appointed Assistant Dis trict Officer, Kuching. We understand that Mr. A. Macpherson, who is on furlough in England, was married on July 28th. We tender our heartiest felicitations. We welcome to Sarawak Mr. R. S. Sagar who arrived on the s.s. Darrel on July 12th to join the Borneo Company, Limited Towards the end of the month Kuching was considerably enlivened by the visit of the Roman Catholic Fathers from outstations, and the seating accommodation in St. Michael’s Catholic Club was severely taxed. We wonder who was the Dutch employee of the Sarawak Oilfields Ltd. who, according to Father Epping, on a certain important occasion earnestly inquired of the doctor; "Is it a lady boy or a boy child ?” The following is taken from "People In London Now” by Gwyn Lewis in a recent issue of the London Sunday Express: "Lean, tanned, and wiry Mr. H. C. Shrubsole, from Singapore, deals in con¬ densed milk. He said : "In Sarawak there are Dayaks who have never seen a cow or heard of cow’s milk. I have charge of the sale of a famous company’s product in Sarawak, Malaya and British North Borneo. I employ a corps of Chinese commercial travellers. Bartering is done in primitive parts of these places. A tin of condensed milk, by the time it reaches the consumer, may have been exchanged for pepper, a bundle of rotan canes used in furniture manufacture, a pineapple, rubber, or a quantity of jelutong, which is an ingredient of chewing gum. Some of my travellers do their rounds in a kind of canoe.’ ” We are expecting in the near future to meet a Dayak suffering from night starvation or some other fashion¬ able complaint of modern civilisation. Incidentally it now only remains for the Dayaks to point out that there are in England people who have never seen a rubber tree or heard of jelutong. E. S. Holl. Mr. E. S. Holl, who died on June 29th, was born on the 21st July, 1870, and in 1919 he arrived in Sarawak where he obtained permission to work timber in the Lundu district (Sempadi Forest Reserve). Later he obtained a concession but was unable to float the Company and finally abandoned the concession in 1924. In March, 1924, he was appointed Director of Agriculture which post he held until 1928, and in February, 1929, he was appointed Curator of Gardens. He also acted as Private Secretary to His Highness the Rajah from January, 1931, until his death. When racing was resumed in 1922 the Kuching Race Committee, by which name the Sarawak Turf Club was then known, was fortunate in being able to avail itself of the services of a man in Mr. Holl with a sound knowledge of racing, especially handi¬ capping. It was not until 1923, however, that he assumed the duties of Official Handicapper, replac¬ ing the previous Handicapping Committee. The success with which he discharged this difficult task up to the time of his death needs no stressing here. Most of ns, at some meeting, have had that queer sinking feeling when the so-called "good thing” has only just scraped home by the shortest of short heads ! Turning up records one finds at least one dead-heat at each meeting and short heads in abundance, which rightly account for one of his sobriquets—The Handicapper—by which he was known and will always be remembered on the Sarawak Turf by his intimate friends. Mr. Holl’s personal charm endeared him to all; it is difficult to recall any occasion when his even temper was ruffled, and his sudden death is a matter of the deepest regret to everyone. We extend our sympathies to Mrs. Scovell and her family, who are his nearest relatives. —{Contributed) Rum and Rhinos. Fifty years ago anyone who shot a rhino was rather disappointed ; he couldn't eat it all. it was too far to carry home, and the most that could be obtained from it was an occasional sword hilt made from the horn; these can still be obtained at a fabulous price. Nowadays, a rhino may fetch anything up to $300-$400, its horn being the most useful part, but the blood and flesh also fetch a price, solely on account of the supposed aphrodisiacal properties appreciated by the Chinese. Even fifty years ago the far interior, where the rhino lived, was too unsettled for prolonged travel by down-country people, and so, as the up-country people stayed at home, there was neither the supply of, nor the demand for, bits of rhino. With the advent of more peaceful times the animals have become available and in great demand, until it is not too much to say that the rhino has been immolated to provide the Chinese with babies, the Dayak hunters with patent leather shoes, and their girl friends with silk umbrellas. By all accounts the rhino was, and still is, a sportsman, and runs for days when he finds a man coming after him. being, however, completely impervious to Government Orders, dining well on the local tuba, and proceeding early next morning to the nearest stream for the purpose of stupefying all the local fish for breakfast. Now it cannot be denied that the rhino was once numerous in the Ulu Rejang, Ulu Baram and Ulu Trusan; without going into statistics each river even ten years ago was good for them from ten to twenty pairs of horns annually. There are almost none now, and, in fact, after a prolonged visit to the Ulu Trusan into a once populous rhino country, I saw only once a trace made about three years ago and nothing else under five years ago; the locality is remote and high up, but everyone of the many old “wallows” passed had the remains of a Dayak hut within a few hundred yards, and even up on the highest peaks the wandering hunters had left their traces. A once populous rhino district has been wiped out by the Dayaks and one can only feel that it is a good thing that no rhinos have strayed in during the last five years and attempted to re-populate the district as they would have assuredly gone too. Into the ethics of rhino hunting I do not intend to go; the Punan was an uncontrollable curse until he bad finished all the rhinos; the Kayans and Kenyahs were, as usual, reasonable, shared their beasts out among themselves, and made them last, until they finally took up a little over-the-garden- wall poaching. To the local inhabitants one. does not begrudge a rhino or two, since it is all in the district, but these wandering bands of professional Dayak hunters have been the worst menace; they are really persistent and stay on the beast’s tracks from fifteen to twenty days until they catch it up. There are now no more such bands because there are now no more rhinos and it is a fair criticism to say that the indigenous Sarawak stock of rhino is exterminated save for a few individuals on Mulu, Murud, Laiun and Tibang mountains; the odd ones who turn up in the Baram and Trusan now and then being no more than strays from over the borders. Besides rhinos—now defunct—the Ulu Trusan is inhabited by mosquitoes and Muruts, immediately calling to rnind drink and dirt, and yet the last aro good sportsmen, unequalled walkers, patient as carriers, and with a fair sense of humour. They aro in their way great hunters and on shooting three out of a herd of pigs and letting off the other four they applauded this form of game conservation, but spoilt it all by hoping to meet the remaining four on the return journey. To my mind the Murut doesn’t drink as much as he used to, not that he is striving after a better life but because there aren’t as many Muruts. After about six or seven days' walk we followed the Lupin river up onto the highlands forming the barrier between Sarawak and British North Borneo. Two days' walk brought us out onto a ridge as flat as a board, but narrow and between 3,000 and 4,000 feet high with some of the thickest jungle and biggest thorns I have ever encountered. Here the rhino lived not long ago, but there is no sign of him now. After two days' very slow walking something went wrong and we found ourselves away down in British North Borneo for tea, and couldn't get back for supper. Next morning we got lost but in another day arrived again on the watershed at Paya Maga, a large and absolutely flat plain across which we walked for two days. From the hills at the sides this area appears as a marshy “bah”, which a purist would doubtless give to British North Borneo whence the Maga river runs. However there is still a large piece in Sarawak and the basin is anything from five to six miles wide, and two days’ walk along, or about six to fifteen miles; the vegetation is thick scrub with masses of orchids, in places pure stands of ground orchids, and the soil sandy and water-logged. The whole is so far from human habitation that it is a perfect rhino haunt. Their old “wallows” and runs are numerous, and so, unfortunately, are the Dayak “sulaps” and, as I estimate the plain at over 4,000 feet high, the surrounding lips to the basin must be over 5,000 feet. They were my downfall, for, on desiring to take the day off to investigate, I was told there was not enough food left and so I begged an odd hour or two to skim the highest hill for a view. This was most unpopular and everyone kept pushing me up trees which weren’t at the summit at all: finally I pushed over a couple of Murats, fell flat among thorns myself, and climbed up the only tree I have never fallen out of unaided. This was not satisfactory, ns, after I had half a second's glance, mist and rain gathered and I never saw Labuan at all. On returning I found the coolies had re-erected the nightly hut, and were fishing foot-long cat fish out of the Maga river. A short argument followed about food supplies; I went off to investigate further whilst the Penghulu went shooting aud got lost. Then trouble really came. The next day was fine, the going good, and everyone looking forward to arriving home, although nobody knew the way, We had only one meal at about 10 a.m. owing to rice shortage for we had been out seven or eight nights without being able to replenish the food supply on account of the lack of houses, and for the first time in Sarawak I spent the night with no water on top of a steep ridge The next two days were also one-meal days. Coughs and colds became plentiful, the going was undulatory and it generally rained in the afternoon if not before. On the last day we had no food at all and set out early in the morning on some coffee. We then struck a path but tiffin was a farce and some of the coolies were in a bad way. It then began to rain but we arrived at a Murat house at dusk that night instead of, as we expected, next morning. With the existence of flat irrigated rice plains in the Ulu Trusan and Ulu Baram the discovery of another "bah”—roughly speaking in the Ulu Tengoa—is not surprising. It is uninhabited and would make a splendid health resort, but it is no fun coming or going at present, except perhaps by air. —.E.B. Chinese Servants. LIFE IN SARAWAK. The following is taken from the Birming¬ ham Postof June 22nd 1937 :— In answer to my call, Ah Boon, the "boy,” appears silently, apparently from nowhere, and waits with a cheerful smile to learn my wishes. I am still new enough to Sarawak to feel that "boy” is hardly the correct term to apply to a middle-aged married man with a family. Ah Boon's wife is my amah, and her name is Chi Yam. Her chief duties are washing and sewing, but she is also the purveyor of local scandal. Sho is a pretty little thing with soft black eyes, and she gives the impression that butter would not melt in her mouth. But she rules the other servants with a rod of iron. and her tongue is to be feared. I have seen her reduce a six-foot Sikh policeman to a nervous wreck, when the unfortunate man came to lodge a complaint about my dog. Then there is Kwong Li, the lad who does the rough work. Every morning at half-past six he polishes the floors by rubbing them with a coconut shell—which he holds with his foot. Further sleep after this is impossible, for he loves noise. I came home last week to hear hideous shrieks and wails coming from the radio, and Kwong Li standing before it with a rapt expression on his face. He said that the music was excellent. Chong Fat, my cook, is a worker of miracles. He waits upon me after breakfast to learn the day’s menu. Having told him that only myself and my husband will be. in for lunch, I order a little fish and a sweet. Five minutes before lunch my husband arrives with four men who have appeared that morning unexpectedly. Chong Fat is not perturbed when I summon him, but produces a four-course lunch, exquisitely cooked. He has only ono fault. I cannot make him appreciate that there are some dishes which it is not necessary to flavour with garlic. Chai Lok, the gardener, is a young man who is always about to produce the world’s loveliest rose— but never does. In the evening there will be the bud. but by the following morning it has dis¬ appeared. According to Chai Lok, either the devils have destroyed it during the night or some bad man has stolen it. I have a shrewd idea that the rose graces the hair of some sweet young thing who is the favourite of the moment. However, when I was ill Chai Lok filled my room with roses, orchids, hibiscus and other exquisite flowers that never bloomed in my garden. My neighbours did complain about that time of the disappearance of their choicest flowers, but I remained silent. Sometimes at the end of the day I see my complete staff leave their quarters, bound for the tan-tan shops. Next morning there will probably be a request for advances of wages to send to sick relatives. Some of the reasons given are even more patently untrue. At New Year, which is in March, they are not quite themselves. They have several evenings off, for the festivities last twelve days. There is an air of tiredness about them; they complain of fever and other illness and there is a decidedly bloodshot look about their eyes. But it only happens once a year and I say nothing. New Sarawak Court. We have been requested to inform the public that His Highness the Rajah has approved the establishment of a Sarawak Court in the Imperial Institute in London. For this purpose photographs for window transparencies are required. In view of the fact that the establishment of this Court is of both sentimental and material interest to the inhabitants of Sarawak, it is hoped that members of the public will he prepared to lend to the Govern¬ ment any negatives that they have in their possession of the following subjects :— Sago.—Photographs of standing palms, felling and cutting up the trunk, settling tanks, drying and bagging the flour for export. (Detailed photographs of palms, factory and operations are required for a diorama). Pepper.—Photographs of planting, staking, mature plantation, harvesting the pepper fruits, drying, preparation of white pepper. Jelutong.—Photographs of trees, tapping opera¬ tions, coagulating, refining. Tuba.—Photographs of tuba plant, collecting the root, preparation and baling for export; beating the roots to extract the juice, and using the extract to stupify fish. Handicrafts.—Photographs of raftsmen en¬ gaged on their work on silverware, brassware, matting and basket ware. Gold.—Photographs of gold working in Upper Sarawak. Rubber.—Photographs of plantations and factory. Copra.—Photographs of coconut palms. Illipe-nuts.—Photographs of trees. Cutch.—Photographs of mangroves, stripping the bark, cutch factory. Damar.—Photographs of trees and of method of tapping and collecting. Rattans.—Photographs of collecting, prepara¬ tion and export. Timbers.—Hand specimens of six important timbers with photographs of the trees and if possible close-up photographs of the flowers and fruit. In connection with these photographs the princi- pal point is clearness of detail and the selection of a subject that would make a good picture. We are informed that the Government undertakes to take the greatest reasonable care of all negatives lent to it for this purpose, and that it will be desired to retain the negatives for a period of approximately six months. Any persons desiring to assist the Government in this scheme should forward their negatives to the Secretariat, Kuching. The Sarawak Association, London. ANNUAL DINNER. The Annual Dinner of the Sarawak Association was held in London at the Trocadero Restaurant On June 9th, 1937. The following were present:— His Highness the Rajah, Sir George J. Tomlin¬ son. H. A. Adams, II. C. P. Adams, H. D. Aplin, J. R. Barnes, F. Osmond Blagg, F. F. Boult, F. G. Carpenter, Herbert La Chard, W. L. Clark, J. R. Combe. W. Cotterill, D. P. Crane, H. B. Crocker, Lt.-Col. Sir Percy Cunynghame, R. E. Edwards J. C. B. Fisher. C. O. Gange, G. C. Gillan, K. H. Gillan, E. Hose, G. T. M. Mac- Bryan, A. Macpherson, Sydney Malkin, W. H. C. C. Morice, R. Pawle, A. A. Rennie, F. W. Richards, J. A. Smith, J. C. Swayne, G. J. D. Walters and D. C. White. The dinner was preceded by a General Meeting at which Mr. H. D. Aplin was elected Hon. Secretary and Treasurer for the ensuing year. Of the two retiring Committee men, Sir Percy Cunynghame and Mr. F. F. Boult, the former did not offer himself for re-election, and Mr. J. C. Swayne was elected in his place. The other two members of the Committee are Messrs. R. Pawle and A. B. Ward. Solemn Thought. We learn from history’s pages at every proper school That when, in early centuries, the Angles came to rule Barbaric Britons steeped in woad and clothed in skins like brutes, They had. as friends and allies too, the Saxons and the Jutes. And earlier when the Roman eagle flew its conquering way Up northwards to the Cheviots, to Firth of Forth and Tay, It met with staunch resistance from the bow and arrow shots Of the mighty armies of the Picts and also of the Scots. Now Saxon might is still as great as e'er it was before, And Angles brave the Roman frown as once they did of yore. Scots flourish like the green hay tree and multiply like newts, But where are now the worthy Picts? Where can we find the Jutes? Say are they dead or are they fled or were they all still-born? Has liquidation been their lot or were they shot at dawn? With sighs and tears through vanished years did they all fadeaway, And wither like September flowers that once have known their May? Or  do the towers, at midnight hours, of some old Norman keeps Still echo with their ghostly tramp to wake the guest who sleeps? Do Pictish chains cause aches and pains to Pictish feet that tread? And underneath a Jutish arm lies there a Jutish head? Alas, their woe we cannot know; they’ve passed beyond our ken. Those British paths which served them well are trod by other men, And where the boots of Picts and Jutes once followed ancient tracks There run the horrid offspring of the tribes of Smiths and Macs. So list ye Anglo-Saxons, and list ye stubborn Scots ! Please drop a tear when next ye near some blue forget-me-nots; When, Scots, ye hear the words “Bai Jove”, or, Anglo-Saxons. “Hoots”, Then, Anglo-Saxons, mourn the Picts, ye Scots regret the Jutes ! Films of the Month. JULY. On the whole a much better bag than usual. Annie Oakley,” at the beginning of the month, was an excellent wild-west, sharpshooting, Buffalo Bill film; the best performance in which was given by the actor taking the part of Chief Sitting Bull, whose appearance in the circus ring in a hansom cab was the peak of a particularly entertaining picture. We did not actually see “Romeo and Juliet” but did the next best thing and watched, a few days before, the advertising "trailer” in which eminent actors and actresses were shown at the microphone broadcasting their enthusiastic approbation. The audience at the Sylvia Cinema seemed to be about evenly divided on the question whether the “trailer” was meant to be funny or not, but, if such was the intention, it was the most startling success of the month. Florence Desmond herself could not have improved upon it. “Tudor Rose” catered for all tastes. Five execu¬ tions, Cedric Hardwicke, two natural deaths, clatter¬ ing horses, Nova Pilbeam, the Privy Council, and a refreshingly mild “love interest,” could hardly dis¬ appoint anyone. Desmond Tester as Edward VI was extremely good. Like the members nf “Our Gang," who appeared in “Second Childhood” towards the end of the month, he is a child actor who really is an actor and a pleasant change from other more advertised youthful prodigies. Nova Pilbeam was an excellent choice for the part of the unsophisticated Lady Jane Grey, and the member of the audience who remarked loudly “It’s  a d—n shame to cut off a head like that.” was merely expressing the popular point of view. But did everyone who was executed in the sixteenth century take his or her demise quite so calmly as we were led to believe? Truly the generation of 1937 is decadent compared with our tough ancestors of four hundred years ago. “Captains Courageous” was advertised as possess¬ ing the distinction of being t he first film to be shown in Kuching before being "released" in Singapore. The claim was a valid one and,  indeed, it is hardly surprising. The photography, however, was brilliant. We do not like film actors as a genus and Dick Powell gets rather more on our nerves than most of them, hut in spite of this “Stage Struck” was well worth a visit if only because Joan Biondell, as Peggy Revere, fulfilled so thoroughly the average num’s conception of an actress off the stage. With Gilmore Frost shot and Peggy Revere under arrest the film may be said to have had a singularly happy ending. The singing of the Mexican quartet, "The Yacht Club Boys,” in this film was wholly admirable. When listening to such a performance one cannot help wondering why a “crooner” is allowed to “croon” for ten seconds without having a brick thrown at him. “The Devil Dull” was an extremely ingenious film which owed a great deal to the acting of Lionel Barrymore and Lucy Beaumont. Maureen O'Sullivan looked very pretty hut had no part at all, as the whole film depended on the appalling scientific discovery which enabled a man and a woman to reduce to the size of dolls anyone who attracted their attention or incurred their anger, and on the havoc that these dolls could wreak in the civilized city of Paris at the will of their master. It was a great pity that we could not be spared the sob-stuff at the end; and far be it from us to com¬ ment on the moral qualities of a film in which we are asked, in effect, to sympathize with, and approve of, a man who, in order to secure the happiness of his bitter little daughter, mysteriously removes an indefinite number of people and then turns them into living dolls obedient to his behest, kidnaps one enemy and paralyses another for life, makes use of the widow of his friend in order to achieve his revenge and then deserts her when she has served his purpose, misleads and deceives some respectable but slow-witted police officers, commits the offences of escaping from gaol, burglary, robbery, obtaining money by false pretences, and unlawful wounding, and whose actions finally lead to the deaths of all the victims of his experiments, before he walks out into the night tu the accompaniment of the last long kiss on the screen and the last low sobs in the auditorium. Tn conclusion the management must be congra¬ tulated on securing at last a change from the Shirley Temple song, which assaulted our ears for so many weeks during the periods in which the lights are up. First Division News. JUNE. The Resident, First  Division, left  for Lundu on the 5th, stopping at  Santubong on  the way. He visited Sungei Mas at  low tide, which  entailed sitting in a boat and being  pushed through  mud for about a quarter of a mile. The family squabble between the  Tua Kampong of Santubong and his relatives appears  to have been amicably settled after some years of  petitions and complaints. The Santubong Malays asked whether Government would consider installing a water supply through the Kampong and expressed their willingness to pay for this. One prominent local inhabitant, Haji Drahim, informed the Resident that he had to pay as much as two dollars a month for water to be parried to his house. On the 25th the Resident went to Serian. The road was in fairly good condition but it is becoming increasingly obvious that the present gross overload¬ ing of buses must be stopped. On the l6th news was received that six Japanese fishing vessels and one parent ship were off Telok Serubang. Captain Gibson went to investigate but when he arrived the boats had all left. In the District Court, Kuching, a Sebuyau Dayak named Untong took action against a woman named Lanchoon for the return of a rubber garden which, he alleged, he had been forced to transfer to her. The Court was satisfied that undue influence had been exerted by the Malay Court and gave judgment for the plaintiff. A stay of execution, pending appeal, was granted. In another case judgment was given for the defen¬ dants in a case brought by a Chinese against two Buntal Malays. Plaintiff admitted that, although the defendants had signed a mortgage to him, the debt on which he was suing was really due to his father, and that the defendants were unaware that plaintiff's name was on the deeds. The defendants - main tamed that they had paid the debt to plaintiff’s father who was deceased. The Court held that there was reason to believe that the debt had in fact been paid to plaintiff’r father, and that in any case the deeds wore invalid by reason of the substitution. As the case raised a number of interesting points the plaintiff was advised to appeal. On the 8th a party of Dayaks from Senah Parun in the left-hand branch reported that some Dayaks from Sukong, Dutch Borneo, had alleged that a tawak owned by the Parun people was one stolen from them some years ago and had demanded its return. This was refused and the Parun people assert that a threat was then made by the Sukong Dayaks that they would come back later and take it by force. Inquiries at Bau revealed that some five years ago the Sukong Dayaks charged a Chinese at Pangkullan Ampat with the theft of two tawaks but failed to prove the charge. It is assumed that this is the same case. On the 6th a telephone call was put through to Bau by a Dayak named Ngibas from Paku to the effect that there was an amok at Skiat. The District Officer, accompanied by a party of police, rushed to the spot only to find that it was a false alarm. Ngibas bad good reason to make a report to the police as he had been badly frightened in a drunken brawl. The use of the word amok was, however, unfortunate. __________ On the 9th there was a riot alarm from Siniawan and the affair turned out to be a fight between some Dayaks and Chinese. Fortunately the Dayaks were not from neighbouring kampongs and therefore com¬ plications were avoided. One Dayak was injured and a Chinese, named Boon Tet, was arrested and duly punished, there being little doubt that he was the aggressor. The death of Orang Kaya Lambong of Skiat leaves a vacancy that it will be difficult to fill. The Skiats appear to require a strong hand to keep them in order. Surveyors report a number of cases of rubber planting in Sungei Staat. In the only case that had been dealt with by the end of the month a Dayak frankly admitted that he had planted four hundred trees in September 1936. He was duly  fined A great deal of the time of the District Officer, Bau, is occupied with Chinese domestic disputes. In the majority of cases the marriage is not registered and the parties cannot, or will not, see the necessity of registering before applying to the Court for assistance. The majority of the com¬ plainants are women and it is noted that in nearly every case they are Sarawak born. At Serian two Malays of Tebekang were convicted of removing boundary pegs, one being fined $50 and the other $25. Orang Kaya Disa of Trangkan was summoned for replanting rubber, but. after a long hearing and a second examination of the garden, the case was dismissed. One Chinese, named Lai Choi, was fined $25 for opening a shop without permission at Tebeduk; and a young Chinese, named Chai Thiam Joon, was imprisoned for two months by the Police Court for living in a Dayak kampong, this being his second offence. On the 16th a Land Dayak woman, the wife of a Chinese of Ampungan, who had long been suffering from an ulcerated stomach, made an unsuccessful attempt to commit suicide by cutting her throat. The dresser brought her to Serian and put seven stitches in her throat. The patient, though still unable to be moved, was progressing well at the end of the month. Applications for land continue to come in fron the Samarahan and the Sadong coast. Quit rent collections for the first half year are very satisfactory, total collections exceeding $5,000. An exchange of land was made between the Roman Catholic Mission and the Government in Serian, the former rendering a small piece on which the Government wish to erect the Court writer's house near the pangkalan, and the latter in return giving an equal amount from the hill next to the Roman Catholic Mission, which will be useful to the Mission for filling purposes. A start was made at Serian on the erection of the Court writer's quarters and these should be finished during July. The regrading of the road in front of Serian bazaar was undertaken by the Public Works Department and very satisfactory progress has been made. The earth taken from the road is being used for filling at the back of the bazaar. When the regrading and filling is completed there will probably be space enough for from four to five more shop-houses. A very successful regatta was held at Simunjan on the 30th. The Resident, Mr. Kelley, and the Kuching Military Band were present. A coroner's inquest was held at Lundu on the 29th and a verdict of "suicide while of unsound mind” was returned on a Teochew, named Pung Seng Kiat, who hanged himself with a rope at the back of a shop. St. Joseph's School Sports, 1937. The afternoon of July 10th was enjoyed by all those who were present at the St. Joseph’s School Sports. It is hoped that this will be an annual event in future. The weather was tine and rather warm but an occasional cold drink from an extremely well-run bar made the tropical heat almost endurable. From the appearance of the sky it seemed to he raining everywhere but on the Sports ground, this thoughtfulness of the “Clerk of the Weather” enabled one or two school records to be broken. To remark on one or two events in particular. The winner of the 100 yards. Division I, returned the remarkable time of 10 3/5 seconds on what might be termed a rather soft track. The winner of the Pole Vault heat the school record bv 9", clearing 10' 4''. and would have cleared more with a longer pole and better visibility. The Blindfold Race for the small boys caused a great deal of amusement among the spectators. A slight scarcity of veterans in the “over 45” class in the race for their “benefit” was noticeable, but perhaps the other veterans preferred to rest on their laurels; however four or five turned out and thundered down the course in true racing style. At the close of the meeting the Reyd. Father de Vos thanked all those who had contributed towards the Sports Fund, and all those who had so ably giver their assistance towards the construction of the grandstand, and the organisation of the Sports in general. He congratulated and thanked the athletes for their excellent display, after which he asked Mrs. Dick if she would kindly present the prizes. Among the spectators were the Right Reyd. Monseigneur Hopfgartner, the Mother General of the Franciscan Sisters, who had just arrived in Sarawak from England, and many of the Sisters from the outstations. Father Delaney, well known on account of his former connections with the school, was also present in the capacity of a judge. The whole meeting went with almost clockwork precision and in spite of the fact that the officials juggled surprisingly with the programme everything finished on time, or rather at “Stetigah time.” which, according to the powers that be, is Raid to be six o’clock. In conclusion, a very enjoyable afternoon and a very successful meeting. The results were as follows :— Sarawak Turf Club. Provisional Programme. AUTUMN MEETING, 1937 First Day, Thursday, September 2nd. RACE NO. 1. [2.30 p.m. THE TUAN MUDA S CUP. Value $250. A piece of plate of the value of $100 presented by His Highness the Tuan Muda of Sarawak with $150 added. Second to receive $100. Third $40. A race for Division I ponies. Entrance fee $1, with a further subscription of $4 after publication of the weights and a final subscription of $5 if a starter. Distance 6 furlongs. RACE NO. 2. [3.0 p.m. THE SEKAMA STAKES. Value $250. Second to receive $100. Third $40. A race for Division II ponies. Entrance fee $1, with a further subscription of $4 after publication of the weights and a final subscription of $5 if a starter. Distanced furlongs. RACE NO. 3. [3.30 p.m. THE DATUS’ STAKES. Value $250. $50 presented by the Datus with $200 added. Second to receive $100. Third $40. A race for Division III ponies. Entrance fee $1, with a further subscription of $4 after publication of the weights and a final subscription of $5 if a starter. Distance 6 furlongs. RACE NO. 4.  [4.0 p.m. THE B.C.L. STAKES. Value $250.  $50 presented by  the The Borneo Co., Ltd., with $200 added. Second to receive $100. Third $40. A race for Division I ponies. Entrance fee $1, with a further subscription of $4 after publication of the weights and a final subscription of $5 if a starter. Distance 3 furlongs. RACE NO. 5. [4.30 p.m. THE MATANG HANDICAP. Value Second to receive $100. Third $40. A race for Division II ponies. Entrance fee $1, with a further subscription of $4 after publication of th» weights and a final subscription of $5 if a starter. Distance 4 furlongs. RACE NO. 6. [5.0 p.m. THE PENDING STAKES. Value $250. Second to receive $100. Third $10. A race for Division III ponies. Entrance fee $1, with a further subscription of $4 after publication of the weights and a final subscription of $5 if a starter. Distance 3 furlongs. RACE NO. 7. [5.30 p.m. THE RANEE’S CUP. Value $275. A piece of plate of the value of $100 presented by Her Highness the Ranee of Sarawak with $175 added. Second to receive $100. Third $40. A race open to ponies of all Divisions. Entrance fee $5. Post entries $5 accepted up to 4.30 p.m. on day of race. Handicaps published on the course and no refunds after publication. Distance 1 mile. Second Day, Saturday, September 4th. RACE NO. 1. [2.30 p.m. THE MAIDEN STAKES. Value $200. Second to receive $75. Third $30. A race for ponies which have run at one or more Official Meetings of the Sarawak Turf Club and have not won a race. Entrance fee $1, with a further subscription of $4 after publication of the weightstand a final subscription of $5 if a starter. (Entrance fees returned in the event of a pony winning on the First Day 1. Distance 4 1/2 furlongs. The winner of this race will not be penalized under Section 7 of the Racing Regulations (i.e., o 7 lbs. penalty). RACE NO. 2. [3.0 p.m. THE ST. GILES’ HANDICAP. Value $250. Second to receive $100. Third $40. A race for Division II ponies. Entrance fee $1, with a further subscription of $4 after publication of the weights and a final subscription of $5 if a starter. Distance 4 1/2 furlongs. RACE NO. 3. [3.30 p.m. THE SUMMER HANDICAP. Value $250. Second to receive $100. Third $40. A race for Division I ponies. Entrance fee $1, with a further subscription of $4 after publication of the weights and a final subscription of $5 if a starter. Distance 4 1/2 furlongs. RACE No. 4. [4.0 p.m. THE LORNA DOONE STAKES. Value $250. Second to receive $100. Third $40. A race for Division III ponies. Entrance fee $1, with a further subscription of $4 after publication of the weights and a final subscription of $5 if a starter. Distance 3 furlongs. RACE No. 5. [4.30 p.m. THE DIDO STAKES. Value $250. Second to receive $100. Third $40. A race for Division II ponies. Entrance fee $1, with a further subscription of $4 after publication of the weights and a final subscription of $5 if a starter. Distance 5 furlongs. RACE No. 6. [5.0 p.m. THE SIOL STAKES. Value $250. Second to receive $100. Third $40. A race for Division III ponies. Entrance fee $1, with a further subscription of $4 after publication of the weights and a final subscription of $5 if a starter. Distance 4 1/2furlongs. RACE NO. 7. [5.30 p.m. THE HOLL MEMORIAL STAKES. ’ Value $275. Second to receive $100. Third $40. A race open to ponies of all Divisions. Entrance fee $5. Post entries at $5 accepted up to 4.30 p.m. or. day of race. Handicaps published on the course and no refunds after publication. Distance Round the Course (1 1/3 miles approximately). Third Day, Monday, September 6th. RACE No. 1. [2.0 p.m. THE SARAWAK STEAMSHIP CO. PURSE. Value $250. $100 presented by The Sarawak Steamship Co., Ltd., with $150 added. Second to receive $100. Third $40. A race for Division I ponies. Entrance fee $1, with a further subscription of $4 after publication of the weights and a final subscription of $5 if a starter. Distance 5 furlongs. RACE NO. 2. [2.30 p.m. THE SIME DARBY STAKES. Value $250. $50 presented by Messrs. Sime, Darby Co., Ltd., with $200 added. Second to receive $100. Third $40. A race for Division II ponies. Entrance fee $1, with a further subscription of $4 after publication of the weights and a final subscription of $5 if a starter. Distance 6 furlongs. RACE No. 3. [3.0 p.m. THE ROYALIST STAKES. Value $250. Second to receive $100. Third $40. A race for Division III ponies. Entrance fee $1, with a further subscription of $4 after publication of the weights and a final subscription of $5 if a starter. Distance 5 furlongs. RACE NO. 4. [3.30 p.m. THE MICHAELMAS HANDICAP. Value $250. Second to receive $100. Third $40. A race for Division I ponies. Entrance fee $1, with a further subscription of $4 after publication of the weights and a final subscription of $5 if a starter. Distance 4 furlongs. RACE No. 5. [4.0 p.m. THE KEPPEL STAKES. Value $250. Second to receive $100. Third $40. A race for Division II ponies. Entrance fee $1, with a further subscription of $4 after publication of the weights and a final subscription of $5 if a starter. Distance 3 furlongs. RACE No. 6. [4.30 p.m. THE TURF CLUB STAKES. Value $250. Second to receive $100. Third $40. A race for Division III ponies. Entrance fee $1, with a further subscription of $4 after publication of the weights and a final subscription of $5 if a starter. Distance 4 furlongs. RACE NO. 7. [5.0 p.m. THE CONSOLATION STAKES. Value $200. Second to receive $75. Third $30. A race open to any pony which has not won a race at the meeting. Division I to carry 11 st., Division II 9 st. 7 lbs. and Division III 8 st. A pony that has been placed second at this meeting to carry 7 lbs. extra. Apprentice allow¬ ance cannot be claimed in this race. Post entries $5. Distance 3 furlongs. RACE NO. 8. [5.80 p.m THE RAJAH’S CUP. Value $300. A piece of plate of the value of $150 presented by His Highness the Rajah of Sarawak with $150 added. Second to receive $150. Third $75. Fourth $40. with a Sweepstake of $10 each for runners of which the winning pony shall take $50%, the second pony 30% and the third pony 20%. A race open to ponies of all Divisions. Entrance fee $5. Post entries at $5 accepted up to 4.30 p.m. on day of race. Handicaps published on the course and no refunds after publication. Distance 1 1/2miles. REGULATIONS. 1. Entries.—All nominations, accompanied by entrance fee $1 each, description of ponies and declaration of colours to be made to the Secretaries not later than noon of the 12th August, 1937. 2. Entrance fees.—(a) Entrance fees for ponies entered previously and scratched before the 12th August will be returned. (b) In the event of ponies not being scratched before 19th August, 1937, 3rd or 5tb September, 1937, a further subscription (forfeit) of $4 will have to be paid. If a runner a final subscription (forfeit) of $5. A pony shall be considered a runner once its number is posted on the Semaphore. 8. Handicaps.—For the First Day will be published on the 19th August, 1937, on 3rd Septem¬ ber. 1937 for the Second Day aud on 5th September, 1937 for the Third Day at noon each day on the Sarawak Club notice board. There will be no refund of entrance fees, or for¬ feits after publication of the weights for each day's racing. 4. Transport Allowance on Ponies.—An allow¬ ance up to a maximum of $20 will be made for all ponies entered from Sarawak outstations or other States of Borneo. No owner in B.N.B. or other State outside Sarawak will be given this allowance until the pony has been registered and has raced in Sarawak in his name at an Official Meeting. 5 Weight.—The maximum weight shall be 11 stone 7 lbs. and the minimum 7 stone. 6. Course.—Opened for training on the 17th July, 1937. No pony may go onto the Course before 6 a.m. and the Course is closed for training on Tuesday, Friday and Sunday. 7. Penalties.—Winners of any race at this meeting after publication of weights shall carry a penalty of 7 lbs. for each race with a maximum of 11 stone 7 lbs. 8. Prizes.—20% reduction if under 5 entries. No second prize will be awarded if there are less than 3 runners and no third prize if less than 5 runners. 9. Jockeys.—(a) Professional jockeys who are Sarawak subjects and have not ridden more than two winners under Sarawak Turf Club Rules, may claim an allowance of 7 lbs. (b) Any rider not a licensed jockey or registered apprentice shall ride as an Amateur and may not claim the Apprentice Allowance. (c) A jockey who has ridden at any time as a professional jockey or as a registered apprentice may not compete in races open to Amateur Riders only. 10. Fees.—The maximum fee paid to a winning jockey shall be $15 and for second place $10 and for a ride $5 in the absence of any agreement to ride for a lower sum. 11. Whip.— No whip used in any race shall exceed two feet in length. 12. Spurs.—If spurs be worn these shall not have rowels. 13. Ponies.—(a) A pony must have run on the First Day to be eligible for entry in races on Second and Third Days. (b) Any Borneo pony of not more than 14 hands in height may be imported from B.N.B. and shall be eligible for entry in races open to Sarawak ponies provided that their sires and dams were foaled in Borneo. (c) All new ponies shall carry top weight on the First Day in the Division in which they are classified which shall be as follows :— Division T over 13.2 hands to 14 hands. Division II 13.0 hands to 13.2 hands. Division III under 13.0 hands. 14. Totalizator.—As usual. 15. Unlimited Cash Sweep.—(a) Will be drawn in units of $10,000, e.g., if under 30,000 tickets sold there will be two prizes of each denomination; between 30.000 and 40,000 three prizes of each donorninnimii, etc. (b) If there ate only 4 runners the 3rd horse gets 15% and the 5th horse gets 10% only. (e) The Committee reserve the right to decide on which race the Unlimited Sweep shall be held. 16. Cash Sweeps.—(a) As before, except that the 10% previously divided amongst starters will now be divided amongst Drawers of ponies entered. (b) Through numbers can be booked in advance by Members only not later than 3 p.m. on Monday, 30th August, 1937, after which time the reserve list will be closed. (c) Under no circumstances can a Through Number be reserved unless the application is accompanied by a remittance. (d) The following through numbers are available for booking :— From 101 to 1000 inclusive. 17. Visiting Members.—A Visiting Member shall pay a subscription of $5 per week or portion of a week «luring which he shall be a member of the Club. A nomination of such gentleman to be a Visiting Member shall be signed by two Ordinary Members as respectively proposing and seconding him. 18. Strangers.—Persons not Members of the Club or strangers not introduced by a Member, may admitted within the enclosure of the Grand Stand or the Paddock during any Meeting on payment of an entrance fee of $5 for each day’s racing. 19. Owners.—Are requested to sec that their saises and jockeys obtain necessary badges for entrance to Paddock. 20. Objections.—(a) Objections shall be accom¬ panied by a deposit of $10. (b) An objection may be made by a Steward in his official capacity without any deposit. 21. Where not otherwise especially mentioned the Rules of the Race Course shall bo the same as those adopted by the Straits Racing Association. 22. The decision of the Committee of the Sarawak Turf Club shall be final in all matters of dispute. 23. All communications to be made to THE BORNEO COMPANY, LIMITED, Secretaries, Sarawak Turf Club MINUTES OF A COMMUTES MEETING OF THE SARAWAK TTJRF CLUB HELD AT ‘B.M.K.,’ KUCHING ON THE 4TH JULY, 1937. 1. Present.—Mr. B. J. C. Spurway in the Chair, Messrs. Wee Kheng Chiang, Tan Sum Guan, Chan Qui Chong, W.  J. Chater  and G. T. Bates. 2.  Absent.—The Datu Patinggi,  Messrs. J.  B. Archer, H. E.  Cutfield  and J. C. II. Barcroft. 3. Late Mr. E. S. Holl.—The Committee stood in silence for a few minutes. The Chairman sail that the death of Mr. Holl was a severe loss to the Turf Club of which he had been an enthusiastic Member and Official since the formation of the Club. To commemorate his services to the Turf Club and the general esteem in which he was held by all members he proposed a race at each meeting should lie designated the "HOLL MEMORIAL STAKES.” This was approved. 4. Official Stater.—Mr. Chater pointed out that there had been comments by owners as to the Starting at the last race meeting. It was decided to invite Mr. B. J. C. Spurway and Mr. D. MacDonald to be Honorary Official Starter and Deputy Honorary Official Starter. 5. Handicapper.—Decided that Mr. B. J. C. Spurway should'be Honorary Official Handicapper and Mr. Chan Qui Chong to be Honorary, Official Time-keeper. The Secretaries were authorized to buy two new stop-watches. 6. Vacancy on the Committee.—Decided to invite Mr. Phillip Soh Fu to join the Committee in place of the late Mr. E. 8. Holl as he is next in order of voting at last General Meeting. 7, Vice-Presidency.—Decided to invite Mr. E. Parncll to accept the position of Vice-President in place of Mr. H. B. Crocker, who has retired from the Government Service and left the country. 8. Autumn Meeting.—Decided, subject to per¬ mission being granted by His Highness the Rajah, to hold the Meeting on the 2nd, 4th and 6th September as for various reasons these are more suitable dates than as originally proposed. Subject to the above being approved, the Course will open for training on the 17th July. 9. Land at Race Course—Decided to purchase Mr. Lau Chin Eng’s land, which is up for auction, in order that the land can be cleared to give an uninterrupted view of the Mile and Round-the- Course Races. Messrs. Wee Kheng Chiang and Chan Qui Chong were authorized to purchase on behalf of the Club. 10. Insurance of Jockeys.—Owing to the unsuit¬ ability of the policy offered by the Norwich Union Fire Insurance Society, Ltd., the Secretaries were instructed to obtain further particulars from other Companies. 11. Judge's Box.—The question of erecting the Judge’s Box near the rails was discussed and it was decided Mr. Spurway should go into this matter and if necessary, a new Box should be erected. 12. Motor Mower.—The Secretaries were in¬ structed to obtain particulars of Mowers suitable for the Race Course. 13. Transport charges of Ponies.—Decided that no owner in B.N.B. or other State outside Sarawak gets the allowance until the pony has been regis¬ tered and has raced in Sarawak in his name at an Official Meeting. 14. Mr. Banks.—A  letter from  Mr.  Banks relative to obtaining a  rebate of  the  annual subscription on account of  his absence  from  Sara¬ wak was read. The Secretaries were  instructed to inform Mr. Banks that  the subscription  is an annual subscription and no rebate can be allowed. 15. A letter from Mr. Tan Sum Guan suggest¬ ing that the Turf Club might pay for a grave-stone for the late Mr. Holl was read. Decided to taka no steps in this connection until the wishes of Mr. Holl’s relatives in England are known. 16. Annual Subscription.—The Secretaries were instructed to call an Extraordinary General Meeting to consider and, if approved, alter the Annual Subscription to be as follows :— MINUTES OF A COMMITTEE MEETING OF THE SARAWAK TURF CLUB HELD AT ‘B.M.K.,’ PADUNGAN ROAD, KUCHING, ON 14TH JULY, 1937, AT 6 P.M. 1. Present.—Mr. .B. J. C. Spurway (in the Chair), Messrs. Wee Kheng Chiang, Tan Sum Guan, Chan Qui Chong, W. J. Chater and G. T. Bates. 2. Absent.—Messrs. J. B. Archer, H. E. Cut¬ field, the Datu Patinggi, Messrs. J. C. H. Barcroft and Phillip Soh Fu. 3. Minutes of Meeting of 4th July, 1937, were read and approved. 4. Decided that the Judge's Box should remain as at present but that the Post opposite should be altered and made more prominent. 5. Decided that for this Meeting the Entrance fee for all Open races (Post Entries) shall be $5. 6. Decided that Bar prices should be altered to the following :—  7. Programme.—Decided to adopt the following programme for the Autumn Meeting. Mr. Spur- way proposed that as an experiment, with a view to increasing the return to owners of winning horses, that Race 8, Third Day should be a “Sweepstake” Race, i.e., each owner entering should pay $10 in addition to the entrance fee of $5, the winner to get 50%, second horse 30% and third horse 20%. This was agreed to. REGULATIONS. 1 . All nominations, accompanied by entrance fee $1 each, description of ponies and declaration of colours to be made to the Secretaries not later than non of the 12th August. 2 .—(a) Entrance fees for ponies entered pre¬ viously and scratched before 12th August will be returned. (b) Handicaps for the First Day will be published on the 19th August, on 3rd September for the Second Day and on 5th September for the Third Day at noon each day on the Sarawak Club notice board. (c) In the event of ponies not being scratched before 19th August, 3rd or 5th September, a further payment of $4 will have to be paid. (d) If a Starter a final payment of $5. (e) There will be no refund of entrance fees or forfeits after publication of the weights for each day’s racing. Race 6.—The Turf Club Stakes. Division III. 4 furlongs. *Race 7.—Consolation Stakes. Open (Con :). 3 furlongs. Race 8.—The Rajah's Cup. Open, 1 1/2 miles. *Any pony that has been placed Seconds at this Meeting to carry 7 lbs. extra. Apprentice allow¬ ance cannot be claimed in this race. 8. Mr. Lau Chin Eng.—Decided to charge a nominal rent of $1 per month with one month’s notice provided Mr. Lau Chin Eng keeps the land cleared to the satisfaction of the Committee. 9. A letter from the Sarawak Mission of Seventh-Day Adventists was read. Decided to subscribe $50 (Fifty dollars) to their hospital launch. 10. Mr. Tan Sum Guan proposed that in future the Annual General Meeting should be held in the Chinese Chamber of Commerce. Mr. Wee Kheng Chiang said he did not think it would be easy to get a quorum if it was held in the Chamber of Commerce. After some discussion Mr. Tan Sum Guan’s proposal was agreed to. 11. Mr. Tan Sum Guan asked that Mr. Ong Soon Tee should be advised of the meeting and that a programme should be sent him. The Secretaries were instructed accordingly. Traffic Regulations. AUTUMN MEETING. 1937. 1. After the hour of 11 a.m. on the 2nd, 4th and 6th September, 1937, all motor vehicles must proceed to the race-course via Padungan Road or Ban Hok Road only, and up to the hour of 7 p.m. on these days must return by the Sekama Road only. Exceptions :— 2. After depositing passengers at the grand¬ stand. vehicles will line up on the extreme left-hand side of the grandstand road, one behind the other, and within three yards of each other, facing away from the grandstand. 3. Rickshaws and bicycles may proceed to the race-course at any time, and by any road, and must park on the bandstand plot. They will not be allowed to remain on any part of the road leading to the  grandstand or roads  leading  to the  race¬ course. 4.  All vehicles must  move to  their  parking grounds  without delay, as  directed  by the  Con¬ stabulary. WARNING:— The driver of any vehicle :— (a) endeavouring to turn  in  grandstand road or, (b) stopping to pick up passengers in grandstand road, will be prosecuted for causing an obstruction. Sarawak Club. ANNUAL TENNIS TOURNAMENT. Additional results are as follows :— MEN’S CHAMPIONSHIP SINGLES. First Round.—Baughan beat Digby 4—6, 6—4, 6—3. Cargill a bye. Benson beat Rothera 6—1, 6—3. Kitto a bye. Second Round.—Cargill beat Baughan 7—5, 6—3. Kitto beat Benson 6—3, 6—4. Final.—Kitto beat Cargill 6—2, 7—5. MEN’S HANDICAP SINGLES. Final.—Kitto scr. beat Philp+ 15 odd games and + 30 even games 6—0, 6—3. MEN'S HANDICAP DOUBLES. First Round.—Baughan and Rothera+ 15 beat Cargill and Kitto —15, 6—2, 6—2. Benson and Philp a bye. Final.—Benson and Pbilp + 15 beat Baughan and Rothera+ 15, 6—1, 6—3. We wish to thank Mr. T. J. L. 0. Boyd for acting as umpire. Kuching Badminton Association. OPEN TOURNAMENTS, 1937. The Kuching Badminton Association’s 1937 Open Tournaments commence on 24th July. All matches will be played at the Maderasah Sekolah Melayu, Kampong Jawa Road No. 1. Play starts at 4.30 p.m. during week days and at 2.00 p.m. on Saturdays and Sundays. Players will be notified by the Hon. Acting Superintendent, Mr. Yeo Ah Choo, to play off their ties. Any further particulars can be obtained from the Honorary Secretary. “A” MEN'S SINGLES. First Round.—Chin Nyit Joon vs. Wee Ah Chew; Wee Eng Lee vs. C. Khok Hian. Second Round.—Ang Ah Chai bye; Law Hun Chong vs. Kueh Chin Bee; Ong Seng Chiang vs. Tan Seng Swee; Mathew Hon vs. Wee Boo Chiang; Lim Ah Lai vs. Chan Mah Khiok; Chia Bok Gee vs. Johari; Chua Teck Hee w. Mathew Chai; Yeo Cheng Chin bye. "A” MEN'S DOUBLES. First Round.— Joblie and Bujang vs. Mah Kliiok and Bok Gee; Mathew Chai and Mathew Hon vs. Cheng Chin and Seng Swee. Second Round.—Nyit Joon and Aini vs. Abang Bolhassan and Mat; Teck Guan and Ah Lai bye; Khiok Hian and Hun Chong bye; Ah Chew and Boo Chiang vs. Eng Lee and Seng Chiang. MEN'S SINGLES "B.” First Round.—Ah Choo vs. Choon Gee; Pa’ee vs. James Chai; Leng Geng Awg. Su’ud; Kheng Hai vs. Poh Lim; Khiok Kaw vs. Wall Joo; Abang Wahab vs. Lian Teck. Second Round.—Ed. Voon vs. Peng Siong; Kim Hwa vs. Balm; Chakraverty bye; Eng Seng bye; Hoon Yaw vs. Bujang (52); Hian Teck ns. Abang. MEN’S DOUBLES “B.u First Round.—Khiok Kaw and Choon Law vs. Kushairi and Salleh; Liang Teck and Wah Joo vs. Ben Jomel and Su’ud; Lai Soon and Foh Lin vs. Abeng and Salleh. Second Round.—Choon Gee and Peng Siong vs. Poh Lim and Ah Choo; Awg. Noon and Abang Hood bye; Ed. Voon and James Chai vs. Gol and Bujang. MEN’S SINGLES “C.” First Round.—R. Rozario vs. K. Cargill; Kho Peng Moh vs. H. M. Calvert; Ah Non, Tan vs. Law Thian Seng; F. L. Mansel vs. Spawi; Lee Ah Kow vs. Kueh Huat Tat ; Teo Ah Ilin vs. Sim Seng Teck; Chai Ah Jap vs. Law Choon Gee; W. J. Chater vs. Song Thian Eng; Wong Say Teng vs. Ong Kee Thai; Chan Ah Bah vs. Kueh Huat Eng; J. A. Benson vs. Buit; Jepon vs. Abit. Second Round.—Maleng vs. Law Hoo Teng; Alli os. Tnay Ah Sui. MEN’S DOUBLES “C.” First Round.—Ah Hin and Thian Eng vs. Peng Moh and Hoo Teng; J. Martin and Hudie vs. Chater and Cargill; Awi (585) and Gani vs. Coamo and V. Samy; D. Singh and Matassan vs. Seng Teck and Rozario; Dobil and Hassan vs. Birt and Mansel. Second Round.—Calvert and Ah Jap os. Joo Choon and M. Juan; Wahid and Miew vs. Dani and Awi (188); Large and Solosa bye; Huat Tat and L. Hin cs. Rapa-ee and Isa; Esen and Sahari vs. Kitto and Benson; Omar and Tapah vs. Abg. Bisunie and Abg. Murzuki. LADIES’ SINGLES. First Round.—Miss Phek Luan + 3 vs. Miss Gek Bui + 3. Second Round.—Miss Sai Hua scr. vs. Miss Emmie Chai+ 3; Mrs. Kennedy+ 3 bye; Mrs. Gibson+ 5 vs. Mis. Pin Chee + 3; Miss Shak Yin + 3 : vs Miss Hilda Hon scr. MIXED DOUBLES. First Round.—Miss H. Hon and Mathew Hon scr. vs. Miss C. Hon and Morgan Chai scr. Second Round.—Mrs. Kennedy and F. L. Mansel + 16 vs. Miss Shak Yin and Seng Chiang scr.; Miss Gek Bui and Eng Lee scr. bye; Miss Emmie Chai and JamesChai 5 vs. Miss Sai Hua and Bok Gee scr.; Mrs. Pin Chee and Mah Khiok scr. vs. Mrs. Gibson and W. J. Chatcr+12. VETERANS’ SINGLES. First Round.—P.M. Kassim scr. vs. Swee Hock scr.; Sitam scr. vs. Peng Lai scr. Second Round.—Calvert+ 3 vs. Lim Ah Bee + 3; Chai Ah Jap + 3 bye; Andrew Hon scr. bye; Choo Liat scr. vs. Sejilie + 3. Second Division News. JUNE. The Resident, Second Division, reports that at Pusa Melot a young Malay girl of about eighteen years of age and her father, Chedok, were charged with the murder of a nine-year-old Malay girl at Kampong Supa. It was an unusual case and no evidence of any motive for the crime could be produced. There was a certain amount of circum¬ stantial evidence against the girl but the whole case for the prosecution rested on two things, firstly, the evidence of an old and sick woman, and, secondly, footmarks, which the woman said were those of the accused and victim together. Neither could be considered to be reliable evidence and the witnesses for the prosecution were most uncertain of their statements and somewhat contradictory, whereas the accused girl, her parents, and her brothers and sisters appeared to be most straightforward. Con¬ sequently it was found necessary to discharge the accused and further inquiries are being made. In Bimanggang on the 26th Chiew Kian Teck was fined $100 or three months’ rigorous imprisonment fur tapping rubber during the topping holiday. On the last day of the month thirty doors of Undup Dayaks of Penghulu Lambai's house were reported to have tapped rubber on the first day of the tapping holiday. The persons reported have been summoned. On the 15th at 10.45 p.m. T.R. Kelimang of Enkranji arrived at Betong with a Lemanak Dayak Kampai", named Pilang, under arrest, and a Chinese trader, Tan Ah Ngee, who was badly wounded. It appears that Pilang assaulted Tan Ah Ngee with a parang which in the struggle fell into the water. It is alleged that Pilang then picked up a piece of wood and continued to assault the trader, who had fallen into the water while trying to escape. The fact that Dayaks arrived on the scene quickly presented what is believed would have been another murder to add to the list of serious crimes in the Betong district. Eight Chinese launches and one Government launch cleared Betong during the month. Both trade and commerce are badly handicapped by the fact that two out of the three vessels running to Betong arc prohibited from carrying passengers. Not more than thirty passengers can leave the river during a month and similarly not move than thirty can come from Kuching. Consequently it is believed that the fare charged is in fact much more than even the high figure of $5 advertised by the company. The passenger service is totally inadequate when one takes into account the large trade carried on in the district, and the fact that the maximum of thirty includes Government servanta and prisoners on transfer, as well as towkays visiting Kuching on business or pleasure. On the 24th the Court Writer, Pusa, reported that the bandong. Sri Bulan, had capsized at Pulan Burong on the night of the 21st. It is understood that there was a calm sea at the time but that the planks in the bows opened up owing to old age. Over fourteen piculs of rubber arid three hundred and four piculs of sago flower were lost. The juragau and crew were taken off by the bandong Sri Intanterpilih. Dog licences were instituted in Betong during the month and by the end of the month twelve licences had been taken out. The through path at the back of Pusa bazaar, which is being constructed by the Chinese them¬ selves, was nearly completed. An isolated case of tuba fishing in the Ulu Ibus was heard-at Roban. An old Dayak was convicted and fined twenty katis. A mild epidemic of measles has raged throughout the Saratok district. We understand that one of the victims was the Officer-in-Charge At the end of the month Saratok bazaar and offices were thick with Dayaks selling rubber and paying their taxes. There has been a constant stream of Dayaks reporting rubber gardens with no titles. It is probable that much of this rubber will never mature. Owners of such gardens have been warned that they will be charged three years’ back rent. The long and bitter dispute concerning the Saratok Mosque officials was settled by the Resident, Second Division, on his last visit, an election being held. The leaders of the two rival factions, Haji Senussi and Haji Bujang, were asked to withdraw their claims and let some new blood into office. This they did and Haji Zulaihi, who is the son of Haji Senussi and the son-in-law of Haji Bujang, was elected Imam. Haji Spi’ie remained Khatib and Haji Salleh was elected Belal, so that the fend has died a natural death. At Engkilili a Dayak woman, named Rangu, of Sedarat, was caught by a crocodile while she was fishing. She was lucky to escape with only an injury to her leg. Penghulu Undorn of the Krian and a party of fifteen left Kabong during the month on a short visit to Singapore. In Lubok Antu a Dayak of Rumah Sulan, Batu Bebini named Maga, was fined 18 mungkols for forcing his ex-wife against her consent. A case of butang was reported between Ngindang of Nanga Mujang and Bidai of the same bouse. This is said to be ngemulu as Bidai’s husband, Gulau died only a short time ago. Ngindang as usual has arguments to put forward as to why it is not ngeulu. On the 18th Mr. Hipps of Semitau, Dutch Borneo, arrived in Lobok Antu and left on the following day. He came from the Kanin and returned by way of Badau. Third Division News. JUNE. In the Resident’s Court, Sibu, a Chinese was convicted of burglary and sentenced to eighteen months' rigorous imprisonment, another Chinese was fined $500 for importing opium, an appeal against the Sibu magistrate’s decision in a civil case upheld, a complicated appeal by the Sarawak Electricity Supply Co., Ltd., from a judgment of the Sarikei District Court adjourned, and three appeals from various Sarikei court judgments dismissed. Litigation, especially amongst the Foochows, is popular, and there appears to be a number of petition writers who urge unsuccessful litigants to appeal and charge comparatively large sums for writing the petitions, most of which are rubbish. It is regretted that even Dayaks and Melanaus with requests are beginning to make these by letter, the products of the same petition writers. In one case a Dayak paid a writer $15 for such a useless document. The rickshaw' strike in Sibu was settled and on the 16th the vehicles were on the road again. It is considered that the pullers had a legitimate complaint. At Sibu one inquest was held during the month into the drowning of a Chinese girl, aged twelve years, who got out of her depth while bathing in a deep ditch. A finding of death by misadventure was recorded. On the 16th a party consisting of two rubber restriction inspectors and two police were attacked near Sungei Merah, Sibu, by Henghua gardeners, while on patrol duty for illegal tapping in the early morning. One of the inspectors sustained bruises through having been beaten with sticks. Much ill-felling appears to have becn caused among local Chinese gardeners by the institution of those patrols to detect and prevent tapping before legal hours, which offence has been very prevalent. The case has been dealt with in court and three convictions were obtained. An experiment is being made in Sibu by putting flood-gates on the out-falls of the main drains of the island, whereby it is hoped io reduce the flooding of the greater proportion of the island. A captive bolt pistol was received from Kuching and put into use during the month in Sibu, but. as expected, considerable opposition was met with from the Chinese who complained of adverse effects upon the meat. This has been substantiated to some degree by the Health authorities but is probaldy due to the pigs being insufficiently bled. House to house inspections carried out in Sibu during the month showed considerable improvement in the sanitary condition of the lainses .m over¬ crowding is still very acute. Bishop Edwin Lee of the Methodist Episcopal Mission arrived on the 16th accompanied by Dr. Archer, and proceeded to Kapit with the Resident in order to inspect sites for the enlarging of the mission field in that district. The Bishop, while in Sibu. unveiled a window in the Methodist church, dedicated to the memory of "Tuau Hoover”, and the service was attended by practically nil the Europeans in Sibu. In Sarikei a Chinese was fined $50 for tuba fishing. Three inquests were held at Sarikei during the month. In the first a verdict of suicide was returned on a female Foochow who was found dead in a rubber garden, having drunk a quantity of acetic acid. In the second inquest a verdict of death by misadventure was returned on a male Foochow who accidentally fell into the Rejang river near Lobok Bulat. Tn the third inquest a verdict of death by misadventure was returned on a male Dayak who was found in the river at Tanah Puteh. What might have been a crime of considerable importance in Sarikei occurred on the 20th when a Foochow, named Lan Tung Tieng, hit his uncle, Lau Hay Tuang, across the back of the neck with an axe. Fortunately for the victim the blow was, apparently, only a glancing one and he escaped with a severe wound The assailant was subsequently committed to stand trial in the Resident's Court. A captive bolt pistol was introduced for stunning pigs in the Sarikei slaughterhouse. The Postmaster-General, having granted a licence to the Controller of Rubber to operate a wireless transmitting and receiving station at Matu, this station was opened for traffic on the 11th. The work of renovating the station and installing the engine was carried out by Mr. F. Harding and his mechanics. In the Kapit district there have been two cases in the District Court of nebang kayu di pendem, one being at Song and one at Kapit. The offender in each case was fined two piculs. Two Chinese of Sungei Kapit were fined $50 each for planting rubber. An enormous number of disputes concerning the ownership of Dayak rubber were settled in Kapit during the month. These disputes have come to the surface as a result of the issuing of identification plates in connection with Rubber Restriction. Vague rumours as to an influenza epidemic at Beluga were confirmed on the 13th by Native Officer Abang Alunat. Help was requested from Sibu and on the 19th dresser Edward Chia proceeded up river with Native Officer Abang Alunat, being still away at the end of the month. The Native Officer has reported that so far they have recorded about 205 deaths, and so, as the whole Belaga population was estimated at only about 4,600 the epidemic appears to have been serious. The return of Chando, a Gaat Dayak woman, from Kuching after a successful operation there for an ovarian cyst will undoubtedly help in medical propaganda in the Kapit district. Many of the Dayak rubber owners in the Kapit district are extremely disturbed in mind as a result of Rubber Restriction proceedings in spite of the propaganda. Rumours have even circulated that Government were going to demand quit-rent and also a fee of 25 cents for every peg put in the rentis; the origin of such rumours is a mystery. Some Dayaks who were known to have had poor harvests last season have been given work at 50 cents a day on the roads at Kapit. On the 20th Bong Ah Shin, a Kheh long-sentence prisoner sentenced for murder, escaped. All Dayak houses down river were warned and he was recaptured by Tuai Rumah Sabang and seven followers at Nanga Melipis on the 29th. It is almost certain that lie was helped with food by someone in the Bleti where the Kheh colony exists and inquiries are being made. The reward of $50 has been paid out to Tuai Rumah Sabang. On the 6th at about midnight an outbreak of fire occurred in Kapit bazaar but fortunately it was discovered in time and extinguished. It appears to have been a deliberate attempt to burn the bazaar by putting burning kajangs under the kaki lima, but no clue has been found as to the culprit. Early in the month meetings of down river Tuai Rumah were held at Kanowit in order to fix a date for this year's burns. It is considered that, if an agreement could be reached whereby all padi farmers within prescribed areas would bum within a fixed period, the chances of damage by pest would be considerably diminished. Although the results of the meetings were not altogether satisfactory it is felt that a move has been made in the right direction, and it is thought that next year some more definite arrangement will be possible. During the month Mr. Ong Kee Hui of the Agri¬ cultural Department paid a visit to Kanowit in connection with the proposed experimental padi plot. Subsequently inspector Brahim was per¬ manently transferred to Kanowit. The result of this experiment will be watched with the keenest interest, and it is hoped that it will do much, not only to instruct the natives in modem methods of padi cultivation, but also to demonstrate to them the readiness of the Government to assist them in improving the conditions under which they live. After consultation with the Penghulus in the Nanga Meluan district , various building sites for the recently returned batak’d Dayaks have been settled, and the decisions have on the whole been favourably received by the Dayaks concerned. While the District Officer. Nanga Meluan, has been travelling a great deal of time has been devoted to a full explanation of rubber assessment, and the greatest difficulty has been found in persuading Dayaks that the new legislation was not a revenue collecting movement. In the past Government inspection and survey of rubber has generally meant some new form of taxation, and it is not surprising therefore that the Dayaks regard assessment with some misgiving. The epidemic of gastric influenza in the Nanga Meluan continues and many deaths have occurred. Dressers paid visits to the Ngemah and the Poi districts and as a result of prompt treatment many cases recovered. In Mukah three Dayaks were convicted of tuba fishing in small ditches in the jungle and sentenced to one month’s rigorous imprisonment each in default of payment of fine. A burglar attempted to enter the wireless station at Mukah at night, but the operator woke up when the man was in the act of opening a window and the latter fled. Unfortunately he left no clue beyond a common pocket-knife, which bore some excellent finger prints. These, however, unfortunately turned out to belong to the constable who was first on the spot and who very foolishly gripped the knife firmly in his palm. One case of theft of sago from a sago godown was reported in Oya. Chan Seng Kok was arrested, but, as there was not sufficient evidence against him to warrant a conviction, he was acquitted. The amount of raw sago exported from the Oya district during June was 261 koyans. Compared with the exports for May this shows a decrease of 45 koyans. On the morning of the 6th Native Officer Awang Bunyok reported in Oya that Kam bin Meraoh, aged 6, of Kampong Tanam had been drowned. At a subsequent inquest a verdict of death by drown¬ ing was recorded. Mukah Agricultural Show. PROCLAMATION DAY, 1937. As this show was started principally to encourage agricultural pursuits, (and at the same time, arts crafts, native industries and activities of all kinds) excerpts from a report on it by Mr. Ong Kee Hui, Agricultural Assistant, are given below. It may be of interest, however, if a brief descrip¬ tion is given of the various diversions (of a secondary nature) which were designed to attract the unbucolic (in the hope of bucolicizing them), and to prevent the definitely bucolic from taking themselves and their pumpkins and whatnots, too seriously. The proceedings opened on the evening of May 22nd with the final of the football competition, in which 8 teams competed, the final being between the Crusaders Team and one representing Sarawak Oilfields, Ltd., staff at Matedeng—the latter winning by 1 goal to nil and receiving custody, as the champion for the year, of a very handsome shield presented by Messrs. Ban Lee & Co., of Mukah. The interest in football locally is proved by the enormous crowds which gathered at each of the preliminary matches, which were spread over a period of about two months. The next day 420 exhibits including vegetables, produce, fruit, flowers, models, painting, curiosities, carvings and other handwork were housed in three sheds. Judging such a miscellany is not easy but was well and truly done by Messrs. Gilbert, Leach, Spooner, the Revd. Fr. Epping, and Messrs. J. Chin Nyan, the Capitan China and N.O. Abang Mustapha, to whom an acknowledgement is due for their painstaking and very fair awards, decided under the extreme handicap of heat, noises from ducks, dogs and Dayaks, and the smells of jelutong, sago and other choice odours, vegetable and animal ( in clu Adi ngc hhaommpoi osanpshieipn s ucluup M upkreashe)n.ted by Mr. and Mrs. J. G. Anderson, was won for the scorer of most points in the produce, arts and livestock sections, by Mr. Lau Theng Keng of the District Office with 96 1/2 points, N.O. Abang Mustapha being the runner up with 28 1/2 points, and the Prison vegetable garden third with 17 points which of course were obtained with vegetables only, all produced by one prisoner in charge of the gardens, the best exhibits being Mitake gourd, ginger, arrow-root, soya beans, Australian pumpkin and french beans, and gingelly, etc. Next year. the suggestion, given below, ot Mr. Ong Kee Hui to award separate and additional cups for each section, will be acted on, if some generous person or persons or firms are sufficiently interested to present them. The competitors in these sections are to be con- gratulated on their showing, which seemed to interest everyone; the only individual present who appeared to be utterly bored was a melancholy bird (with a large nose) resembling a Toucan, which snapped peevishly when offered a light ale or mineral water, obviously not the origin of the famous stout advertisement (just see what Toucan The school sports, ably organized by the Revd. Fr O'Brien, were being run off at the same time, the Government Malay school, Mission school and the Chinese school all sending in entrants the obstacle race (or belumba susah, to give the very apt Malay name for it) providing the greatest attraction. On the following day, Proclamation Day, the crowds increased, probably owing to the boat racing which continued all day, while the judges in the show section were still struggling with the rival charms of string beans and bananas, etc. Only five races were arranged, and this was none too few as for some unaccountable reason Sarawak boat crews seem incapable of arriving at the start in time. However, all the races went off well (with only two really bad fouls by local boats which should have known better), with the following results. RACE 1.—15 men boats any type. 1st Laju Laju (Piee Oya). 2nd Lang Laju (Bilong Balan Oya). RACE 2.—30 men boat (Bedar). 1st Sayang Kasih (Tua kampong Petanak). 2nd Rimau Menangkap (Kampong Penat, Oya). Winners of a cup kindly presented by N.O. Awang Bunyok, Hj. Omar, and Hj. Bujang of Dalat. RACE 3.—Unlimited boats. 1st Trimah Kasih (Datu Awang Udin). 2nd Rimau Menangkap (Kampong Penat, Oya). Winners of a champion cup, kindly presented by Messrs. Ban Lee & Co.. Mukah. RACE 4.—Interstation Race (open to any 30 men boats for any coast, station). 1st Adeh di Kasih (Datu Awang Udin). 2nd SingaKala (Telan bin Latip of Tilian, Mukah). Winners of a champion cup, kindly presented by Sarawak Oilfields, Limited, staff, Matcdeng. RACE 5.—Dayak Race 30 men Temoi. 1st Tedong Brani (Pengbulu Gagat). 2nd Tedong Bisa (Penghulu Umpoh). Messrs. Avery, Gilbert, Spooner, and Fr. Epping did noble work acting as starters, shoufers and umpires (as a result of which they were croaking like bullfrogs for many hours afterwards), and Messrs. Chin Nyan, Khoo Shak Kim arid Goh Chong Sek ran a very successful tote. In the middle of the racing there was a curry luncheon in the Fort which was consumed by over a hundred subscribers and their guests, and the old native court was converted into a bar. very ably run by Mr. William Tamby and his assistants. A great attraction also were various sideshows, including a hoopla, and coconut shy (with tinned goods instead of coconuts), at which the base-ball skill of Mr. William H. Avery of Bintulu and Massachussets (or Massachestnuts as he prefers to call it) caused the owner some anxiety on several occasions. In the evening of the 23rd an open cinema show was staged on the padang, and on the night of Proclamation Day the proceedings were wound up with a dancing competition and general noise making ramai-ramai (with a conjuror as an interlude), in which almost every known form of dance was performed and the bands varied from mouth organs, and combs and paper to concertinas, guitars and the usual gendang-gendang. EXCERPTS PROM A REPORT RY MR. ONG KEE HUI OF THE AGRICULTURAL DEPARTMENT. The Second Mukah Crafts and Produce Show was held on the 23rd and 24th May, 1937, and provided two very exciting and enjoyable days for the few thousand people who flocked to Mukah for the show. On the whole the weather was kind, though it threatened now and then to give all at the show a good drenching. This year's show was on a much grander scale than before, and included a regatta, besides the usual land sports, football, cinema show and other events. The actual exhibition itself was housed in four separate sheds. One housed the exhibits of the Agricultural Department, one the Arts and Crafts exhibits, one the Agricultural produce exhibits, and the other the Livestock exhibits. In addition, there were a number of small sheds affording shelter to the various sideshows, which included a hoopla and a modified coconut shy, description of which is left for abler pens. The writer is here concerned with the actual exhibition itself. Regarding this, an inspection of the exhibition stalls revealed the fact that there were much fewer exhibits in the Arts and Crafts Section, but the number of agricul¬ tural exhibits in the produce and livestock sections exceeded those seen in the previous show. A greater variety of exhibits were shown and the exhibits reached a much higher standard than before. Entries in the livestock Section were particularly numerouss. The larger farm animals such as cattle, goats, pigs, etc., were not represented, all entries in the section being poultry. The poultry exhibits were all very good, especially in Sections 2 and 3 Melano and Chinese breeds respectively. Ducks were also represented. Perhaps the most outstanding exhibits in the whole section were the pair of white goose and gander exhibited by Mr. an Teng Keng. As there are a fair number of these animals in the coast district, the absence of any exhibit of the larger farm animals was possiblv due to the fact that prizes offered were not sufficiently attractive. Exhibits in the Produce Sections were with few exceptions of a fairly high standard. Both vege¬ tables and fruits were well represented, and the exhibits showed a wider variety than those in tho previous show. The vegetables on show included some good samples of sweet potatoes, kladis, lobak, bottle gourds, pumpkins, snake gourds, loofah, soya bean, sword bean, french bean, okra, Chinese cab¬ bage. brinjals, arrowroot, etc. Outstanding among the fruit exhibits were some semangka (water melon), moradu papaya, jack fruits, huge coconuts, pomeloes. sweet oranges, pineapples and other luscious fruits. The Agricultural Department as in the previous show staged various exhibits in a separate stall adjoining the Arts and Crafts shed. The size of the shed was the same as in the previous year, But the stall space had to be considerably increased, as approximately twice the number of exhibits shown last year were taken to the show this time. The department's exhibits were divided into the following groups In the fruits, vegetables and food crops sections there were exhibited a few of the crops grown at the 12th Mile Agricultural Station. The Section on pest control comprised various insecticides, poison, and models of various traps for dealing with monkeys and wild pigs (two principal pests of sago), and various cheap and home-made rat traps. A four oaks sprayer, a duster, and a termite pump were also on show for purposes of demonstration. Samples of various agricultural products such as fats and oils, various kinds of flour or starch, tapioca chips, chilly sauce, etc., were also shown. Samples of various strains of padi together with a model of a wet padi field showing the system of irrigation, were exhibited in the section on wet padi cultivation, besides various home-made rat traps already included under pest control. In the section on poultry, a model poultry farm (alternative pen system) and a model of a good type roosting house were exhibited. Finally there were two models of two cheap types of rubber smoke-house suitable for small holdings, and a model of one of the latest type of copra kiln in the F.M.S. A list of the exhibits in the department’s stall is given in Appendix I. Two officers of the department were on duty at the stall for most of the time during the two days, and were kept busy by a stream of visitors to the stall. Those interested were shown round the stall and explanations and short talks were given on some of the more interesting and important exhibits. A note was taken of the number of visitors who visited the stall and the sections on which most of their interest centred. It is estimated that approximately 1,350 people visited the stall. This does not include a large number of casual sight-seers who merely passed by and did not stop to make enquiries. The figures given in Appendix II, may be taken as a very rough indication of the popularity of the different sections. Wet padi cultivation appeared to be the most popular, possibly because it is comparatively new to the average Melano, not because of any genuine interest in this subject. Pamphlets in Malay and Chinese on various agricultural subjects were distributed to those genuinely interested, and in a glass case were exhibited the seeds of some of the more common agricultural crops such as vegetables, etc., obtain¬ able from the 12th mile Agricultural Station. There was a rush for vegetable seeds, a certain amount of which were distributed after the show. It is of interest to note here that a fair number of the outstanding exhibits in the Agricultural Section were grown from planting materials distributed by the department’s stall after the previous show. To sum up some of the impressions on this year’s show attendance was considered by some observers to be below those in the previous show. Consider¬ ing the fact that attendance was spread over two days as compared with one day, and split up between land sports, and the river sports as well as the show ground, the writer is of the opinion that far from being less than the previous show's, the total attendance may have been more than before. It is generally considered that on the whole this year's show was much better and, in most respects, much more enjoyable. The inclusion of the regatta proved most popular, and the exhibition stall itself was much better organized. The choice of May instead of September during which to hold the exhibition proved better than expected as the sea was calm and the favour¬ able weather conditions facilitate the growth of crops for exhibition. The innovation of a champion cup awarded to the most successful exhibitor in all sections proved an excellent scheme, and was largely responsible for the general increase of exhibits in the livestock and produce sections. It is considered that the scheme, could with considerable advantage be extended and a separate cup awarded for the most successful exhibitor in each of the Livestock, Produce or Arts and Crafts sections, the Champion Cup now awarded being retained as at present for award to the most successful exhibitor in all three sections. This would stimulate the interest of exhibitors in all sections and increase the number of exhibits. Further, if funds are available, the writer ventures to suggest that more attractive prizes might be offered particularly in respect of the larger farm animals in the livestock section. It is the writer's opinion that the Second Mukah Show was on the whole an even greater success than the previous year's. Being familiar with district agricultural shows held in various parts of the F.M.S., the writer might also add that the show at Mukah compares most favourably with similar shows in the F.M.8. although it may not stand comparison with the All-Malayan affair held at Kuala Lumpur in August each year.—(Signed O.K.H.) In conclusion, an acknowledgment is due to all those persons who helped to carry on the show, with donations and personal assistance, especially the Judges, the Junior Service staff and the Constabulary, Mukah, the Revd. Fathers of the Roman Catholic Mission and Messrs. Sarawak Oilfields, Limited, and Ban Lee & Co., Mukah, and it is hoped that, now the idea has “caught on,’’ the Mukah show will develop into a regular annual event on Proclamation Day, a most suitable date historically and meteorologically. J. G. ANDERSON, Honorary Secretary, Mukah Show, 1937. Fourth Division News. JUNE. An appeal was heard in the Resident’s Court, Miri, regarding a business dispute between two Indian partners. The accounts kept in Tamil were so muddled that, in the absence locally of a disinterested person capable of translating them, the Secretary for Native Affairs was asked to assist in obtaining a statement of the accounts in English. On the 17th a Chinese was found hanging in the jungle near the Pujut Road. The body was sub¬ sequently identified as that of a Sarawak Oilfields Ltd. cooly, named Liew Chung, who had been missing for a week. Many Dayaks are still applying for permission to move into the Niah, Sibuti and Suai rivers. While there can be little objection to families joining existing houses all three rivers arc filling up too quickly, and no new houses should be formed for the present. The Customs godown at Miri is now finished and it remains only to reconstruct the wire fence surrounding it. The main building is very imposing, and the work has, on the whole, been well carried out. Work on the new office is still delayed owing to the entire absence of timber. The contractor has now ordered supplies from Bintulu, but delivery is not expected for about another month. The suit between Chin Fook, plaintiff, the contractor for the new offices in Miri, and Soo Cheng, defendant, in respect of the latter's failure to deliver timber in accordance with his agreement, was settled, the plaintiff being awarded damages amounting to $1,036. Mr. A. W. D. Brooke returned from Baram on the 8th and left for a tour of the Niah and Sibuti districts on the 22nd. He was still away at the end of the month. An unusual number of deaths occurred in the Baram district during the month, both in Marudi and in many of the upriver villages, due in most cases, it is understood, to insufficient care following influenza, which still continues throughout the district. Assan bin Badar, the headman of Kampong Narum, Marudi, died on the 27th. He had been in failing health for some time, but appeared to be recovering, when he became suddenly sick again and died after a few days’ illness. Assistant Forest Officer, H. P. Buxton, arrived from Kuching on the 16th and immediately pro¬ ceeded to the Tutoh and Apoh rivers in connection with the proposed protected forest between those rivers. The project has caused a certain amount of feeling among the natives, because part of the land which is included is near their villages, and might be conceivably used as farming land in the future. It is hoped (hat another boundary will be found and that other forest, further upriver, can be included in exchange for the area near the native villages. Holders of about a thousand acres of rubber in the Foochow concession on the 25th and 26th signed agreements to sell their holdings to Mr. Daubeny's concern, and received ten per cent of the purchase value. It is understood that the holders of some four hundred acres in the centre of the concession are still holding out and do not intend to sell. On the 3rd the District Officer, Limbang, left for a visit to the Panderuan river, and he reached Rumah Asut at Merutup. No complaints were received, the people appearing to be quite contented and prosperous. During the month a Bazaar Area was demarcated for Limbang, and complete Bazaar Area by-laws and Rural Area by-laws were drafted and forwarded to Kuching for legislation. Similar by-laws were also completed by the Officer-in-Charge, Lawas, for his district and forwarded at the same time. On the 1st m.l. Sylvia was sent to the Island Trading Company, Ltd., Subok, Brunei, in order to have all the super-heating apparatus for solar oil removed. This action was found to be necessary owing to the quite unbearable heat, set up in the engine-room, which at the same time pervaded the whole of the launch. An unpleasant accident occurred in the Ulu Trusan when two Muruts were out hunting pig, which resulted in the death of one of them, a lad of about fourteen years of age. They were on their way home in the rain, the younger walking in front and the elder, holding a loaded gun under his arm, behind, when the dogs put a pig in the jungle. The Murut with the gun hurriedly tried to whip off the leaf, which he had tied over the breech to prevent the cap getting wet, but in doing so he temporarily dragged back one of the hammers and then suddenly released it. The gun exploded and the boy was shot in the hack. He died three days later. A preliminary inquiry was held by the Officer-in-Charge, when the Murut who had handled the gun was remanded on a charge of causing death by culpable negligence. The accused was eventually tried and convicted on this charge by the District Officer, Limbang and Lawas, sitting in the Resident’s Court, and sentenced to one year’s rigorous imprisonment. He was also ordered to pay $60 “libal nyawa.” The shoes and stockings of the Officer-in-Charge, Lawas, who had taken them off while he went across river in a waterlogged prahu for five minutes, were stolen from the Kubu jetty right under the eyes of the police in the barracks but were never recovered. Early in the month Tuai Rumah Ateng Mugang of Ulu Fah, Trusan, brought down several followers with "damar,” which was disposed of at quite a fair price in the bazaar. Two Muruts appeared in Trusan during the month with a pair of rhinoceros horns, which they staled they had received at Lupine Fah from two Dutch Borneo Muruts, who had brought them over the border. After communication with Kuching they were granted permission to dispose of these horns, but they were warned that this would not be allowed in future. The second sago factory at Sundar, owned by Chop Soon Bee, which had to close down some years ago. was reopened recently, and is now work¬ ing full time. There is consequently now quite a large output of sago from Sundar. There has been a slow infiltration of Tagals into the Lawas district over the border from British North Borneo for sometime, but it is to be hoped that the quarrelsome Kulors do not also find out the supposed advantages of the Sarawak side of the border and dribble over in the tracks of the Tagals. The only Bintulu case which calls for special mention is one in which a Dayak was fined $150 under Section C(26) of the Dayak code for com¬ mitting incest with his neice. The woman was fined $75 which is to be paid out as plasi menoa. The Punans living in the Ulu Jelalong have not yet come down to get plates for their rubber trees on account of the river being mali at the moment. In Bintulu the price of sago and jelutong remains satisfactory, while the price of belian has gone beyond all reasonable limits. Split attaps are now difficult to obtain at $90 per laksa and consequently the natives are prosperous. On the 29th m.v. Margaret, while attempting to proceed over the Bintulu bar from the river, stuck and had to return. She was drawing 7' 6" and had 8' of water. The juragan complained that the marks and signals were wrong, but since then the s.s. Auby has arrived in the port and reported that the signals and leading marks are quite in order. Area.—The Total area of the Estate is unchanged at 2,784 acres, of which 2,674 acres are under rubber, all of which is mature. The dates of planting are as follows Crop — The crop harvested during the year amounted to 638,266 lbs., as compared with 636,072 lbs. last year. There was prohibition by Government of Tapping for a total of 122 days during the year, as compared with 65 days last year. Forward Sale has been made of 5 tons monthly May/December, 1937, at the equivalent of 11 5/8 d. per lb. landed London. Labour and Health.—The supply of labour remains just sufficient for present requirements. The health of the Force has been good. Estate.—The Visiting Agent has recently reported that the Estate generally is in good order. Directorate.— In accordance with the Company's Articles of Association, Lt.-Col. J. Harvey, D.S.O., retires from the Board of Directors and, being eligible, offers himself for re-election. Auditors.—Messrs. Turquaud, Youngs & Co. retire and offer themselves for re-appointment. On behalf of the Board, J. K. HENDERSON, A. R. MALCOLM, SACKVILLE HOUSE, 143/149, FENCHURCH STREET, 25th June, 1987. LONDON, E.C. 3, AUDITORS’ REPORT TO THK MEMBERS OF SARAWAK RUBBER ESTATES, LIMITED. We have audited the Balance Sheet set forth above, and have obtained all the information and explanations we have required. We have compared the Balance Sheet with the books and vouchers of the Company in London, and with the signed returns from the Estate in Sarawak. In our opinion such Balance Sheet is properly drawn up so as to exhibit a true and correct view of the state of the Company’s affaire, according to the best of our information and the explanations given to us, and as shown by the books of the Company and the signed returns from abroad referred to above. LONDON, 25th June, 1937. TURQUAND, YOUNGS & CO., Chartered Accountants.  