The Sarawak Gazette MONDAY. FEBRUARY 1st. 1937. Birth. At Sibu. on the 2nd January, 1937, to the wife of Abang Yan. Officer-in-Charge of Matu and Daro, of a son. Local and Personal. JANUARY.  On New Year’s Eve almost the whole European population of Kuching were present at a dinner and Fancy Dress Ball very kindly given by Their Highnesses the Rajah and Ranee at Astana. Dinner was served on the ground floor to about ninety guests, and was followed by dancing which continued until a warning bugle announced the imminent passing of the Old Year. A gun fired from Fort Margherita heralded the birth of 1937, and the New Year was ushered in with all the customary ritual, the strains of “Auld Lang Syne resounding through the ball¬ room and floating across river to the sleeping bazaar. We have to thank Their Highnesses the Rajah and Ranee for a very gay and enjoy¬ able evening. The costumes were as diverse and picturesque as ever, many of them being strikingly original; Her Highness the Ranee was particularly effective as a Sikh lady, and among the men Captain W. G. Blackie of s.s. Circe was outstandingly good as a cigarette vendor in “buttons” and a pill-box hat. Each year we look forward eagerly to the Astana fancy dress ball, and each time we depart telling one another that the party was the "best ever.” This year was no exception, and the guests went to bed tired hut happy, as always. These dances go with a swing that makes them easily the most enjoyable entertainment of the year. We are glad to learn that the Earl and Countess of Inchcape will shortly be visiting Sarawak, arriving at Kuching on March 13th. On January 8th, Mr. H. B. Crocker sailed for Europe on furlough prior to retirement. Mr. Crocker was appointed a cadet in the Sarawak Civil Service in August, 1900, and after filling a number of posts retired in December. 1928. as Chief Secretary. Find¬ ing a life of leisure at home uncongenial, he rejoined the Service in November, 1929, being appointed Registrar and Resident’s Court Magistrate, Sibu, where he served until 1934. On his return from furlough in that year he was appointed Acting Government Secretary in succession to Mr. F. C. Macaskie, con tinuing in that position until his second retirement. Mr. Crocker has a long connection with Sarawak, since he is the son of Mr. W. M. Crocker, who joined the Service of the late Rajah in 1864 and retired in 1880. It is good to know that this connection is not to be severed, since we understand that Mr. Crocker will probably settle down in this country in the near future. We are sure that all our readers join with us in wishing him a long and happy retirement. Mr. W. F. Dick has taken Mr. H. B Crocker’s place as Acting Government Secret¬ ary. Mr. F. H. Pollard has been appointed to act as Resident. First Division, and Mr G. F. J. Pegler has ceased to officiate as Travelling District Officer. First Division, and has taken over the duties of District Officer, Kuching. On January 14th Mr. J. B Archer. Resident, Fourth Division, left Miri for Sibu by H.H.M.Y. Maimuna in order to take over the Third Division from Mr. C. D. Adams, who is to retire on pension early in February. The post of Resident. Fourth Division, is temporarily in abeyance, Mr. E. O. Bruce having replaced Mr. Archer at Miri as Senior District Officer, Miri and Barnin. The Fourth Division has been split up into three districts, namely Limbang and Lawas, Miri and Baram, and Bintulu, which are at present controlled directly from Kuching; we understand that this system will continue as an experiment, pending consideration of certain measures of general re-organization which are at present under review. Mr. Bruce was relieved at. Limbang by Mr. R. L. Daubeny, who left Kuching with Mrs. Daubeny in H.H.M.Y. Maimuna on January 10th. Dr. A. D. Hutchison, who has resigned his appointment in the Government Service, sailed for home from Kuching on January 8th. From 1929 Dr. Hutchison served con¬ tinuously as Divisional Medical Officer, Sibu, where he leaves many friends, and where he will be greatly missed; we wish him all success in the future. Mr. C. A. Willis, the Representative of the Sarawak Government on the International Rubber Regulation Committee, left Kuching by the Darvel on January 9th en route for Europe'. Mr. Willis was a passenger in the Imperial Airways plane which on the night of January 13th was forced to land on a beach in Siam,—fortunately without mishap. Mr. C. Corbin’s many friends in Sarawak will be glad to learn of his marriage to Miss Muriel (Eve) Rendall, which took place by special licence at Portsmouth last December. Mr. Corbin, who will be returning to Kuching in February to resume the Management of Messrs. The Sarawak Electricity Supply Co., Ltd., will, we understand, be accompanied by Mrs. Corbin, and we offer them both our warmest congratulations. We learn from a home paper that Air Commodore S. W. Smith, O.B.E., R.A.F., who until recently was Air Officer Command¬ ing R.A.F.. Far East, has been appointed Air Officer Commanding No. 1 (Bomber) Group as from January 7th, with head¬ quarters near Abingdon. The improvement in trade is reflected in the additional vessels that have had to be placed on the Singapore run in order to deal with cargo that cannot be carried by regular vessels. An extra ship is now assisting s.s. Auby and s.s. Vyner Brooke on the Kuching run. sailing every ten days, and leaving Singapore five days after the Vyner Brooke, and the Kampar on the Rejang River has had to be replaced by s.s. Katong, a vessel of larger cargo capacity which sails alternate weeks with s.s. Angby. Another sign of the times is the luxury trade which has recently sprung up as a result of the general increase in prosperity. In Kuching bazaar a number of shops carry stocks of electrical gadgets, expensive toilet articles such as foreign perfumes, etc., mechanical toys and ornaments, for all of which there seems to be a ready sale. Three years ago few shop-keepers would have been rash enough to hope to dispose of electric toasters and diminutive phials of scent at five dollars a time, but now there appears to be a brisk demand for these and similar articles. Certainly the shops which stock them are crowded at all hours of the day, and seem to do a busy trade. We publish on another page the first instal¬ ment of a most interesting account by Mr. S. B. Ah Khoon of a recent visit to China. We invite the attention of our readers to this excellent article in the hope that some of them will follow Mr. Ah Khoon’s example and set down for us their experiences when on holi¬ day in foreign lands. These accounts, apart from being very interesting reading, are of genuine assistance to others who may wish to go on similar trips, but who are deterred by lack of information regarding conditions in the countries they wish to visit, and so are forced to keep to the beaten track. The Rev. Father Anthony Mulder, Rector of the R.C. Mission, Mukah, sailed for home on furlough by the Vyner Brooke on January 28th. We wish him a pleasant leave and a speedy return to Sarawak. The Rev. Father J. Buis, who is also pro¬ ceeding on furlough, has gone first to Manila, where he will he Sarawak’s representative at the Eucharistic Congress. Father Buis is accompanied by the Rev. Father Van de Laar, of Bintulu, who will return to Sarawak at the close of the Congress. We welcome back Mr. L. N Reynolds, Commissioner of Sarawak Constabulary, who returned from furlough on January 25th. Mrs. Reynolds is remaining in Africa for a few months. We were very sorry to say farewell to the Rev. Father W. Shelley, C.R.. who sailed for Europe on January 23rd. We regret to say that Father Shelley will not be returning to Kuching, since it has been decided that the Community of the Resurrection is to with¬ draw from Sarawak. The remaining Fathers of the Order will leave for England during the next few months. ______ We are glad to hear that as the result of the enterprise of Messrs. Tan Sum Guan & Son a greatly improved cold storage service will shortly be available in Kuching. This will supply a long-felt want and wilt be most welcome, and we commend the new service to the support of our Kuching readers. About the middle of the month the General Hospital, Kuching, had a rather unusual patient on its books in the shape of a small female maias. For some ten days this young lady was a dignified and much respected inmate of one of the Asiatic wards, where she occupied a special cot complete with tempera¬ ture chart and diet sheet; although her con¬ dition on admission gave rise to serious anxiety, she soon improved under treatment, and apart from one relapse her recovery was uninterrupted. During the whole of her illness she was a model patient, and a great favourite with the other occupants of the ward. Her only breach of the hospital rules occurred when in a moment of exuberance caused perhaps, by the consciousness of returning health, she climbed up the wall and attempted to stop the ward clock. Apart from this one lapse from decorum her behaviour was never anything but lady-like and correct. Notes and Comments. THREE ACRES AND A KERBAU. Although the theme of the article published on this page to-day is applicable rather to an attitude of mind than to specific policies in the Malay States, it is well worth reading by those who believe that a reaction against idealization of the kampong is over¬ due. In the book which has given rise to this thoughtful article, Professor Julian Huxley warns British administrators in tropical Africa against the creation of “a human zoo, an anthropological garden.” That, Professor Huxley believes, is a possible result of the fetish of indirect rule, the preservation of the framework of village and tribal life and the protection of the tribes against European influence. The Sarawak Gazette, as will be gathered from the article we reprint from its columns to-day. thinks that the same danger is already visible in Sarawak, where the administrators who regard themselves as the best friends of the native may yet prove to have been his worst enemies. where indeed the native himself may yet tura upon his would-be friends and ask what right they have to keep him in the state of picturesque simplicity, not to say backwardness, which they apparently believe to be his proper condition in the modem world. This is a problem which arises in a much more perplexing form in Sarawak, where the administra¬ tion is dealing with primitive peoples, than in the British protectorates in the Malay Peninsula, where the indigenous race is a relatively advanced one. In its extreme form this problem exists in the Peninsula only in dealing with the aboriginal tribes of the forests and sea-coasts. There are people, very short-sighted people, who argue that the Sakai, the negritoes, the Jakun and the sea gypsies should be allowed to remain in their supposedly idyllic state, untouched by modern medicine, agriculture, educa¬ tion and the other essentials of civilization. In point of fact, it. would be better, much better, for the aboriginals themselves—though not for scientists and others who like to retain live specimens in a human zoo to merge gradually with the Malay population on the fringe of their jungle fastnesses, to settle down to kampong life and to adopt Islam (not Christianity). That process is already notice¬ able in Perak, Selangor and other parts of the Peninsula, and it is to be welcomed, not lamented. But so far as the Malay race is concerned it is not possible to find in the record of British trusteeship any deliberate attempt to insulate the Malays against the modern world. The reaction against English education for country-bred hoys, voiced by Malay spokesmen as well as by British administrators, may perhaps be cited as a move in that direction, but if it be admitted that Government is right in trying to keep the peasantry on the land, then clearly the Govern¬ ment is right in adopting a type of education which will not unsettle the peasant. Only if the rural school is so framed as to lay undue stress on handicrafts and agriculture, and to leave the pupil with a knowledge of the three R’s but otherwise mentally unawakened, will that charge be well- founded. but there is no evidence to support it yet. There can be only one proper objective for British policy in the Malay States, and that is to keep the Malay peasantry on a stable basis, living on his own land, producing his own foodstuffs, and finding his interests within his own village community? Tn that end the village school is being improved and given a marked agricultural bias, and the Agricul¬ tural and Co-operative Departments are attempting to help the peasant to get better prices for his produce. Whether, even with these and other attempts to check a drift from country to town, the governments can succeed in preventing such a drift in the Malay States remains to be seen, but at any rate the attempt must be made. In our view the warning uttered by Professor Huxley in respect of Africa, and by the Sarawak Gazette in respect of its own territory, applies to the Malay race only in so far as there is a tendency to take an idealised, sentimentalised view of kampong life. We speak of an "unspoilt” Malay scene, by which we mean a scene as arcadian outwardly and as primit ive inwardly as it was when the first British administrators saw it fifty years ago. We deplore the introduction of concrete dams by the P.W.D. instead of the old, picturesque and thoroughly inefficient water-wheels in Negri Sembilan. Just as the foreign visitor to Japan pays too much atten¬ tion to old colour prints and too little to the ugly industrial sky-line of Osaka, so the present-day European in Malaya, in so far as he is interested in Malay life at all, is inclined to sentimentalise about mouse-deer tales, padi-planting superstitions and other charming trifles, instead of considering the really significant things in the rural scene—the cinema, the vernacular newscaster, the motor-bus, and in the near future, the coffee-shop radio. Whether we like it or not, “civilization’’ is rapidly permeating the kampong, and it is for the British administration to accept that process as inevitable, to make no attempt to presene anachronism, and to avoid that irritated and illogical approach to the “Europeanized, educated or wen progressive native”—to use Professor Huxley's 'words—against which we are warned in the article published on this page to-day. The above eminently sensible article appeared as a leader in the Straits Times of January 7th. It summarises the administrative problem discussed in December’s "Notes and Comments’ and does good service by reminding us that one of the modern administrator’s first duties is to face facts Thirty or even twenty years ago life was not So complicated, and consequently it really was possible to visualise the perpetuation of an arcadia in which primitive natives could be allowed to live their own lives uncontaminated by the outside world. But now the issues are no longer quite so simple, indeed are no longer simple at all. The outside world can no longer be ignored. Since the Great War the West has been pouring machines and the civilization of a machine age into the East. and as a result of this process the rate of material development has been fantastically accelerated, far outstripping the rate of mental development on the part of the people concerned,—where they are primitive natives, that is. And since we are responsible for this position, surely il is up to us to do something about it. We cannot just sit back, bewail a vanished past, and confine our administrative efforts to an attempt to put the clock back In the words of one of H. G. Wells’ characters,— "This ere progress ... it goes on!" It does. And not all the fulminations of all the Colonel Blimps in Pall Mall and Piccadilly (nor, we. might add. the sighs of the sentimentalists) will stop il. Our duty as administrators is surely to control this "progress." to direct it into the proper channels, and to see that the native is able gradually to adapt himself to the changed world that progress brings. No one likes to see an ulu Dayak in a bright blue blazer and a homburg hat,—he presents a grotesque spectacle, but let us remember that this is our fault, for if we were not here he would not be sporting his homburg at all. (Instead, he might be wearing a confection adorned with the hair of a recently decapitated child,—so unspoilt and romantic!) As it is, he is grotesque only because he is trying to imitate the habits of a race which he has been taught to believe is superior in wisdom to his own. We encourage him to adopt a number of our con¬ ventions,—we like him, for instance, to share our view that it is wrong to chop the beads off helpless women and children, indeed, sometimes we even go so far as to put him against a wall and shoot him when he disagrees with us on this point,—yet when he carries this process of imitation one or two stages further, we jeer at him. Doesn’t this seem a trifle illogical? As Professor Huxley has pointed out. Western civilisation cannot have it both ways. If we expect the native to conform to our code of morality and behaviour, we cannot be surprised when he adopts other of our conventions. Nor should we be resent¬ ful. Surely it is up to us, not to laugh at the Dayak in his homburg. but to see that lie gets the right kind of homburg, and wears it in the right way. We should do our best, that is, to help him to cease to be grotesque,—to ensure that eventually the sight of Dayak in European clothes will seem to us just as natural as an Englishman or a Chinese similarly attired. For he is going to buy his homburg and blazer, make no mistake about that. Crocodiles at Baram. We print below an extract from 1936 Annual Report of the District Officer, Baram : Two deaths and one severe injury were caused In crocodiles during February. One evening after fishing in Logan Ikang. a party of three Kenyahs wore about to return home when a crocodile rose and seized one of them from the stem of the boat, and dragged him under. There were other parties in the lake at the time but nothing could be done. Deceased was a Long Sabatu, aged about twenty- five. and was called Tama Apieng Maya Tumau. His body "was recovered the next morning and was untouched save for the wounds where the jaws of the crocodile had seized him. He was still grasping his fishing net with the one hand. Some flays earlier an Uma Samuka Kayan from Lung Laput was fishing in about three feet of water in a small tributary of the Tru. His thigh was seized by a crocodile and a large piece removed, but the crocodile was caught and killed. The Kayan was carried home, and although his death was expected daily, since the wound rapidly became gangrenous, no attempt was made to bring him to Marudi for treatment. A Native Officer found him in this condition, and only by making himself thoroughly unpleasant was he able to persuade the relations to bring him to the hospital, where he recovered in a few weeks. Without treatment he would certainly have died. ‘‘About the same time and also during February, a couple of Dayaks from the house of Lanyau in the Kelabit river, a tributary of the Bakong, were taking jelutong down to Beluru bazaar from their hut in the jungle. They were each in their own boat and night had just fallen, when there was a cry and a splash and one of them disappeared. That, night and the next morning a search was carried out. and one crocodile was shot, and found to have pieces of human flesh and hair in its mouth. Other parts of the body were recovered later. Deceased was about twenty, and was called Nyaming.” Death of Mr. Martin Johnson. FOREMOST CINEMATOGRAPH. EXPLORER. Mr. Martin Johnson, the famous American naturalist and cinematographer, has died following injuries received when a plane, in which he was flying with his wife and other passengers, crashed in the hills five miles from San Fernando, Cali¬ fornia, yesterday, states a Reuter message. Mr. and Mrs. Marlin Johnson were both found unconscious and both sustained leg fractures. The latest report of Mrs. Marlin Johnson stated that she is now out of danger. One other passenger was also killed in the crash. The airliner in which they were flying carried ten passengers and a crew of three. THE MAN AND HIS WORK. More than any other man, Mr. Martin Johnson taught the world the advantage of the. camera over the gun in “shooting” big game. He and Mrs. Martin Johnson were known wherever there is a cinema, for their films “Congorilla" and “Baboona” have thrilled audiences in the great cities throughout the world. An American by birth, Mr. Martin Johnson soon became famous in his country as a naturalist and an intrepid cinematograph explorer. His two films were made in the jungle of Africa, and their realistic setting had a great appeal for American audiences. The success of the films went, further than that. They were accepted and applauded on the Con¬ tinent in which they were made—the highest test of a jungle film. No far-fetched stories of “bring¬ ing ’em back alive.” no impossible feats by man facing beast were introduced to spoil, the natural effect of the films. Mrs. Martin Johnson was spokesman for her husband, for he was very reticent about his adven¬ tures and she went with him everywhere. ARRIVAL IN MALAYA. In September 1935, shortly, after “Congorilla'' and “Baboona” had been shown in Singapore, Mr. and Mrs. Martin Johnson arrived in Malaya to prepare for an expedition into Borneo. They brought with them a Sikorsky amphibian aeroplane, stork-like in shape and giraffe-like in its markings. The plane was named “Spirit of Africa,” and it was one of the two “Sikorsky” aircraft used in the making of “Baboona.” Early one morning the Martin Johnsons zoomed off in this strange craft, and they were not heard of for a year. They pene¬ trated into parts of the Borneo jungle previously unvisited by Europeans and discovered species of animals not till then known to exist on the island. One of their discoveries was a “flying snake” a strange reptile that was said to leap 40 to 50 feet through the air. NATIVE CEREMONIES. They brought back with them “Truzon” the world's largest captive orang-outang, who was cared for by" two Dayaks. Truzon and his keepers were to be taken round the United States in a plane, on a nine months' lecture tour. “Two years ago I took a baby elephant round in a plane. Truzon will be easy after that,” said Mr. Martin Johnson. On their return the name of their plane, written in English. Chinese and Malay, read “Spirit of Africa and Borneo.” They had used it to shoot about 160,000 feet of film, some of which dealt with native ceremonies. WITH JACK LONDON. Martin Elmer Johnson was born in Rockford, 111., in 1884, and married Osa Helen Leighty, of Kansas, in 1910. He travelled round the world six times, and spent 12 years in the South Sea Islands. He was the only member of Jack London's “Snark” voyage to complete the trip (1917); he helped to build the “Snark” and was the last to leave her. His first attempt at film-making was in 1924 when he began a record of the vanishing wild life of Africa. He was an author, too, his works being “Th rough the South Seas with Jack London, “Cannibal Land.” “Camera Trails in Africa,'' Safari—a Saga of the African Blue,” and “Lion African Adventure with the King of Beasts."—Straits Times. An Account of A Recent Visit to China. BY S. B. AH KOON. INTRODUCTION. To the many Chinese born abroad, China is something of a legend. A good deal is heard about it both from the papers and from people, but our desire for news and information concerning the land of our fathers seems to be insatiable. It is therefore hardly surprising that on my return from a recent visit to China, I found myself overwhelmed with qestions from my many friends and acquaintances; in the normal course of con- versation it is impossible to convey much of one’s impressions and I could not but notice that I left my friends and acquaintances dissatisfied with what little I was able to tell them. This, coupled with the fact that one gets tired of repeating the same things over and over again to a number of people, has made me come to the conclusion that a written account of my visit distributed amongst my friends would be the best means of satisfying their curiosity. Having come to that conclusion, however, found that I could not make myself carry it out. Being but poorly educated, and not being one of the “blessed” gifted with the genius with which good writers are endowed, I was naturally diffident of undertaking something to which I felt I could never do justice. My friends, however, would give me no rest, and urged by a few of the more persis¬ tent I have been constrained, with much misgivings and diffidence. to write the following account of my travels. In presenting this, I do so in the hope that any faults will be overlooked, any remarks which may be found offending will be pardoned, and that the writer will be spared from any just retribution from his friends and or readers for offering for their edification such “rubbish.” My first visit to China was in 1930. when I had ten weeks' leave, and some months before I was due for leave this year I was debating with myself where to spend it. Four years of daily toil in the same place made me anxious for a change of climate, although I was not by any means worn out or broken down in health. Thinking over the matter, I came to the conclusion that the best thing to do would be to pay another visit to China and Japan via Manchuria. It is true that I had been to China before, but what I had seen and experienced during my last visit made me anxious to go again, and I thought it would be interesting to see what changes had come over the pleasures in Shanghai during the span of four years. Though not poor. I was not born with a silver spoon in my mouth. Having therefore decided to revisit China, 1 worked out my plan with the help of pamphlets issued by the China Travel Service. I decided to go further afield than I had done on ray previous visit and to go as far as Japan, hut circumstances obliged me to return before this programme could he completed. While I was planning and working out my itinerary. Mr. Lim Tiang Seng, of Chop Soon Huat. Sarikei, in the course of a talk expressed his desire to accompany me if my proposed trip materialised. His proposal was of course welcome, and throughout my travels here recounted I had the pleasure of his company, and I could not have found a more agreeable companion. BOUND FOR SINGAPORE. My twelve weeks leave, accumulated, was granted, and on the eventful day of April 13th. 1936, we sailed from Sarikei per the s.s. Kampar for Singapore as deck passengers. We wore seen off by some friends who wished us bon voyage, and to mark the occasion a photo was taken on the wharf just before the Kampar sailed. When this was over, the officials, after a look here and there, disembarked, and the ship weighed anchor. We waved to our friends and our families whom we were leaving behind, and in a few moments Sarikei town was out of sight. When the steamer was well on her way we proceeded to find a place to pot our camp-beds. The day was fine but rather warm. Sank was reached at 10 a.m., where one thousand bags of cutch were loaded, and it was 12 noon when the Kampar steamed down the river. As we sailed out of the mouth of the Rejang River the sea began to show its tiny waves, and being a very bad sailor I felt rather uncomfortable. The next day the sea was still a little angry, and I remained in ray camp- bed the whole day without food. Though sick, I was obliged to remove to the second deck below on account of rain. On the morning of the third day the Kampar entered Singapore Harbour, and by 10 a.m., after inspection by the revenue officers, we boarded a motor-sampan and landed in Singa¬ pore. We went direct to our hotel in a motor-car. after having first handed our luggage to the hotel men. Having taken a bath and refreshed ourselves, we went at 2 p.m. to cash our cheques from the Kwong Lee Bank and remitted our money to Amoy through the Ho Hong Bank; the currency was then $52 Singapore to 100 Chinese dollars. This done, we went out in a motor-car for a ride. We wanted to do all the sight-seeing at once, as we had decided to go by the Van Heutz on the next day. On the 16th, however, we had a discussion and eventually decided to cancel our proposed sailing by the Van Heutz and sail on the 21st by the s.s. An Hui. On the 17th we went out to find the Chinese Consulate so as to get our passports, but after two hours walking we failed to locate its office. Some of the rickshaw men that we engaged pulled us to all sorts of commercial offices, and once to the High Court, but not to the Consulate. It was not till we made enquiry from a tea shop that we were able to get the necessary information. The pass¬ port office of the Consulate is situated in a back room in the Chinese Chamber of Commerce. The Malay, attendant gave us forms to fill in; when this was done, we went in the room where the Secretary to the Consul General was seated. He spoke very kindly to us and told us that security was necessary before a passport could be issued, and added that passports would be given us at the Consulate. Cairn Hill. We spent most of our time that night in the Great World, enjoying the various side-shows and the circus. Next day. having obtained the seal of the hotel to our passport forms, we went out in a motor-car to the Consulate, and as it was still too early, we went out for a spin, and then on to Johore Bahru town, where we spent about half an hour sight¬ seeing. We returned to Singapore and went to the Consulate, where we obtained our passports at the cost of $2.28 each. On the 19th there was heavy rain and we kept indoors as far as possible, but in the evening we visited the New World Amusement Park. The various side-shows are very entertaining indeed, and time flew past without our knowing it. A visit to amusement places like the Great World and the New World in Singapore is worth the seasick¬ ness one has to endure during the voyage. ON BOARD THE An Hui. We got up early in the morning of the 21st, and after tea got busy packing up our things. We went to the Japanese Consulate and had our pass- ports vised free of charge, as our intended destina¬ tion was Japan. At one o’clock we boarded the An Hui. and in order to save a bit more money for use in China we took deck passages. There were crowds of passengers, men, women and children, and the noise they made, yelling and shouting, was deafening. The day was terribly hot, and at 4.20 p.m. the An Hui weighed anchor and steamed out of the harbour hound for China. We made arrangements with the cook to supply us with food and tea up to Amoy, paying $4 each for food. Our time on board the An Hui turned out to be by no means a pleasant one. The noise made by the  passengers every day and night was really intolerable, and what was worse, this was continued throughout the whole night up till the morning. When anyone began to talk aloud nt night the others would yell at him or her to shut up, and the resulting chorus from other passengers only made matters worse. But after a few nights we began to get accustomed to the noise, and we paid no heed to it. We passed our time on board reading, and occasionally went up to air ourselves on the top deck. There were two stalls on board from which roast pork, fowls, etc., could be bought; the vendore did a good trade daily from early morning up to about 10 p.m.. but as soon as the ship called at a port they closed their business. The water pipes of the ship were used every minute, especially in the morning; one had to wait until one’s patience was exhausted for water to wash one’s face, and for a bath one bad to wait even longer. Not only was water obtained with, difficulty, but we had to waif for the bath-room also. The W.C. was never too clean. On the morning of the 24th a male passenger died and his corpse was put in a coffin and placed at the very end part of the ship to be taken for burial in China. The ship’s people keep a stock of coffins for this purpose, and sell the coffins for $42 Straits currency each, so I was informed. In the evening a cool breeze took the place of the terrible heat which we experienced throughout the day. Every evening the opium smokers among the passengers lined up in sitting postures waiting for their turn to smoke opium. The opium man does good business, since he charges as much as fifty rents for a two-hoon tube. Beside the opium business there were several places where gambling was carried on. Passengers on this part of the ship were mostly of the labouring classes who came from various places in the south seas. They, spoke blatantly, spat everywhere at any time, and many of them were far from healthy. All these little inconveniences we endured as best we could. After all, we cannot have “our cake and eat it," as the saying goes, and if we had wanted a more comfortable trip we would have travelled first or second class and then economised in China. HONG KONG. It was with much relief when at 9.30 a.m. on the 26th Hong Kong town was seen. Half an hour later we entered the harbour and the ship east anchor. Crowds of hotel runners came on board, shouting nt the tops of their voices for clients. The crowds moved about, and we found ourselves packed like sardines. The hotel people were soon followed by a swarm of hawkers, bringing their wares for sale. These hawkers are to say the least of it annoying in the way they conduct business; they practically force the passengers to buy their goods, edible and non-edible, from needles to blanket As far as I could see none of them were licenced, for at the sound of cha shi, which means that the Inspector of Police or some other officer of the law, had arrived to inspect licences, each and every one of them hid their various goods under camp- beds and amongst the property of the passengers, and they themselves sat calmly and quietly like other passengers. Some of them undoubtedly did good business. This sudden stop dead of trade happened many times, and being curious about such a state of affairs 1 enquired from many of them the reason why they did not obtain licences before hawking. They all told me the same story; although the licences only cost $2 per month, the issue is limited, and another reason was that if they apply for a licence it will cost them a fortune, and many have lost part of their savings without obtaining a licence, hence it is better to hawk illegally. Beggars also came into the ship to try their luck; they were soon followed by some singers who came down to croon for their food. The ship discharged her cargo till late in the evening, and was full of dust and foul air. This, coupled with the noise made by children crying, mothers scolding, and the cranking of the winch, made the ship worse than the tower of Babel,— with the addition of children running about and their fathers taking no heed of them. Passengers were quarrelling with hawkers over their purchases. By 5 p.m. the hawkers left the ship, but the noise still remained the same as the various passengers who had bought the hawkers’ articles began to talk among themselves of what they had purchased, shouting from one corner of the ship to the other. This noise continued up to midnight. One was often woken up with a start by the noise of cursing or yelling, someone by accident or intention having spilt some hot tea or dropped something onto the sleeping passengers, or stepped on his or her foot. It will not be out of place for me here to say a few words on the tambang women of Hong Kong. It will surprise a newcomer to Hong Kong to see how the Chinese women and girls work as tambang people. The boat is not a big one usually, and is manned by a crew of two or three women only, and it is marvellous to see them pull up sail and paddle off the boat, burdened as they are with their children. Some have a, few men among the crew, but so far as I can recollect there were none, or very few, tambang without any women in them. In spite of the baby lurching on her back, the average Lambang woman is just as active as a man, if no more so. Even on shore Chinese women were working as coolies pulling cargo carts,—I am perfectly convinced that Chinese women are as tough as their men-folk in many walks of life, and the Hong Kong Chinese women in particular are a race of Amazons, who are best left alone ! The night was spent in Hong Kong. Hong Kong town is ven beautiful at night; the houses are built on the hill-side, some at least as high as a thousand feet above sea level, and the multitude of lights made the night scenery very pretty indeed. Early next morning, even before 6.30 a.m., the hawker pests returned to the ship, and as soon as some of them disappeared more suddenly appeared to take their place. SWATOW. We were not sorry when the ship weighed anchor p.m. and sailed for Swatow. According to the scheduled time the ship should have arrived at Swatow   the  following    morning, but owing   to    fog the An Hui travelled very slowly, blowing her siren intermittently. Early next morning the Swatow passengers started packing up their belongings and putting on new clean clothes preparatory to landing, but to their great disappointment the ship had to cast anchor at 8.20 a.m. owing to thick fog. Twice that day the, anchor was pulled up only to be dropped again owing to the fog, which appeared again as suddenly as it disappeared. That night was spent on the sea, and it was lucky for everyone that the sea was very calm. The bell of the ship was rung every other minute to avoid collision On the morning of the 29th a male passenger was reported dead, so that the ship had now two corpses with her. The fog was still thick, and ir the ship one could hardly see more than 20 yards ahead. A child of about five years old got convul¬ sions, and although it was a pitiable sight to set the anguish of the mother, a widow, the passengers close by were so indifferent that some of the more callous began to laugh at it. This was the ninth day on board the ship, and it was more than enough for any one to endure. Besides the filth, and the ubiquitous spittle and phlegm, there was no end of quarrelling about the windows on the side of the ship, some wanting them to be opened, and some shut. I spent most of my time on the top deck in order to be away from the foul air below. At 11.15 a.m. the ship, to the pleasure of every passenger, weighed anchor and proceeded slowly on her course, but alas by 12 noon the anchor was dropped and thick fog again enveloped us, bringing the curses of nearly ail the passengers. At 2.25 p.m. the fog suddenly cleared and the ship sailed for Swatow, followed by two other vessels, and the passengers leaped for joy and the Swatow passengers got busy with their luggage. Swatow was reached at 3.15 p.m. As usual, hotel runners swarmed over the ship and made any amount of unnecessary noise to get clients. Some three hundred passengers landed at Swatow, and food hawkers boarded the ship to do their business, (ramblers also-came down to ply their trade, illegal though it was. They did a roaring trade, and I saw a passenger lose $20 after only a minute’s play. The passengers by now were reduced to a couple of hundred, but this reduction did not result in a corresponding decrease in the total amount of noise created. AMOY. At dawn on the 30th we left for Amoy, where we arrived at 5 p.m. After the usual inspection by the Customs, Police, etc., we proceeded to the Tai Chian hotel, arriving there at 7.25 p.m We fell as if we were just out of a dungeon, and directly after a plate of rice each we slept like logs of wood; I got up before daybreak as the noises of the ship still rang in my head. As soon as we had breakfasted and Pressed, we went out to look for the Ho Hong Bank When found it was closed, on account of some National holiday. We visited the Lam Poh. Toh monastery where about eighty monks live, and spent the afternoon sight-seeing in the town. visiting the Chung San park, where girls were playing basket¬ ball and tennis. We had our dinner that night in a Formosan restaurant known as the “Butterfly" Restaurant, where pretty girls were engaged as waitresses. Formosans are Chinese in appearance, wearing Chinese dress, speaking and writing Chinese also, but their characteristics are different. FOOCHOW . After having seen all that was worth seeing in Amoy we decided to visit Foo Chow, and on May, 4th we boarded the s.s. Hai Yang. which sailed for Foo Chow at 12.40 p.m. We took 2nd class passages costing us $12 each with free food. The day was cool, and the sea was as calm as could be desired. Those who have not travelled in the ships of the China coast might be interested to hear that Chinese first and second class cabin passengers are allotted different places to that of foreigners, for whom the accommodation was far better than for Chinese passengers of the same classes. Another point of interest is the fact that all Chinese passengers were practically barricaded in behind iron bars. The reason for all this discrimination is that piracy has often occurred with the pirates disguised as first-class passengers, so that extra precautions have to be taken, with the resulting unfair discri¬ mination against bona fide peaceful Chinese passengers. The next morning we entered the Foo Chow river and Mamoi was reached at 9 a.m. Just before the ship cast anchor many sampans and launches came alongside, and as usual the hotel people swarmed over the ship. Our luggage was handed over to the hotel people, whose launch we boarded with many other passengers for inspection at the checking station. One thing that particularly struck me was the compare lively little or no noise they made. Just before they came on board 1 thought their combined voices would break up the s.s. Hai Yang, but to our very great surprise they solicited clients for their various hotels in a quiet and most becoming manner. With apologies to the local gardeners, during rubber- selling day, I was so struck by the difference that it has kept me thinking ever since. All the luggage of the passengers was minutely examined by the soldiers at Mamoi, the several launches waiting their turn in a very orderly manner. A launch, tired of waiting, tried to snatch her turn, but was told politely to return to her place in the waiting line. The two soldiers who examined our luggage asked me where I came from, where I was going to, and what I was doing at Foo Chow. He took my word for all these, and did not examine our luggage piece by piece. I also told them that this was the second examination on the Hai Yang as the first one done by the Customs Officers on board; a smile was the only answer I got. After the examination of the passengers' luggage a pass was given to the Juragan of the launch and we left for Foo Chow town, where we arrived at 11.30 a.m. We lodged in the Nang Seng Hotel, which is situated in the middle of the town and close to the big bridge. In the afternoon we went out in rickshaws for a ride to the foreign rural residency where several foreign nationals live, and where a number of schools are situated. Houses in this section have a good compound around each, but the roads here are not wide enough for heavy traffic, very little of which was to be seen. In the evening we went round the town in a motor car and visited the Institute of Natural History. It is situated in the centre of the town and in it lions, tigers, camels, vultures, etc., are kept for show, and there are also several kinds of dead specimens and models. We also passed by the aerodrome, where two hangars were seen. We sped on our car to the Si-fu (small west lake) where there is some nice scenery. We also saw the site for the new General Hospital, which was a cemetery. In preparing this site the graves are dug up and bones exhumed and placed in small long-shaped jars, one for each skeleton. The sleeping and forgotten population of this cemetery have to wake up (with reluctance and protests to give space to the firing and the sick. If this hospital is completed it will be the most up-to- date hospital in Fukien province, if not in the whole of China. On returning to the hotel we bought our tickets to go to Shanghai in the s.s. Sui Yang, $15 each second-class, Chinese cabins. We got up early the next morning (6th). Heavy rain was falling and some parts of the roads were flooded for a short while. From the hotel window we could see that vegetables hawkers were doing their business and displaying their vegetables on the road, and there was a group of some 200 of them on that part of the road. The policeman on duty was kept very busy with these people, who were continually obstructing the traffic. It was most interesting to see the busy policeman and the hawkers, who, when told to give way on one part of the road, would carry their two baskets to the obstruction of another part. At about 8 a.m. they all disappeared, much to the relief of the policeman. OFF TO SHANGHAI. We left Foo Chow town at 12.30 p.m. by a motor launch and reached Mamoi about 2.30, meeting a strong head wind all the way down, and boarded the Sui Yang. Owing to the second-class cabins having been all taken up. we were given first-class cabins without paying anything extra. Second- class accommodation in this ship is better than first, however, as the former cabins are situated at the back part of the ship, whereas the first-class cabins are situated in the middle, close to the engines. The ship sailed at 4 p.m. with crowds of passengers. both deck and cabin.  Chinese who wished to travel by European class cabin on the top deck was refused, and told by the Sergeant of the guard to go down. All Chinese passengers were told to clear off from the front deck to the buck part of the ship, and the gangway doors were shut and locked by the Sergeant. As the gangway door- were shut and locked from outside, we were unable to get much wind from the from of the ship, and we had to breathe whatever air was blown from the port-holes and from the back of the ship. It was lucky for us that the weather was cool. Cabins for Chinese passengers are usually dark and dirty, with no proper ventilation. The second- class cabins of m.v. Rejang arc at least a dozen times better than those of the s.s. Sai Yang, Hai Yang, Kut Wo and Tai Yuan. Cabins for foreigner- are of course not included in this comparison. as the Chinese have no right to them, oven if the ship is owned by Chinese (i.e., s.s Kwang Tak in which I travelled in 1930) unless in possession of official documents. During the whole way from Foo Chow to Shanghai the sea was very calm, and there was no ruin. The weather was ideal, being cool with a breeze blowing continually from the side of the ship. Meals were served at 9 a.m. and 5 p.m., and tea at 7 a.m., gruel at noon and sweet stuff at 9 p.m. At 9 a.m. on the 8th of May, 1936, we arrived at Woo Sung and proceeded slowly to Shanghai, which we reached shortly afterwards, and by 12.40 we were ushered into a room at $2 per night in the Ya Chow Hotel situated in the French Concession. On arrival we handed our luggage together with our keys to the hotel people, who led us to the hotel's motor-car in which we were driven to the hotel door where, as soon as we alighted, boys rushed out prepared to carry out any, instruction. The driver told them we wanted a room, and one of them brought us up to the second floor in the lift, and handed us over to the room boys, who showed us several rooms for us to pick and choose. That afternoon we went out in a motor car trying to go round as much as possible, but Shanghai is a city whose space is not easily covered within a short time After driving some time in the city of the concessions we went over to the Chinese-controlled city, and on to Kiang Wan. The after-effects of the 1932 struggle still remain to be seen. The Commercial Press building is left as il was after the struggle. Nearly all the houses which were there in 1930 were not there now, and some better houses have taken their place. A visit was also paid to the Aeroplanes Museum, where models of all kinds of planes are there for show to the public. This building is built exactly like the shape of an aeroplane. As soon as we entered it, an officer at the door told us to register our names in the book put on a table specially for this purpose. Models of aeroplanes of every make, bombs of all sizes and shapes, photographs and writings of famous men are a few of the many things one can see there. Outside the house there is a full-sized Junker plane for show. There were many visitors there then, and each visitor who wanted a book was given one free of charge. The municipal building was closed at the time, and we were unable to pay a visit to this. The Natural History Museum was also closed, as were the Stadium and Library.  First Division News. DECEMBER. Four inquests were held in Kuching during (be month. On December 3rd an open verdict was returned at the inquiry held into the death of an unknown female infant who was found floating in the river of Sungei Mantawa. At an inquiry into the death of Indi Ramasamy, a Tamil, who died from swallowing disinfectant on December 2nd, a verdict of suicide during tem¬ porary insanity was recorded. A similar verdict; was returned on December 2nd at an inquiry held into the death of a Chinese named Ting Tang Hoi (j.) who was found hanging in Ong Eng Hin's house at the 2nd mile, Rock Road. A verdict of death from natural causes was recorded on December 31st at an inquiry into the death of Tong Ah Poi, of Padungan, Kuching. During the month a deputation of Land Dayaks from Sta'ang, Petak and Sekok c omplained that a large portion of their land had been ceded to the Serian District without their authority. This matter is still under consideration and it is hoped that settlement will be reached shortly. Mr. F. H. Pollard was appointed to act as District Officer. Kuching, with effect from :30th December, 1936. vice Mr. R. L. Daubeny. The following are extracts from a report by Mr. G. F. J. Pegler, Travelling District Officer, First Division :— “Accompanied by Mr. J. L. Noakes, Assis¬ tant Superintendent of Lands and Surveys, I proceeded to Goebilt, Muara Tebas and Sungei Beradek on November 27th to inspect proposed Kampong Reserves. “The Survey Department had previously demarcated twenty-three lots for houses at Goebilt and of these seventeen have already been allocated, while four applicants have not yet decided on sites. Several houses have been con¬ structed and are under construction, and the owners of these are shewing commendable interest and pride in the general appearance of their compounds. "Natives, who are at present squatting in the proposed Agricultural Reserve and along the river bank to the east of the Police Barracks, have been instructed to move into the Kampong Reserve with the least possible delay. In connection with the. future development of the village at Muara Tebas, it is interesting to record that forty-three applications were immediately forthcoming for the thirty-six lots surveyed recently by the Survey Department. There is, however, ample space for future expan¬ sion. It is hoped that the new lots will be occupied before June, 1937. "On November 30th, accompanied by Abang Zamhari. Native Officer, Lundu, I proceeded to Lundu via Rambungan and Sampadi. “Padi crops in the Lundu district show promise of providing an excellent harvest. Good reports were received from the areas under cultivation at Serayan, Tanjong Pedada and Semunin, but rate appear to have caused con¬ siderable damage to crops at Tanjong Purun. "Leaving Lundu at 7 a.m. on December 4th, 1 proceeded by boat to Sampadi and thence by bicycle to Rambungan, arriving there at 2.45 p.m. It was found necessary to reprimand the Tua Kampong of Rambungan for the disgraceful condition of all paths at Stoh and Rambungan. ‘The 10th mile bazaar area was visited on December 7th. A great deal of filling is neces¬ sary before the sites for new shop-houses can reach road-level and it is therefore proposed to utilize for this purpose a small hill situated in a rubber garden belonging to Mr. Ong Hap Leong. In his report for the month of October, 1936, the District Officer. Bau, draws attention to the fact that the state of affairs existing in the Left- Hand Branch of the Sarawak River is giving cause for concern and suggested that the area could be . more efficiently controlled from Kuching. The Resident, First Division, having approved this suggestion. I proceeded to Bau on December 8th to acquaint myself with all matters referring to the. Left-Hand Branch. ‘On December 10th I left Kuching by car for Serian. The large hole in the road at the 13th mile proved an effective obstacle to the taxi making a through run to Serian, and I had accordingly to complete the trip by a bus which I had previously arranged should meet me on the Serian side of the obstacle. "The condition of the Simanggang Road can only be described as disgraceful, and extremely dangerous. Deep ruts and pot-holes abound along the whole extent of the road, which is also so slippery in places that it is astonishing that there are not more accidents. In this connection it is of interest to record that two days previous to my visit to Serian a crowded bus skidded off the road and overturned in the ditch. Fortunately none of the passengers suffered serious injury. "On December 11th. Orang Kaya Japar of the Left-Hand Branch of the Sarawak River was apprehended by Police acting under my instruc¬ tions and brought to Serian. This man had been providing “medical" treatment at Land Dayak houses between the 32nd and 37th miles. Simanggang Road. While there was no actual proof that he had been selling charms and faking presents, there was strong suspicion that he had been doing so. He has been warned not to leave his district in future without permission. "Leaving Serian by m.l. Vava at 7.10 a.m. on December 12th, I reached Simunjan exactly twelve hours later. A delay of three hours at Gedong for the arrival of the bore, heavy rain and the fact that m.l. Vava was running at less than half speed and continually breaking down may be quoted as reasons for the trip occupying almost double the amount of time taken normally for this journey. "Leaving Simunjan by m.l. Vava at 4 a.m. on December 15th. I proceeded direct to Kuala Tebas. Fortunately the sen was moderately calm and m. l. Vava was able to make the journey without mishap. The engine, however, gave trouble most of the way owing to an undetect¬ able stoppage in the petrol feed. Kuala Sadong was passed at 6.40 a.m. and Kuala Tebas was reached at 9.45 a.m. "At the time of my arrival at Kuala Tebas a regatta was in progress, it being customary for the villagers to have a regatta every year on Hari Raya. There was no lack of entries for the races, which were well contested.” An inquest was held nt Bau on the body of Ngojek who was found shot dead near Gunong Singghi. The jury returned a verdict of accidental death, with which the Coroner disagreed, stating that in his opinion there was not sufficient evidence to shew whether the shooting was deliberate or accidental. Another inquest on the body of Hon Chon, who died in the General Hospital, Kuching, as a result of injuries received while working on a mine resulted in a verdict of accidental death. _________ The Native chiefs from the Left-Hand Branch assembled at Ban on December 8th to meet Mr. Pegler, the Travelling District Officer. They were given a lecture on their general conduct in the past and a warning as to their future behaviour. Pointed references were made to certain trouble-makers, some of whom were present, and it is hoped that as a result Left-Hand Branch affairs will shew an improvement in the future. On the following day a meeting of the chiefs and Tua-Tua of the Right-Hand Branch was held, some seventy people being present. The object of this meeting was to collect a list of the various customary fines and offences, in order that the rather inadequate Dayak Undang-Undang for this section of the community might be corrected and expanded. The result will be communicated to the Resident in due course. Dahan Rubber Estates harvested 27,500 lbs. of dry rubber during December. Abang Haji Adenan, Native Officer, returned from the Left-Hand Branch on December 7th and reported that there is no truth in the story of starvation in Kampong Senah. True, some people may be abort, due to their own laziness, but there is no starvation. The following table gives the individual output of gold from the various mines for November, 1936 The Court Writer, Serian, reports that a Dayak Rest House was erected by prisoners and Tenggah' Dayaks on the edge of Sungei Serian during the month All timber and attaps used in the con¬ struction were taken from the old police barracks, except the posts, which were worked by the Dayaks. Messrs. R. L. Daubeny, District Officer, Kuching and T. A. Reid, Assistant Executive Engineer, visited Serian on December 4th and inspected the new police barracks and jail kitchen, these were found to be satisfactory. The Rev. Father Oss of the R.C. Mission, Serian, left for Kuching on transfer to Dalat on the 4th. The drone of a flying boat was heard in Serian on the morning of December 29th, and again on the 30th at 11.25 a.m. when it circled low over Serian Court house and flew back towards Kuching, The unexpected visit of this flying boat caused some amazement among the natives, who had never previously seen one. The Native Officer, Lundu, reports that an accident occurred at Stunggang, a Malay boy being accidentally knocked out of a boat into 4 1/2 feet of water as the result of a collision with another boat The boy’s mother, who was with him, tried to save him, but he disappeared. The body was recovered about two hours later. St. Michael’s Catholic Club. The Annual Christinas Tree Party and Enter¬ tainment was held in the evening of December 26th at 5.30 p.m. The Club was tastefully decorated for tins festive occasion, and, under a flood of coloured lights, presented a grand spectacle. This, coupled with the excellent weather, helped to make the event a very successful one. There was a record attendance, the children alone numbering upward of a hundred and fifty, these, as well as everyone else who was present that evening were liberally served with ices and cakes throughout the function. One very pleasing feature of the evening's proceedings was undoubtedly Father Christmas motor-car ride. Accompanied by some children in fancy, costumes, he had a triumphal ride through the town. Everywhere the party was greeted with shouts of delight and its arrival at the Club was heralded by the firing of crackers and the rendering of a Marching Song by Mr. G. Solosa's Orchestra. Immediately on arrival, Santa Claus (imper- «mated by Mr. A. P. Merrells, went to the beautifully decorated and toy-laden where, after a few kind words addressed to the tots, he proceeded to distribute the toys amongst them Next came the distribution of prizes in the Fancy Dress Competition. Acting on the decision of the adjudicators, the. Rev. Mother Sabastian and Mrs. W. G. Tait, Father Christmas awarded the prizes as follows : — 1st, Miss Freda Chan-daughter of Mr. and Mrs. L. K. L. Chan 2nd Master A. Reutens—son   of   Mr.   and   Mrs. P. Reutens. Consolation Prizes Master Chan-son of Mr   and   Mrs.   L.   K.   L. Chan  Miss Solosa—daughter   of   Mr   and   Mr.   G. Solosa. Mr A P. Merrells is to be congratulated splendid success he made of his generouse role of of thanks must he expressed to the organizing Committee for the very pleasant and enjoyable evening experienced by all. Traffic Regulations. FEBRUARY RACE MEETING, 1937. 1. After the hour of 11 a.m. on the 18th and 15th February, 1937, all motor vehicles must proceed to   the   race-course via   Padungan   Road    or Ban   Hok   Road   only, a  nd up   to the hour of    7 p.m. on these days must return by the Sekama Road only. Exceptions :— 1. His Highness the Rajah's Cars. 2. The Government Secretary. 3. The Resident, First Division, Kuching. 4. The Principal Medical Officer. 5. The Secretary, Sarawak Turf Club. 6 In cases of extreme urgency permission may be obtained on the course for other cars to return via Ban Hok Road. 2. After depositing passengers at the grand- stand, vehicles will line up on the extreme left-hand side of the grandstand road, one behind the other, and within three yards of each other, facing away from the grandstand. 3. Rickshaws and bicycles may proceed to the race-course at any time, and by any road, and must park on the handstand plot. They will not be allowed to remain on any part of the road leading to the grandstand or roads leading to the race¬ course. 4. All vehicles must move to their parking grounds without delay, as directed by the Con¬ stabulary. WARNING 5. The driver of any vehicle :— (a) endeavouring to turn in grandstand road or, (b) stopping to pick up passengers in grandstand road, will be prosecuted for causing an obstruction. Club News. Sarawak Club. BOWLING AVERAGES FOR DECEMBER, 1936. Second Division News. DECEMBER. The Resident of Sintang and Ilie Gezaghebber of Semitan paid an official, but very welcome, visit to Simanggang during the month. Arriving at Lubqk Antu on December 9th, they reached Simanggang on the 10th and remained until the 12th, when they returned via Lubok Antu to Dutch territory. All European Officers visited Betong over Christmas, and advantage of this was taken to hold, a Dayak aum, all Penghulus and many Tuai Rumah being present. A number of questions were discussed. Accompanied by the District Officer, Betong, the Acting Resident, Second Division, paid a visit to the Paku and Ulu Layar. It had been arranged that the trip should include the Spak and Skrang, but owing to indisposition and lack of time this part of the journey had to be abandoned, and the party returned down the Layar. The Resident states that it is doubtful if civili¬ sation as it has developed in the Paku is advantageous. The Paku Dayaks are extremely wealthy, and their hospitality is overwhelming. Each house is well supplied with tables and rattan chairs, and Chinese port wine, beer, gin, milk and Ovaltine are amongst the beverages supplied in place of tuak. Men carrying European Officers' barang from house to house are frequently to be seen turned out in immaculately ironed white trousers and shirts. The path for the whole of the first day’s walk from Tanjong Paku to the Ulu at N. Penum lay entirely through rubber gardens, and not a single farm was observed, although these people have farms some distance from the river bank. The most surprising thing noticed during the trip was the number of Ulu Ai Dayaks working as coolies, or on the half-and-half basis, in the Paku and Layar. The Ulu Ai must be very short of able-bodied men and it is doubtful if they can get the best results out of their farms in the ulu. It is significant that none of these Dayaks apply for work during tupping holidays, and on occasion prefer to tap and be imprisoned for one month in lieu of fines rather than accept labour at 40 cents per day. The Resident estimates that those working on rubber gardens in the Saribas are making over a dollar a day. At the end of the month two cases of theft of prahus were reported from Pangkallan Jongkong. This is a serious offence as great inconvenience is caused to the owners, and the absence of any official at the Pangkallan makes it very difficult to trace the thieves. Tn the above two cases five men were arrested, and were awaiting trial at the end of the month. On December 23rd Mr. F. A. Moore arrived at Simanggang from Lubok Antu. and on the following day the Acting Resident, Mr. N. Mace and Mr. K. H. Digby proceeded to Betong accompanied by a football tram representing the Simanggang Govern- ment staff. Mr. Moore following in m.l. Rentis. The football team defeated Betong 1—0 during the Christmas holidays, and a slight reverse at badminton was amply compensated for by an overwhelming victory at billiards. On Christmas Day a Dayak aum was held at Fort Lily, Betong. the Acting Resident, Second Division, presiding. All Penghulus and many Tuai Rumah were present. Several matters relating to Dayak custom were discussed and the Aiding Resident , defined Government's policy with regard to the few outlaws still at large. At the conclusion of the meeting the Acting Resident announced that Mandal Chaing had been appointed Penghulu of the Spak. Later it was arranged that the Acting Resi- dent would visit the Dayaks in the Paku, Layar and Spak districts, leaving Betong for this purpose on the 27th These is no prospect of an engkabang harvest in thc Ulu Ai, but fruit below Lubok Antu is doing many Malays having come from Kabong to collect durians. Above Lubok Antu the fruit is not yet ripe. At Roban Haji Abil bin Haji Ahir was found guilty under Order No. XVI of 1905 lated November 15th. 1905. of the Green Order book and fined $50. Accused had guaranteed to cure complainant’s husband of leprosy, selling bis quack medicines at a high price. Haji Abi’s patient is now an inmate of the Leper Camp and is likely to be one for some time. A Chinese wayang arrived at Saratok on December 8th from Knelling and proved very popular with the local Chinese, returning to Kuching on the 26th. It is true that it attracted a number of Dayaks to the bazaar, but judging from their criticisms they were not very impressed. When the wayang was due to sail two of the actors were found to be missing; they were traced and have been sent back to Kuching. Third Division News. DECEMBER. At Sibu proceedings were concluded in the Coroner's Court in an inquest held upon a Chinese who jumped into the river and was drowned, after attacking and seriously wounding his wife with an axe. A finding of suicide while of unsound mind was recorded. Major Bridges arrived at Sibu on December 2nd and proceeded on a lour of inspection of Native and Chinese holdings throughout the Division from the 5th to 24th December He was accompanied throughout the tour by the Assistant Superin¬ tendent, Rubber Restriction, and for part of the time by the Resident, Third Division. Local producers, dealers and exporters were circularised and informed that it was essential that rubber exports should be reduced to a minimum during the close of the year, with the result that no rubber was exported from Third Division ports during the month. Export of all stocks was held up with a view to taking advantage of the with¬ holding of the cess, between 1st to 12th January, 1937. The land revenue for the Division (hiring November amounted to $9,612.06 which shows a further improvement on previous months and compares favourably with $8,880.02, the amount collected in the corresponding month of 1935. The improvement in revenue collection has continued during December. On Hari Raya, December 15th, a salute was tired from the Battery at Sibu at 8 a.m. Throughout the day the usual ceremonial calls were paid and returned. Luckily the weather was fine, whirl permitted the illumination of the kampongs and open air bangsawan performances, which took place in Kampong Datu and Kampong Nyabor. The popularity of these bangsawan was evidenced by the large crowds which gathered to view the per¬ formances. Those responsible for the organization. and the performers, Messrs. Ibrahim bin Abang Hassim and Abang Bohan bin A bang Amit of Kampong Datu and the Malay Union Club of Kampong Nyambor. are to be congratulated on their most successful effort to bring a happy day to an enjoyable and memorable conclusion. The Resident, Mr. C. D. Adams, left for Kuching in m.v. Rejang on the 17th. By this same vessel Dr. A. D. Hutchison, who is retiring from the Sarawak Medical Service, left for Kuching on his way to Enland. Dr. Hutchison was seen off by a large party of friends and acquaintances, repre¬ sentative of all communities. The Resident, returned to Sibu on the 22nd. A number of officers and their families arrived on December 24th for the Christmas holidays and to witness the Regatta to be held on January 1st, 1937. Amongst these were Messrs. A. W. D. Brooke. A. Macpherson and D. R. Lascelles from up river, Mr. F. L. G. Crossley from Sarikei, and Mr. and Mrs. J. G. Anderson from Mukah. The Offices were closed for the Christmas holidays until Monday, the 28th. On the 29th the Rev. Father Shelley arrived at Sibu from Kuching and held a Service at the Court House on the 30th. During Father Shelley’s visit the christening of the son of Mr. and Mrs. D. L. Leach took place. The christening service was performed in Mr. Leach’s house, and was attended by a number of friends and acquaintances. Father Shelley left for Kuching in m.v. Rejang on the 31st. The following table gives the Sibu and Kanowit trade figures for the month :— During December five Chinese were sentenced to fines and varying terms of imprisonment at Sarikei for tuba fishing. The travelling dresser visited Daro from 16 th to 18th The suspected lepers referred to in the November report were found to be suffering from an acute form of yaws, and not leprosy. They were treated locally and later returned to their homes. All the Lower Rejang district Penghulus gathered in Sarikei and Binatang prior to leaving for Sibu to attend the Dayak Council and Regatta. The latter created considerable interest throughout the district and large numbers of Dayaks made their way to Sibu for the festivities. Major W. F. N. Bridges, accompanied by the Assistant Superintendent of Rubber Restriction, Mr. D. Duclos, visited the Lower Rejang district during the month. Major Bridges arrived in Sarikei from Kanowit via the Julau and Wak rivers, and was accom¬ panied by the District Officer, Meluan, Mr. A. He also visited the Binatang district before returning to Sibu, and later, accompanied by Mr. F. L. G. Crossley. visited Matu, Daro, Rejang and Selalang, returning to Sarikei, from whence he left for Kuching by m.v. Rejang. The local exporters both at Sarikei and Binatang loyally co-operated with Government and ensured the success of what was, virtually, an embargo on rubber exports. In consequence there were no exports of rubber during the month. The following table gives the Sarikei and Binatang trade figures for the month No rubber was exported from Kanowit during December after the exporters had had the quota position explained to them and the voluntary embargo was imposed. The District Officer, Meluan, states that the improvement in Dayak rubber is startling. Several deaths from pneumonia occurred in Meluan. and the Dresser was sent to prevent panic. Apart from this, health was fair, though influenza is particularly prevalent. An application from fifty Cantonese pepper planters to open gardens near Nanga Julau was refused. The District Officer, Kapit, reports that there have been many deaths throughout the district from pneumonia and influenza, the Dresser having been continually paying flying visits to infected houses Out of a number of Kayans ai d Malays returning to Belaga seven died en route; after arriving in Belaga several more died. A strong rumour spread that the sickness was from Kapit, and no one dared to come down-river until Penghulu Puso and Peng- hulu Taman Usun Hang came down at the end of the month for the Sibu Regatta. At the end of the month the Dresser was away on a visit to Rumah Penghulu Grinang, where seven deaths have occurred. Reports of further deaths in the district are still coming in. accompanied by urgent requests for the Dresser. Reports show that the padi crops throughout Song. Kapit and Belaga districts are good So long as upriver Dayaks continue to get good crops by farming hill padi, it is impossible to impress them with the advantages of farming swamp land. Pigs are apparently causing much damage and old men say that it is many years since there have been so many pigs at this time of year; the result has been an extraordinary demand for cartridges. The engkabang crop in the Kapit district was a total failure. An attempt is being made to clear some of The hillside at Kapit to allow planting of krebang in considerable quantities. All Dayak Penghulus from the Mukah district (except Ambun and Unchi of Balingian) went to Sibu on December 28th for the Regatta. and for discussion regarding revision of Dayak Adat and Fines. They expressed themselves m agreement with the latter proceedings. The price of sago at Mukah averaged 75 cents per passu and is on the up grade. 155 1/2 koyans of raw sago were shipped out of the river. Messrs, the Sarawak Oilfields, Ltd., have made considerable progress with their access works preliminary to exploration of their tentative reserve at S. Matadeng. The coast road trace is practically completed along the Coast reserve, and approach roads, temporary bridges, and ferries have been completed as far as Penipah. The wharf and temporary office, store, and garage are completed at Kuala Mukah. also coolie lines and a small kajang house near the beach. About 200 coolies, mostly Chinese, are working near the Kuala, and they have completed an access road to the beach to avoid swamp on the point. Considerable progress has been made with a sea wharf at S. Matadeng for use when possible for heavier drilling gear, boilers, etc. A small bungalow has also been erected at Matadeng. The Oya Dayak Penghulus with a few followers were sent to Sibu to attend the meeting for the discussion of amendments to the Dayak undang- undang. A good number of Melanaus, with their racing boats left for Sibu towards the end of the month for the regatta. Rough weather interfered considerably with the Melanau sea-fishing. The price of raw sago in December was 75 cents per passu at Dalat and 85 cents at the Kut. 168 koyans of sago were exported from the district. Three motor schooners, one sailing schooner, and five bandongs cleared Oya during the month, the total tonnage being 245 tons. Sibu Regatta,—January 1st, 1937. A GREAT OCCASION. The regatta which took place at Sibu on New Year's Day excited tremendous interest and enthusiasm throughout the whole Third Division. On Christmas Eve parties of Dayaks began to arrive at Sibu and continued to arrive up to December 31st. the parties increasing in size and numbers until the bazaar, and in fact the whole island, was crowded to full capacity. The writer went through a nightmare of Dayaks clamouring for tempat diam. since long before the end of the influx all available godowns, Government quarters and even the verandah of the Court house were crowded with men. women, children, and howling infants. However. somehow everyone was squeezed in somewhere. and all was well. The regatta attracted natives and Chinese from all districts a party of Kayans and Ska'apans coining even from as far away as Belaga; it was estimated that about 4,000 Dayaks were present, to say nothing of Chinese, Malays and Melanaus. Entries were phenomenal, and must constitute a record for any Regatta ever held in Sarawak. The starter's job was not an enviable one; in the open race for boats of 15 paddlers there were no less than 113 entries, and although only about 80 boats Parted. it can be imagined that it required a good deal of effort to get them into some semblance of a straight line, particularly since all the paddlers were shouting and none of them paid any notice¬ able attention to orders of the starter, whose task was not made easier by a certain slight weariness occasioned by the New Year’s Eve festivities. Racing started promptly at 8.0 a.m. in brilliant sunshine. The first race was for boats of any make with unlimited crews; these averaged about 70 paddlers per boat, and there were 32 boats entered. The Queen Mary from the Oya river continued the successful career that she began at Dalat regatta last Autumn, and won the first rare easily. This boat has the most graceful lines, and very nearly took the third race on the card with only 15 paddlers. It is impossible to give a detailed description of any race owing to the size of the fields and the width of the river, which rendered it difficult to follow individual boats; as a rule in the long races the winner was well ahead of the rest of the field by the time the waterworks were reached, that is to say about half a mile from the winning post. There was little assistance from the water in the morning, but in the afternoon there was an ebb which gave boats that were placed on the true right bank a considerable pull. The open race for 30 paddlers was a surprise and paid the highest tote dividend of the day. the satis¬ factory sum of $55 being returned for a dollar bet. The boat was owned by Shebli, and came from the Oya river. T.K. Kirak of Kanowit started a well- fancied favourite for the Tua Kampongs’ race and did not let his supporters down. One of the most popular wins of the day occurred in the last race before the luncheon interval; this race was for unlimited upriver crews and went to Belaga. There was no tote on this race, but had there been one Penghulu Puso’s crew of mixed Kayans and Ska'apans would undoubtedly have started favourites. To the general disappointment they tailed to start for the Champion Cup later in the dav, either because they were overwhelmed by their victory in the morning, or else because they mis¬ took the time of the race; the opinion was general that had they started they would have given other boats in the race a hard tussle for first place. Luncheon was taken shortly after mid-day. the Resident and Mrs. C. D. Adams providing an excellent cold buffet at the Residency which was well and truly dealt with, and which was thoroughly appreciated by all. Racing was resumed again at 1.30 p.m. Penghulu Kana produced another fast boat, the Salawan Nanga Stubuh; at one time Naraya Kilat looked like a winner on the outside, but once again there was one boat just too good for Mr. Crossley and his co-owners. Kana's boat got an advantage from the water and although Renang's boat was pegging away at him, Kana’s boar was still draw- ing away at the finish. The outboard races were rather disappointing and tried the patience of the starters to the limit. They were entirely responsible for the delayed , pro¬ gramme in the afternoon. The race for the Champion Cup. which was open to unlimited crews and boats placed during the day, resulted in another win for Shebli's Singa Melumpat. When racing was resumed after tiffin it was rumoured that the Queen Marti did not intend to enter the big race owing to a split between the owner and his crew, The race, when it came off, was most exciting, the Sri Pahlawan of Dalat with ex-bugler Dollah as flag-man appear¬ ing to win by a matter of feet. It was found. however, that this boat was not qualified lot the race at all. The unlimited consolation race had to be re-paddled on the following morning, since the light was very bad and the starters ruled out the first three boats for cutting in half way down the course. The paddle-off next morning, when all the crews were fresh, provided a magnificient spectacle. Unfortunately all the tote records were lost, (no,—the organizers did not welch!) so that no dividends can be given. JANUARY 2ND.—PRIZE GIVING AND LAND SPORTS On the morning of Saturday, January 2nd. Mrs. C. D. Adams very kindly presented the Regatta Prizes in the Court-house, after which the Hon. Secretary, in a short speech, thanked Mrs. Adams for giving away the prizes, and expressed regret that the Resident and Mrs. Adams were shortly leaving Sibu and Sarawak on retirement; he hoped that the event of the previous day would remain in their memories in the years to come, and that they would enjoy a long, happy and prosperous retirement. During the afternoon land sports took place.—at least they were land sports in name only, as it poured with rain and the padang in a few minutes became a sea of liquid mud. However, the incle¬ ment weather in no way deterred the huge crowd, which determined to enjoy itself and see the sports through as in the case of the Regatta. The entries were phenomenal and each event had to be run off in a long series of heats. Unfortunately the tug-of-war had to be abandoned owing to the state of the ground, but the sprints, egg and spoon, obstacle, and last but by no means least, the Dayak Penghulu' and European officers’ races went with a swing, and excited tremen¬ dous enthusiasm. No account of the sports would be complete without some mention of the hunt for the slippery pig; the spectacle of a crowd of mud-bespattered Dayaks and a few Sikhs, who were unable to resist the excitement and temptation of joining in, slipping and sliding all over the place after an equally mud-bespattered and well-greased pig beggars description. The Champion Cup for school boys, which was kindly presented by Ibrahim Bros., went to Sang Hai of the Roman Catholic Mission School, Sibu. The evening was enlivened by an exhibition of illuminated and decorated boats which moved in procession on the river. The boats were ingeniously and tastefully peculated and presented a gay spectacle they drilled slowly up and down. The first prize went to Abang Tani, who had transformed a long-boat into an illuminated submarine; the second prize is gained by Sedi for his large seaplane with whirling propellers and a blaze of coloured lights and the third prize fell to Rebi, who produced a swan which looked rather like a cross between this bird mil the Loch Ness Monster. A firework display then wrote Finis to everything, and that night and the next day saw bands of Dayaks winding their way homewards with their baggage, which included main new additions in the shape of straw hats, spitloons, pocket mirrors, and what not. One dreamy Dayak will remember the Regatta for a long time to come; while standing deep in thought.—or perhaps just standing,—he inadver¬ tently placed his leg almost exactly in front of the muzzle of the finishing post cannon just as it went off ; luckily be was only slightly scorched, and he walked off looking more surprised and indignant than hurt. The organizers of the Regatta and Sports are deeply grateful to all those who kindly presented cups, these being as follows :— C. D. Adams, Esq., Mrs. Adams, The Binatang Chamber of Commerce, Datu Abang Haji Mohidin, Messrs The Kwong Lee Bank. Abang Enjah. N.O., The Distributors of Wills' Embassy Cigarettes, Mr. Teo Chong Loh, Dr. Loh Mung Sung, Ibrahim Bros., and Haji Satem. And finally very sincere thanks are tendered by the Committee to all those who by their co-operation and energy helped to make the Regatta such a complete success, and an event which will be remembered for many years to come. SIBU REGATTA. RESULTS. RACE No 1. 8 a.m. Long Boats, open to any type,—paddlers unlimited. First boat to receive a silver cup presented by the Binatang Chamber of Commerce, with $100 added. Second to receive $50, third $25. Course from the sawmill, 3 miles approx. Entries : 32. 1st Queen Mary (Kasat). 2nd Naraya Kilat (F. L. G. Crossley, Esq., Abang Openg and Peng¬ hulu Ginan). 3rd Lang Langit (Penghulu Ikau). RACE NO. 2. 8.30 a.m. Dayak Penghulus (in the boat),—Paddlers, 15. First boat to receive a silver cup presented by Datu Abang Haji Mohidin with $30 added. Second to receive $15. third $10. Course from Pengkalan Haji Anni, miles approx. Entries : 22. 1st Trima Kasi Nanga Stubah ( Penghulu Kana). 2nd Nyalipan Api (Pengarah Ngelambong). 3rd Kijang Nerais (Penghulu Ikan). RACE NO. 3. 9 a.m. Open to any boat,— paddlers. 15. First to receive a silver cup pre¬ sented by Messrs. Kwong Lee Bank, Sibu. with $30 added. Second to receive $15, third $10. Course from Bukit Lima road junction, 2 miles approx. Entries : 113. 1st Rejak (J. L. Tambik). 2nd Queen Mary (Kasat). 3rd Laju Laju (Pa'ee). RACE No. 4. 9.30 a.m. School-boys.—paddlers. 15. First prize $15. Second to receive $8, no third prize. Race did not fill Course from the Waterworks, 1/2 mile approx. Entries : 5 1st Papan Terbit (Abang Amin School). 2nd Sri Hua Leong (Chung Hwa Public Middle School). RACE NO. 5. 10 a.m. Open to any boat,— paddlers, 30. First to receive a silver cup pre¬ sented by the Binatang Chamber of Commerce, with $60 added. Second to receive $30, third $15. Course from Bukit Lima road junction. 2 miles approx. Entries : 73. 1st Singa Melumpat (Shebli). 2nd Bujang Pelandok (Pengarah Ngelambong). 3rd Buying Belalang (Muling). RACE NO. 6. 10.30 a.m. Offices and ’ships’ crews (Government),—paddlers. 8. First to receive a silver cup presented by Haji Sa torn with $12 added. Second to receive $6. no third prize. Course from the Waterworks. 1/2 mile approx. Entries : 12. 1st Barat Daya (Lands & Surveys). 2nd Rejak (P.W.D.). RACE NO. 7. 11 a.m. Tua Kampongs (in the boat),—paddlers, 15. First to receive a silver cup presented by Abang Enjah, with $30 added Second to receive $15, third $10. Course from Pengkalan Haji Anni, 1 1/2 miles approx. Entries : 7. 1st Sri Bulan Perak (T.K. Kirak). 2nd Burak Melayang (T.K. Salleh). 3rd Kilat Manyambar (T.K. Abang Sigu). RACE NO. 8. 11.30 a.m. Long boats,—padd¬ lers unlimited. Open to natives living in the Kanowit river and its tributaries above and includ¬ ing Nanga Machan, and the Batang Rejang, and all its tributaries above Nanga Kanowit. Fust to receive a silver cup presented by Mrs. C. D. Adams, with $100 added. Second to receive $50, third $25. Course from the sawmill, 3 miles apprxo. Entries : 12. 1st Kijang Belaga (Penghulu Paso, Ska’apan). 2nd Bruang Langit. (Penghulu Grinang). 3rd Bujang Entabai (Indu). RACE NO. 9. 1.30 p.m. Long boats—open,— paddlers unlimited. First to receive a silver cup presented by the Distributors of Wills' Embassy Cigarettes, with $100 added. Second to receive $50, third $25. Course from the sawmill, 3 miles approx. Entries : 27. 1st Salawan Nanga Stubah (Penghulu Kana). 2nd Naraya Kilat. (F. L. Crossley, Esq., Abang Openg and Penghulu Giman). 3rd Angin Mela- yang (Renang). RACE NO. 10. 2 p.m. Outboard motors,— Class I. 4/5 h.p., length of boat 5 fathoms and over. First to receive a silver cup presented by Messrs. Kwong Lee Bank, Sibu. with $10 added. Second to receive $5, no third prize. Course from the sawmill, 3 miles approx. Entries : 8. 1st Bujang Kilat (Abang Indeh). 2nd Sri Lela (Abang Enjah). RACE NO. II 2.15 p.m. Outboard motors, Class II, 9/10 h.p. length of boat 6 fathoms and over. First to receive a silver cup presented by Mr. Teo Chong Loh, with $10 added. Second to receive $5, no third prize. Course from the saw- mill. 3 Hides approx. Entries: 9. 1st Tileng (Abang Yan). 2nd Kapit Kongsi (Abang Ahmat). RACE NO. 11B. 2.30 p.m. Outboard motors, Class III. 8/10 h.p., length of the boat 5 fathoms and over. First prize $10. Second to receive $5, no third prize. Course from the sawmill, 8 miles approx. Entries : 4. 1st Serindet Laid (Abang Enjah). 2nd Dayang Helen (Wee Teck Teong). RACE NO. 12. 3 p.m. Temoi only, open,—15 paddlers. First to receive a silver cup presented by Dr. Loh Mung Sung, with $30 added. Second to receive $15. third $10. Course from Bukit Lima road junction, 2 miles approx. Entries: 80. 1st Bujang Belaga (Berendam). 2nd Mas Paun (T.R. Hingkan). 3rd Bujang Gila (Dutoh). RACE NO. 13. 3.30 p.m. Berdayong (one man only. First to receive $4. second $2. Course from the Waterworks, 1/2 mile approx. Entries : 10. 1st Bujang Dua (Duan). 2nd Anjing Laid (Bakei). RACE No. 14. 4 p.m. Long boats—open,— paddlers unlimited. For boats which have been placed in a previous nice only. First to receive a silver cup presented by C. D. Adams, Esq., Resident. Third Division, with $100 added. Second to receive $50, third $25. Course from the saw¬ mill. 3 miles approx. Entries : 14. 1st Singa Melumpat (Shebli). 2nd Naraya Kilat (F. L. Crossley. Esq.. Abang Openg and Penghulu Giman). 3rd Salawan Nanga Stubah (Penghulu Kana). RACE NO. 15. 4.30 p.m. Ships' crews—open, —paddlers 8. First to receive $12, second $6. Course from Pangkalan Haji Anni, 1 1/2 miles approx. Entries : 4. 1st Singa Kala (s.s. Soon Ann). 2nd Swindle (s.s. Katong). RACE NO. 16. 5 p.m. Consolation Race—open, -paddlers 15. First to receive $30, second $15, third $10. Course from Pengkalan Haji Anni, 1 1/2 rules approx 1st Lau Laju (Adis). 2nd Mas Malang. 3rd Bujang Kilat (Renang). RACE NO. 17. 5.30 p.m Consolation—open,— toddlers unlimited. First to receive $100, second $50, third $25. Course from Bukit Lima road unction, 2 miles approx. 1st Tajai Malayang Hitam Manis (Pengarah Lambong). 2nd Lang Malayang (Chat and Guang). 3rd Ular Lidi (Abang Otton). Island Club, Sibu. SWEEPSTAKE ON GRAND NATIONAL STEEPLE-CHASE, 1937 Please note that as the race is held on March 19th and not on March 26th as printed on the tickets he draw will take place on Sunday 14th March. All ticket counterfoils to be returned before noon on Saturday 13th March. For the Island Club: Sibu, R. W. BORMOND, Honorary Secretary Island Club, Sibu. DECEMBER BOWLS AVERAGES. Fourth Division News. DECEMBER. Only one major case came before the Miri Courts during December. Lan Ah Meng was charged under section 411 of the Penal Code with dishonestly receiving stolen property knowing, or having reason to believe it to be stolen. He was convicted and sentenced to one month's rigorous imprisonment, this sentence being commuted, on appeal, to a fine of $800. An application was made by Dangeh, a Tuai Rumah of Niah, to bring several doors of Dayaks from Simanggang. On a list being sent to the Resident. Second Division, it appeared that the great majority of those named therein had never had my intention of moving, and some had not even been consulted. Enquiries are still being made, as a groat deal of unnecessary work has been caused in this way. Work continued on the clearing of the jungle at Tanjong Lobang. and this was almost completed by the end of the month . Certain repairs to roads were effected and the Government roads were in a fair state throughout the month. Captain C. P. Lowe, Director of Public Works, arrived on December 22nd in connection with the proposed construction of New Offices at Miri. The plans were almost complete by the end of the month. Early on the morning of December 19th a small boat containing five Chinese was run down by the Sarawak Oilfields Ltd. vessel Pergam. Three of the occupants of the boat were rescued by a Malay from the Kampong nearby, but two. a man and a boy were drowned. The body of the boy was found a few hours later, but that of the man has not yet been recovered. At the inquest on the body of the boy a verdict of death by drowning was returned, the Juragan and crew of the Pergam being exonerated from all blame in connection with the accident. The District Officer, Baram, states that reports of the rice crop in his district are contradictory and differ considerably from place to place, but. on the whole, they are optimistic, and augur well for the coming harvest, in spite of the usual pests. The Kelabits from the Saridan and Boyu arrived at Baram in the middle of the month to pay their taxes and buy gunpowder. They were brought down by Penghulu Lupong Bala, who says that they have recently had another epidemic of some disease which has killed many of them, both old and young. Other chiefs who visited the station were Penghulus Murah Tingang, Sadie Kedut. Nyipa Wan and Tama Kalang Lawai, and also Upriver Agents Suhinin, Soman and Sahit. The Curator of the Sarawak Museum returned to Kuching by m.v. Margaret, on December 1st. The same day a meeting of Chinese traders was held in the fort to explain the position of rubber restriction and the necessity to export as little as possible during the month. Everyone was most reasonable and agreed to ship no rubber to Kuching by the mid-month sailing of m.v. Margaret. This was done, but in consequence nearly two thousand piculs were shipped at the end of the month. An enquiry was held at Sebauh on December 23rd into an alleged rape case. The accused, a Dayak named Maju anak Anggom, was remanded. The District Officer, Bintulu, reports that there is a general trade boom among the natives owing to an increase in the price of several commodities. The traders in the district are paying as high as $10.50 a picul for jelutong, whilst, first grade damar fetches $4.50 per picul; the price of sago is also on the increase. An enquiry was held at Bintulu into a loss of cargo on m.s. Chuan Kim Aik. the owners wishing to claim for the loss. This matter was referred to the Superintendent of Shipping, Fourth Division. During the month thirteen cases were disclosed at Limbang of owners of rubber trees having failed to submit any Census Declaration Form; th- garden belonging to the Chinese Tua Pek Kong. was one instance. In each case fines up to $100 or forfeiture of the garden were imposed. Forms were filled in and sent to the Chairman. Rubber Restriction Committee. Yeo Mah Yaw. a dealer of Ukong, was lined $100 for submitting false monthly returns, and Ah Loi. of Sungei Lubai, was fined $50 for over-stocking rubber. 97 vaccinations were successfully effected amongst Dayaks in the Sungei Lubai. and a further supply of lymph is being ordered. It was found that several Brunei Malays were living in Rumah Ubong, and being employed as rubber tappers. This was forbidden, and the Bruneis will be dealt with when they next appear. A large number of Dayaks and all Penghulus visited Limbang at various times during the month. They all reported a satisfactory padi-planting, and quite a number look out Passes to nemuai to the Second and Third Divisions. Rudi, a Dayak, complained that Koyok Pudun (Murut) had intimidated him through a Chinese gardener Ah Sin. Investigation showed that there had been a quarrel between the two, and the Murut had let out a few unguarded words during a drinking bout. He was therefore pledged to be of good behaviour for twelve months. It is fairly clear, however, that Muruts as a whole do not appreciate Dayak houses fanning in their vicinity. During a house-to-house visit up the Sungei Panderuan by the District Officer. Limbang, the question of rubber smuggling from Temburong territory was discussed, and all natives warned. It is clear that they quite understand the coupon system in force in the Slate of Brunei, compared with the present tapping holiday system in Sara¬ wak, but none of them seemed to suspect any smuggling in their vicinity. They appreciated the fact that information leading to conviction of offences would entail a reward. One Chinese trader was alleged by Dayaks to have intimated that sheets of rubber with the stencil reversed, or upside down, would only fetch 2 3 the ordinary market price. He flatly denied the allegation. and luckily for him he had not had time to purchase any at a reduced price. Accompanied by Penghulu Wee, the District Officer, Limbang, visited all houses in the ulu Panderuan, including Sungei Penganan and Sungei Marutop. Surprise checks on all Chinese traders and rubber dealers stocks were made, and weights and measures examined. Tua Kampongs and Tuai Rumah were warned regarding borrowing of stencils, and owners told that they must apply for an individual stencil if they do not possess one. The District Officer, Limbang, reports that while travelling up river on December 21st, the Dayak poling in the bow of the boat suddenly leapt ashore and up the bank, to the accompaniment of hoots of excitement from the remaining paddlers. He emerged a few minutes later with a young otter in each hand ; this was apparently considered by the Dayaks a very favourable omen. During Penghulu Belulok’s absence at Limbang, he received news on December 30th that his house of 10 doors at Nanga Medamit had been burned out 3 days previously. The Penghulu admits that not a soul was left in charge while everybody was away on their farms. A party of 6 Muruts admit that they stepped there to cook, at noon, in the room of the father of one of them, on or about the day or the con¬ flagration. but they emphatically deciare that they extinguished all embers in the dapor before con¬ tinuing downriver. The Penghulu and Lance- Corporal Yahya are proceeding up river now to investigate, meanwhile individual statements are being recorded from those who cooked at the house, which is situated a long distance from any other house in the neighbourhood. It is an unfortunate fact that one of the six is the recent son-in-law of Belulok, and being on bad terms, the latter is therefore inclined to believe that the fire was neither accidental nor even the result of care¬ lessness. Belatak, a Malay, was brought in to Limbang suffering from severe accidental gunshot wound in the right thigh muscle. He admitted that while out at night after plandok he had held his weapon near the muzzle with the butt trailing along the path, just prior to squatting down in order to relieve nature. The weapon discharged as he did so, and the home-made buckshot entered his leg at a tangent, striking the bone hut not breaking it. Four of the. seven pellets have so far been extracted by the Medical Officer. Brunei, and the patient stands a good chance of recovering. At Lawas there were a couple of reports of cattle having been slashed with knives, but unfortunately the culprit could not be traced. This is a mean but not uncommon offence and it is very seldom that anyone is brought to book for it, because there is usually nobody looking after the cattle at the time, and the offence is frequently not discovered and reported till a day or two after it occurred. There are reports that Penghulu Lakai of Lawas has been settling cases and keeping fines imposed for himself without reporting to Government. This is quite possible, since not only have his people frequently complained about him, but successive European Officers have found him use- less and deceitful and he is continually being reprimanded. The allegations will be investigated. Almost no up river Muruts came down to Lawas during December, though there was the usual stream of downriver Muruts bringing in their rubber for sale in the bazaar and then spending the proceeds on getting thoroughly drunk At Sundar a meeting was held to discuss the question of Brunei fishermen poaching in Sarawak waters and possibilities of Sarawak nationals having retaliated in Brunei waters. Then were present the Native Officers of Lawas and Trusan, the Officer-in-Charge, and Tua Kampongs of all fishing villages in this District. This is an old and vexed question, continually cropping up anew. A special report on the results of the meeting has been forwarded to the Resident. At the same time the opportunity was taken to discuss the question of Brunei boat hawkers regularly hawking Brunei wares in the Trusan River without taking out or holding any sort of pass or paying Exemption Tax to Government. It is apparently usual for a Brunei hawker to return to Brunei with anything up to $300 hard cash in his pocket after spending a fortnight in the Trusan River. The only goods they supply which are not obtainable every day in the bazaars or from local hawkers are ordinary parangs. Only one out of seven Tun Kampongs was in favour of this pirate trade being allowed to continue, and he is a relation of the hawker concerned! As far as is known not a single catty of rubber left the Lawas District during the month. All exporters, including Lawas Estate, made an admirable response to the request that exports should be held up, realising the advantages that would later accrue to them thereby. Also no con¬ sequent case of hardship has yet come to light. The Seluating bridge near Lawas bazaar col¬ lapsed and the centre portion was completely carried away by very strong flood water during a violent storm on the night of December 7th, Unfortunately some belian planks and beams must have been carried so far down river, floating at first on a large pile of bamboo that struck the bridge and eventually sinking, that they have not yet recovered. A Public Holiday was observed on December 14th m honour of King George VPs birthday. The following  day  being Hari  Raya   was also   a   holiday. Hari raya celebrations suitably reflected the increase in prosperity due to the prevailing high price for rubber. For two nights Lawas was a blaze of light; some 300 flares decorated both banks of the river, stretching from above Lawas Fort to a point well below the bazaar. Govern¬ ment buildings and private houses were all prettily lit up. and the view from the Fort looking down towards the bazaar was of a veritable fairyland. CORRESPONDENCE. [The Editor is not responsible for the opinions of correspondents.] Timber in the ulu Rejang. KUCHING , 19th January, 1937. To the Editor, Sarawak Gazette. SIR. On page 22 of the January issue of The Sarawak Gazette you make the statement in reference to Mr. Gotte’s work in the Merit for the Borneo Company, Ltd., that "his results shew that the timber resources of that part of the country have not yet been fully realized." This, of course, is most inaccurate. It was upon my Department's advice that Mr. Gotte proceeded to that region and if further evidence is necessary it might be recalled that two large Protected-forests had already been constituted in the area in which the Company is interested. I am, etc.. THOMAS CORSON, Senior Forest Officer. The Shark Industry. KUCHING, 27 th January, 1937. The Editor, Sarawak Gazette, Kuching. SIR, I have read with considerable interest the article on the shark fishing industry appearing in your issue of 4th January. Whilst the article as a whole paints a very tempting future, I most emphatically disagree that shark fishing can be made to pay in Bornean waters. To my knowledge there have been two attempts to get the business on a paying footing in British North Borneo, and both have failed, with consider¬ able loss to the promoters. The first attempt was made from Bulau Daat, near Labuan, the enterprise later on removing to the mainland of British North Borneo near Kunimis. The trouble is that there are very few large sharks in these waters, and unless large sharks are caught in quantity the fishery has no hope of succeeding. In support of the above statement I would cite the incident which took place some years ago, when a young girl fell overboard from a K.P.M. steamer. The location was, I think, the Straits of Malacca. After having been in the water for the best part of twenty-four hours, she was picked up unscathed by some Chinese fishermen. Had the location been in Ceylon or Australian waters she would not have survived long. In Bornean waters small sharks are encountered in shoals, but these fish are useless for commercial purposes. The chief product of the industry is. of course, sharkskin, and latterly the North Bornean enter¬ prise, with which the writer was closely connected, found that even large skins were quite unsaleable, the fashion for articles made from the tanned skin having gone completely out. The reason for this is very hard to understand, as good shark leather will outlast the best cowhide. The by-products you mention in the article all have a value, but in the absence of large sharks it is quite impossible to get them in sufficient quantity to "carry” the industry by themselves. It is interesting to observe that in the course of shark-fishing, large numbers of turtle, both green and hawksbill, become entangled in rhe net- and drowned. At a glance, one might think that here is a lucrative side-line, but such is not the case. The flesh of the green turtle is excellent food, but no North Bornean native will look at it. and when it was suggested to a well-known cold storage firm in Singapore that they should purchase these creatures and dispose of them in that city, the idea was turned down. The shell of the hawksbill turtle provides the tortoise-shell of commerce and good thick shell is worth £3 per lb. Here again, there are more snugs. Most of the hawksbill turtles off Borneo have already had their shells removed by natives who keep a look-out for them when they come to land to lay their eggs. The plates are removed by rather cruel heating process and the creature is turned loose to glow a new shell—a process which takes several years. To conclude. should any of your readers contem¬ plate investing their money in a shark fishery in Borneo I would beg of them first to consider Mr. Punch's well-known advice to those about to marry. Yours faithfully, J. COLMAN.  