The Sarawak Gazette. THURSDAY. JULY 1st. 1937. Birth. At Jalan Masjid Sarikei, on the 18th June, 19B7, to Dayang Masniah, wife of N.O. Abang Openg, a daughter, named Dayang Majenah. Death. HOLL.- On June 29th, at the General Hospital, Kuching, Edward Smart Holl, Private Secretary to His Highness the Rajah and Curator of Gardens. Aged 66 years. Social and Personal. JUNE. It is with very deep regret that we record the death of Mr. E. S. Holl, Private Secretary to His Highness the Rajah and Curator of Gardens, who collapsed suddenly in the District Office on the morning of June 29th and died shortly after 4 p.m. on the same day. Mr. Holl was one of the “old guard", and probably the best-loved man in Sarawak. He will be very greatly missed. Au appreciation will be published in our next issue. We also record with deep regret the deaths of Abang Haji Fadel bin Abang Haji Mohammad Kassim and Abang Haji Anis bin Abang Haji Mohammad Kassim. Both the deceased were brothers of the Datu Patinggi and both rendered notable services to Sarawak. Appreciations appear on an¬ other page. There was a very large attendance at the “At Home” given by Mr. Ong Tiang Swee, c.s.s., at his residence. Rock Road, on June 9th, in celebration of the wedding, on May 29th, of bis son, Mr. Ong Hap Ann. to Miss Lau Hong Ngoh, daughter of the late Mr. Lan Geok Soon. Nearly all the Europeans in Kuching appeared to be present and there were many representatives of the Asiatic communities’. June 9th, being the occasion of the celebra¬ tion of the birthday of His Majesty King George VI, was observed as a public holiday throughout the State and all Government offices were closed. Visitors to Kuching during the month included Bishop Edwin Lee and the Rev. Dr. Archer of the Methodist Episcopal Mission, Singapore, who arrived from Sibu by the m.v. Rejang on the 25th. Both visitors returned to Singapore by the s.s. Circe on the following day. Mr. T. S. Boyd, the Chief Justice, returned from casual leave by the s.s. Circe on the 13th. Mr. Boyd visited China and Japan and his itinerary was a refreshing change from the usual “round trip” by the P. & O. line which has been singularly popular, amongst Sarawak Government officers, during the last year or two. Mr. Boyd went by train from Shanghai to Nanking and Pei¬ ping. and then entered Japan at Kobe via Mukden and Korea. Mr. S. Harrop and Mrs. Harrop left Kuching on furlough on the 12th. We wish them a successful leave. Mr. Harrop’s work at the Brooke Dockyard has been taken over by Mr. E. R. Evans, who arrived with Mrs. Evans on May 31st. We welcome Mr. and Mrs. Evans to Sarawak and trust that they will enjoy the six months that they intend to spend here. Another newcomer to Sarawak to whom we extend our welcome is Mrs. D. McNiven, who arrived with her husband. Mr. McNiven, the Kuching Agent of the Chartered Bank, on the s.s. Kajang from Singapore on the 7th. Two flying boats visited Kuching during the month. The first one arrived on the 17th and on the 19th proceeded to Bintulu, Baram. and Labuan. It returned to Kuching on the 20th. When it attempted to start for Singa- pore on the 22nd. it was found to be suffering rom engine trouble, and another flying boat, which was already scheduled to arrive on the following day. brought a relief engine. Both made a successful departure on the 25th. H.M.S. Herald returned to Kuching from Sirik on the 26th and left again on the 28th. As usual her stay was all too brief, but in forty-eight hours matches of football, hockey, cricket, and bowls were played, and a most successful entertainment was presented at the Sarawak Club. The death in England of Mr. S. W. Harris is reported. Mr. Harris joined the Sarawak Government in 1907 and retired on pension as Engineer of the Sadong Collieries in 1932. He had been suffering from heart trouble for some time but his death was quite unexpected. He leaves a widow to whom we tender our sincerest sympathy. Mr. H. D. Aplin succeeded Mr. A. A. Rennie as Government Agent, London, on June 1st. Mr. Aplin joined the Sarawak Civil Service in 1908 and. after a long and distinguished career, retired on pension in March 1934. The Secretary for Native Affairs relates, in his monthly report for May. that on May 22nd he proceeded to the Talang Talang islands to be present at the annual semah ceremony, which took place on the morning of May 23rd. This ceremony, which is a survival of the Sarawak Malays’ former animism, has lost most of its popularity. The ceremony consists of a party of Malays, led by a pawang, sailing around the islands and reciting prayers to the spirits of the seas. A landing is then made on the main island, where a mock battle takes place in which the invaders are the conquerors. A similar cere¬ mony also survives in Trengganu, Malaya. “Anak Singapura” in the Straits Times, in a paragraph concerning “the pagan rite of semah Kuala,” quoted the following extract from the 1936 report of Mr. N. R. Jarrett, acting British Adviser. “For three days the fishing community gives itself up to feasting and play, during which time no boats are allowed to land or leave. On the third day a white buffalo is slaughtered and after the usual feast the head is floated out to sea accompanied by the incantations of a pawang as an offering to the spirits of the sea.” It would be interesting to know if this cere¬ monial rite was once common to all Malay races, and, if so, why it has apparently survived only in the territories of Trengganu and Sarawak. Coronation of Their Majesties King George VI and Queen Elizabeth. SARAWAK’S LOYAL ADDRESS. The following is the address made by His Highness the Rajah to Their Majesties the King and Queen :— To Their Most Gracious Majesties King George VI and Queen Elizabeth. The Rajah of Sarawak presents his humble duty to Your Majesties on the occasion of Your Majesties' Coronation. The Rajah and all his subjects and all the subjects of Your Majesties in Sarawak most humbly offer to Your Majesties their loyalty and devotion, and it is their earnest hope that a personal affection for Your Majesties and a true loyalty to the Throne may long unite the many races and peoples of your Empire in a living fellowship of faithful and willing service.” The following letter was received from the Colonial Office by the Sarawak Government Agent,  DOWNING STREET, 4th June, 1937. "SIR, I am directed by Mr. Secretary Ormsby (lore to refer to your letter of the 13th of May, and to inform you that the Address from His Highness the Rajah of Sarawak has been laid before His Majesty the King, who has com¬ manded that an expression of Their Majesties' appreciation and thanks for this kind message on the occasion of Their Coronation may be conveyed to His Highness. I am, etc., (Signed) F. J. HOWARD." Coronation Medals. A supply of large Coronation Medals has been received from London for sale as souvenirs of the coronation of His Majesty King George VI. These medals, with a diameter of 2 1/4", are in fine silver and are enclosed in a red leather case. The price is $9.00 each. The medals are of a very handsome design, bearing on the obverse the profile of His Majesty King George VI and on the reverse the profile of Her Majesty Queen Elizabeth. Specimens may be inspected on application to the Secretariat, Kuching, to which office intending purchasers should send their orders. Proclamation Day.  THE CELEBRATION OF THE PROCLAMATION DAY OF H.H. THE RAJAH OF SARAWAK IN KAMPONG BAWANG, MATU, ON THE 24TH MAY. 1937. 8 a.m.—Two of the pupils sounded their bugles and the Sarawak flag was hoisted in the middle of the padang in front of the School. BOYS’ SPORTS. At 2 p.m. the sports were started and came to a close at 5.30 p.m. At 5.45 p.m. the schoolmaster presented the winners of the sports various prizes including Japanese toys, etc. Four boys were awarded medals for wearing Malay national dress in school even day. These prizes were awarded in order to encourage hoys to put on national dress both during class-time and afterwards. 8.30 p.m.—A Malay Bangsawan was performed by school-boys for the first time in Bawang. There was a great gathering of Bawang people, which included the schoolmaster of Kampong Skaan. Lectures in Malay were given by the school¬ master on the subjects of loyalty to the Rajah of Sarawak and the benefits of using national dress, and of the reason for our gathering. Lastly the whole gathering prayed io God for the long life and prosperity of our Rajah and his descendants. The schoolmaster regretted the absence of Abang Yan, Officer-in-Charge, Matu, and Haji Yaman, N.O., both of whom had been invited but could not be present owing to the pressure of issuing rubber garden stencils. The schoolmaster, Abang Median, hopes fervently that this kind of Celebration will happen every year in Bawang.اوچفن درفد ݢوروسکوله ملايو كمفوڠ باواڠ ماتوباݢي هاري سڠݢهسان سري فدوک دولي يڠمىهامليا سر چرلس بينر بروق جي. سي. عيم. منجادي
راجا نݢري سراواق, الله سبحانه وتعالى منجاديکن راج ايت ايله كران ممرينته دان مڽوروهكن اومت يڠدباواه ناوڠنڽ دڠن سݢل كبجيكن دان منݢهكن سݢل كجهتن دڠن مڠيكوت شريعتڽ ڽڠمها سوچي يڠتله دباوا اوليه راصولث دان باݢي ايله يڠ مڠاتوركن كهيدوفن اومة سفرت مڽوره كفد برچرچوق تانم برنياݢ دانلاينڽ درفد فكرجاءن يڠ مندادتڠكن كمعموران نݢريڽ دان امن سنتوس اهليث يڠدمكين هندڤله كامو كاسيه دان ملياكن راج كيت سرت تنجوقكن اومانه دان ستيا كيت كفداڽ كران كقواتن فونچا كرجاءن راج ايت برسرت دڠن كيت، باݢيمان كات فلفاته اورڠ توا٢ "قوات تونجڠ كران اكرڽ". مك فرمان الله تعالى هي سکلين مريک يڠ فرچاي طاعتله کامو اکن الله دان طا عتله کامو اکن راصول دان اورڠ يڠ ممرينتهكن كاموايله راج كامو اتو يڠبرديري فد تمفتث.
كمفوڠ باواڠ، ماتو، 25مي، تاهن 1937. Death of Mr. E. S. Holl. The sudden death of Mr. E. S. Holl in Kuching hospital shortly after 4 p.m. on June 29th will be deplored by all his many friends in Sarawak. Mr. Holl had appeared to be in his usual good health until Tuesday morning, when, while talking to the District Officer in the latter's office, he suddenly collapsed. He was hurried to hospital but never recovered consciousness, and died in the afternoon of the same day. The funeral took place at 11.30 a.m. on Wednes¬ day, June 30th. There was a large concourse of members of all races. Mr. E. Parnell, the Officer Administering the Government, led the procession behind the hearse to the grave, and the pall-bearers were Messrs. Calvert. Middlemas, Reynolds, Sin¬ clair, Baird, and Pascoe. There were many wreaths, some of them anonymous. Those bearing labels were from Their Highnesses the Rajah and Ranee, Mr. and Mrs. Parnell, Mr. and Mrs. C. Ah' Jap, Katharine and Clem, William and Elsa, Messrs. Sime, Darby & Co., Ltd., Mr. G. T. Bates, Tom and Norah Pascoe, Mr. R. F. Sinclair, Mr. and Mrs. Law Siew Kee, All Ranks of the Sarawak Constabulary, Mr. and Mrs. A. W. Gibson, Mr.- and Mrs. W. H. Kelley, Mr. Tan Boon Tye, Messrs. The Borneo Co., Ltd., St. Michael's Catholic Club, and Mr. and Mrs. Joseph Law. Kematian Al-marhum Abang Hail Fadil. Dengan sepenoh-penoh duka-chita dan pilu kita memberita-kan ia-itu telah berlaku kaderat Tuhan di-atas hamba-nya Abang Haji Fadil bin Al-marhum Datu Bandar Abang Haji Mohammad Kassim, pada malam Khamis jam pnkol 12.30 ia-itu pada 3 hari bulan June, 1937. di-rumah Al-marhum ayahenda- nya di-jalan Datus Road. dengan sebab mengidapi penyakit bengkak di-kaki-nya selama 10 hari. Allah yarham itu berumor 67 tahun, dan ia-nya adik yang ketiga kepada Yang Berhurmat Datu Patinggi Abang Haji Abdillah. Allah yarham itu ada meninggal sa-orang istiri dan 8 orang anak, 4 laki-laki dan 4 perempuan. Maka 3 orang daripada anak laki-laki-nya telah beristiri dan sa-orang anak perempuan-nya telah bersuami. Maka daripada anak-anak merekaitu-lah allah yarham itu ada meninggal 30 orang chuchu. Pada masa muda-nya allah yarham itu telah masok kerja Perentah di-dalam Pejabat Suka tan Tanah (Survey Department) lebeh kurang 5 tahun, kemudian di-suroh oleh al-marhum ayahenda-nya pergi ka-Makkatui-mushar-rapah kerana menyem- purna-kan Haji. Allah yarham itu dudok di-dalam Mekah lebeh kurang 5 tahun. Maka apa-kala balek-nya dari Mekah di-pinta oleh nekenda-nya Datu Bandar Abang Haji Bol Hassan menulong di-atas serba-serbi pekerja-an-nya. Pada tahun 1909 Allah yarham itu masok kerja Perentah di-Sajingkat Quarry menjadi penulong saudara-nya Abang Haji Abdillah Datu Patinggi yang ada sekarang. Maka di-dalam ia-nya meme¬ gang kerja-an di-Sajingkat itu ia-nya di-ambil oleh Perentah menjadi Tua Kampong di-dalam kampong No. 3, hingga tahun 1919. Pada 26 May tahun 1924 allah yarham itu telah di-ambil oleh keraja-an menjadi wakil khas bagi Keraja-an Sarawak, di- Singapura buat menjaga dan melihat hal ihwal ra’ayat Sarawak yang pergi hajilama-nya 3 bulan. Pada 21 August, 1924 allah yarham itu telah di-lantik oleh Keraja-an Sarawak menjadi sa-orang Committee Masjid Besar hingga akhir umor-nya. Muka di-dalam pekerja-an-nya itu ia-nya menjadi Committee bagi memeraksa Wayang Gambar dan lain-lain Committee. Maka di-atas kehilangan allah yarham itu bukan- nya sahaja telah menjadi kenang-kenangan dan duka-chita yang besar kapada anak istiri, kaum kelurga dan sahabat handi-nya sahaja tetapi telah menerbitkan keduka-an kapada Perentah Sarawak kerana ada-lah selama allah yarham itu memeggang satu-satu pekerja-an perentah sangai-lah ia-nya menunjokkan ta'at dan rajin serta memberi puas hati di-atas serba serbi pekerja-an-nya. Kita berdo’a mudah-mudahan Allah masok kan roh al-marhum itu di-dalam perhimpunan segala roh orang yang salih-salih, ada-nya, Amin!كماتين المرحوم ابڠ حج فضيل. دڠن سفنوه٢ دکچيت دان فيلو كيت ممبريتاكن ياءية تله برلاكو قدرة توهن داتس همباڽ ابڠ حج فضيل بن المرحوم داتوء بندر ابڠ حج محمد قاسم, فد مالم خميس جم فوكل 12.30 ياءيت فد 3 هاريبولن جون 1937, درومه المرحوم ايهنداث دجالن داتوس رود, دڠن سبب مڠيدافي فڽاكيت  بڠكق دكاكيڽ سلام 10 هاري.
الله يرحم ايت برعمر 67 تاهن,دان اياڽ اديق يڤكتيݢ كفد يڠبرحرمة داتوء فتيڠݢى ابڠ حج عبدالله, الله يرحم ايت اد منڠݢل سئورڠ استري دان 8 اورڠ انق: 4 لاكي٢ دان 4 فرمفوان, مک 3 اورڠ درفد انق لاكي٢ڽ تله براستري دان سئورڠ انق فرمفوانث تله برسوامي, مک درفد انق٢ مريكتيتله الله يرحم ايت اد منڠݢل 30 اورڠ چوچو ٢.
فد ماس موداث الله يرحم ابت تله ماموق كرج فرنته ددالم مابي ديڤتمتت لبه كورڠ 3 تاهن, كمدين دموره اوله المرحوم ابهتداث فرݢي كمكةالمفرفه كران
المرحوم داتوء بىندر ابڠ حج بوالحسن مىولڠ داتس مرب مربي فكرجاءنث, فد تاهن 1909 الله يرحم ماسوق كرج فرنته دمجيڠكة كواري منجادي ايسيتن فورمين باݢي موداراث ابڠ حج عبدالله دالوء فتيڠݢي يڠاد مكارڠ مك دالم اياث ممݢڠ فكرجاء ى دمجيڠكة ايت اياڽ دامبيل اوله فرنته لاݢي مىجادى تواكمفوڠ دالم کمفوڠ نمبر 3 هڠݢ 1919, فد 26 مي 1924 الله  يرحم تله دامبيل اوله کراجاءن منجادي واکيل خاض  باݢي کراجاءن ساراواق,دسيڠافورا بوات منجاݢا دان مليهة حال اهوال رعيت سراواق يڠ فرݢي حاجي لامڽ 3 بولن فد 21 اوݢوسة 1924 الله يرحم ايت دلىتيق اوله كراجاءن سراواق منجادي كوميتي مسجد بسر هڠݢ اخر عمرڽ, مك دالم فكرجاء نڽ منجادي كوميتي مسجد ايت, اياڽ منجادي كوميتي باݢي ممريقسا وا يڠ كمبردان لاين ٢ كوميتي.
مك داتس كهيلاڠن الله ير حم ايت بوكنڽ سهاج تله مىجادي كنڠ٢ ڠن دان دكچيت يڠبسر كفد انق استري, قوم كلورݢا, دان صحابت هنديڽ سهاج, تتافي تله منربيتكن كدوكاءن كفد فرنته سراواق, كران اداله سلام الله يرحم ايت ممݢڠ ساتو٢ فكرجاءن فرنته ساڠتله اياڽ مننجوقكن طاعة دان راجين سرة .ممبري فواس هاتي داتس سرباسربي فکرجاءنڽ مک اوله جاس٢ الله يرحم يڠتر معلوم ايت, فرنته تله هيلڠ سئورڠ درفد فڠݢاويڽ يڠ ساڠت٢ ستيا.
كيت بردوعا مدهمدهن توهث ماسوقكن روح المرحوم ايت ددالم فرهمفونن ارواح الصلحين امين. Kematian Al-marhum Abang Haji Anis. Pada malam Thelatha jam pukol 10.30 ia-itu 3 hari bulan June, 1937, bahawa pada ketika itu-lah Abang Haji Anis bin Al-marhum Datu Bandar Abang Haji Mohammad Kassim kembali ka- rahmatullah Ta'ala di-rumah al-marhum ayahenda- nya di-jalan Datus Road ia-itu 5 hari kemudian daripada kehilangan kekanda-nya allah yarham Abang Haji Fadil, dengan sebab di-datangi uthur vang tiada semena-mena di-dalam tidor-nya. Allah yarham itu berumor 50 tahun ia-itu adik yang ketujoh daripada Datu Patinggi Abang Haji Abdillah. Allah yarham itu ada meninggal 3 orang anak; 2 orang laki-laki dan sa-orang perempuan dan 3 orang chuchu. Ada-lah allah yarham itu pada masa muda-nya ia-nya masok kerja Perentah menjadi jerutulis di-Pejabat Post lama-nya lebeh kurang 18 tahun kemudian bekerja di-pejabat Post, Sibu selama 2 tahun. Kemudian dari itu ia-nya mengiringi al-marhum ayahenda-nya Datu Bandar Abang Haji Mohammad Kassim pergi ka-Makkatul-mushar- rapah, balek-nya dari negri yang mulia itu ia-nya masok bekerja menjadi guru Sekola di-Limbang selama 3 tahun kemudian berpindah mengajar di- Kuching di-Sekolah Perentah (Government Lay School) hingga ia berhenti dari jawatan itu kerana keuthuran lemah sebelah badan-nya. Sa-sunggoh-nya Perentah-sangat duka-chita atas kehilangan allah yarham itu kerana ada-lah selama- nya ia memeggang pekerja-an Perentah yang terma'alum itu sangat-lah ia-nya rnenunjokkan rajin dan ta'at. - Kita harap mudah-mudahan Tuhan berikan. taufik kapada anak-istiri dan kaum kelurga bagi kedua bersaudara allah yarham itu berbanyak- banyak sabar, terutama kapada yang Berhurmat Datu Patinggi Abang Haji Abdillah kerana kehi¬ langan 2 orang saudara-nya yang sangat-sangat di-kasehi-nya itu ada-nya.كماتين المرحوم ابڠ حج انيس.
فد مالم ثلاث جم فوكل 10.30 ياءيت 8 هاريبوان جون 1937 بهوا فد كتيک  ايتله ابڠ حج انيس بن المرحوم داتوء بندر ابڠ حج محمد قاسم كمبالي كرحمة الله تعلى درومه المرحوم ايهند دجالن داقوس رود، ياءيت 5 هاري كمدين درفد كهيلاڠن ككنداڽ الله يرحم ابڠ حج فضيل، دڠن سبب دداتڠي عذور يڠتاء سمنا٢ ددالم تيدورڽ، سلام 2 هاري.
الله يرحم ايت برعمر 50 تاهن، ياءيت اديق يڠكتوجه درفد داتوء فتيڠݢي ابڠ حج عبدالله، الله يرحم ايت اد مىڠݢل 3 اورڠ انق 2 اورڠ لاکي٢ دان سئورڠ .فرمفوان دان اد منڠݢل 3 اورڠ چوچوء اداله الله يرحم ايت فد ماس موداڽ اياڽ ماسوق كرج فرنته منجادي كراني دالم فوسة اوفيس لامڽ لبه كورڠ 18 تاهن كمدين ماسوق بكرج دفومة اوفيس سيبو سلام 2 تاهن, کمدين مڠيرڠي المرحوم ايهنداڽ ,داتوء بندر ابڠ حج محممد قاسم فزݢي کمکة المشرفه باليقڽ دري مکة الله يرحم ايت ماسوق کرج منجادي ݢوروسكوله، دليمبڠ سلام 3 تاهن كمدين دفنده مڠاجر دكوچيڠ دݢرمنة لي سکول فد تاهن 1934 الله يرحم ايت برهنتي دري جواتنڽ منجادي ݢورو, كران دداتڠي عذور لمه سبله بدانڽ.
سڠݢهڽ فرنته ساڠت دكچيت داتس كماتين الله يرحم ايت كران اداله سلامڽ ممݢڠ فكرجاءن٢ يڠترمعلوم ايت ساڠتله اياث مننجوقكن راجين دان طاعة.
كيت هارف مدهمدهن توهن بريكن توفيق كفد انق استري دان قوم كلورݢا باݢي كدواً الله يرحم ايت برباڽق٢ صبر, تراوتام کفد يڠبرحرمة داتوء فتيڠݢي ابڠ حج عبدالله كران کهيلاڠن 2 اورڠ سوداراث يڠاڠت٢ دكاسيهيڽ.
اوڽفن تريماء کاسيه درفد يڠبرحرمة داتوء فتيڠݢي سراواق. كيت دان اهلي الله يرحم سودارا كيت ابڠ صج فضيل دان الله يرحم سودارا كيت ابڠ حج انيس مڠوچف بريبو٢ تريماء كاسيه اتس كاءحسانن توان٢ سموا ددالم بندر كوچيڠ دان دلاين٢ ججاهن سياف يڠبرايڠتن كاسيه سايڠ دان برعمل كبجيكن مڠرجاكن سمبهيڠ غاءيب, ملفظكن دعا اتو بارڠسباݢي صدقه خصوصا كفد فرينته سراواق سيافد يڠاد ممڠر ايڠتكن اتس كجساءن دان كبقتين كدوا الله يرحم سودارا كيت يڠترمعلوم.
مك كيت دان قاوم قرابة الله يرحم سودارا كيت يڠدوا برسودارا ايت مڠوچف برباڽق٢ شكور كفد توهن يڠمها تيڠݢي سرة براولڠ٢ بردعا مدهمدهن توان٢ سموا دنݢراهيڽ برندا٢ بالسن يڠكبجيكن اداڽ.
,ابڠ حج عبدالله .داتوء فتيڠݢي، سراواق On Enemies. Tn these days when people all over the world are talking of the threat and danger of war, it should be a change to think for a while of enemies of a different nature, of a type that are not likely to endanger human fife, or to go around chucking bombs at harmless individuals. It would appear at first sight that we must look to the animal and vegetable kingdoms to find such a type, indeed, it must be almost common knowledge that in both these kingdoms, there are animals and plants which prey upon each other. Very often the enmity of one animal for another has been used to protect a third. Much successful work has been done in checking the depredations of a fungus upon a plant of commercial value by introducing a natural enemy of that fungus. It is then with some interest that one reads in the Malayan Agri-Horticultural Association's Maga¬ zine that the ants "are among the most formidable terrestrial enemies of termites.’’ The same article points out that what we are pleased to call white ants are termites and not ants at all. Here then we have two natural enemies which could be used for the comfort of the human race. If the beams of our houses are being attacked by white ants, all we have to do is to import a colony of ants, and clear the ring. If on the other band, we are infested with ants, we clear the ring for a gang of white ants. I find this frightfully logical myself, but I may be biased. None the less, it is not so very long since that, we were advised to fight our constant friend the ant with a complex glutinous mixture, which seemed far more likely to attract ants than otherwise. I fear, however. that instead of adopting the method outlined above for fighting the two pests, we shall continue to jodelite the beams and dash about with sticky messes alternately for the rest of our time. One of the dominant fears of the lives of many bachelors in this country is that while on leave they may get led astray, and come out married. To combat this fear, it is essential that a fighting front he established in a period of training while still out here on duty, that a strong armour of confidence against the wiles of the fair be donned and got used to before facing the battle line in England. Following the above methods then, it would appear that the best thing to do is to have all over the country charming ladies, together with their natural enemy, the next charming lady. Only then will the unprotected bachelor feel safe and prepared to face his leave in confidence bom of experience. So forward the movement for fair ones, and still more fair ones, for Sarawak. —.N.M. “Out of the Brown.” VARIETY CONCERT AT KUCHING. Those many Kuching Europeans, who, with their guests, managed to recover sufficiently from their Saturday afternoon torpor to reach the Sarawak Club at 9.45 p.m. on June 26th are greatly indebted to the personnel of H.M.S. Herald for a really excellent entertainment. The one outstanding performance, in an other¬ wise uniformly good programme, was that of "Georges and Pierre,’’ the "World Renewed Dia- bolists,” which was well up to professional standard in its extremely witty foolery. It must be pleasant for Messrs. Hugh Rump and Kenneth Collins to know that if, and when, they lose their jobs in His Majesty’s navy, they are certain to find employ¬ ment in Shaftesbury Avenue. We must confess that we were bored by "The Herald’s Harmony Highhattcrs.” Jazz songs of American birth or inspiration can be borne with on the variety stage when they are intended to be a caricature, but, unfortunately, this very talented quartet gave far too good an imitation of the real tiling. However it is probably churlish to carp as, judging from the enthusiastic applause of the audience, this item seemed to be one of the most popular on the programme. Those of us who had perused recent newspaper reports concerning a naval court-martial were some¬ what surprised when we read that one of the attrac¬ tions of the entertainment was to be "Beautiful Girls." But beautiful they indeed were, although given at times to a rather unladylike habit of hitching up the skirt at the knees when sitting down, and to a phenomenal display of biceps. One wonders how Commander Hardy escapes the atten¬ tion of the authorities. Joseph Loyal, as the dancing girl who failed to entertain the Persian potentate in "Camel Bells,” and Charles Riby, in several characters in "A Few Scenes From Every Day Life,” were particularly good. Unfortunately, however, none of these damsels bad voices to match their figures and their faces, and so, when it was decided to include a real, serious, sentimental song, outside assistance was required. But no one will regret that it proved necessary to enlist the services of Mrs. Corbin. It is no disparagement of the remainder of the company to say that her appear¬ ance on the stage was all too brief. "Atmospherics" was a brilliant rendering of an old gambit—the "crossing” of voices through a wireless loud-speaker. Apparently when a tram conductor, a traveller, and a doctor, get mixed up "on the air,” extraordinary things are liable to happen. This item included more jokes satisfactorily far on the wrong side of the conventional border line than any other, which was no mean achieve¬ ment. The other items were too many and varied for individual mention, hut whether we were admir¬ ing Charles Lake's agility with a couple of swords, listening to a comatose quintet extolling the virtues of "exercise,” or being astounded by Roderick Tripp’s explanation, in "The Pig and Whistle,” that his dog was so thin because he never gave it anything to eat, we were enjoying ourselves im¬ mensely. The whole entertainment had obviously been thoroughly and painstakingly prepared and rehearsed, and our sincerest thanks are due to Commander Hardy and his officers and men for providing us with such an extremely pleasant evening. Asleep for A Week. SARAWAK RECORD? On May 1st it was reported in Binatang that Sa'at bin Taha, master of the sailing vessel Mas Melayu, had mysteriously disappeared, and bis ship left Binatang for the coast without him. An intensive search was made but no trace of him could be found, and it was generally agreed that he had tired of a seafaring life and had decided to retire into solitude on shore. Great was the astonishment of the people of Binatang, therefore, when, on May 7th. Sa’at was found asleep in a sago godown. After some minutes of strenuous effort the manager of the sago factory succeeded in awaking him, and found that he was only half-conscious. When he had been revived by copious draughts of milk and broth, he immediately demonstrated a creditable sense of duty by enquiring where his ship was. He was told that it had sailed a week ago, but he patiently explained to his dull- witted audience that this was impossible, as he had disembarked and visited the bazaar with one of the sailors on the previous evening. It is firmly believed in Binatang, that Sa'at bin Taha had been asleep for a week. Films of the Month. JUNE. The month began with an American propaganda film "Fury,” which was apparently intended to arouse a wave of anti-lynching indignation; but, when we had seen Spencer Tracy being bitter for sixty minutes on end, we felt, for the first time, that on occasions lynching may be thoroughly justified. The scene outside the gaol, when the hero's face peered out through the bars, surrounded by a frame of fire, and glared down at the infuriated crowd below, was brilliant from a technical point of view, but it was not sufficient compensation for the pathetic bathos of the remainder of the picture. We trust that the long, dreary, and ridiculous court scene, which occupied fully the last quarter of the film, was as much of an insult to the justice of America as it was to the intelligence of Kuching. Jungle Princess" was a refreshing reversion to the "Tarzan" type of film. These pictures are in a class by themselves as far as popularity locally is concerned, and, from a box-office point of view, it is probably only the lack of enterprise of producers that prevents them being shown more regularly. "Jungle Princess” had one night’s specially extended run and even then seating accommodation was considerably taxed. "Anthony Adverse” was a disappointment. Hervey Allen's novel was a poorly written and pretentions piece of work, but at least the author did possess a flair for story-telling, a breadth of canvas, and a powerful imagination, all of which contributed to the making of a remarkable, although certainly not a great book. The film had none of these qualities. A singularly futile love story, which played only a very small part in the original novel, was dragged out by the heels, fattened up, and made to form the subject matter of the film. Half-a-dozen protracted kisses were thrown in, a thin and cadaverous Napoleon was permitted to make a short appearance as the seducer of Anthony’s wife, and Anthony's adventures in America and Africa were cut down to a minimum. We do not suppose that Mr. Hervey Allen suffered materially by the adaption of his novel to the film, but the deliberate maiming by the powers of celluloid of an excellent story, on account of a perverted preoccupation with "romance,” should he legally actionable in the interests of the public if not of the author himself. Incidentally it would be interesting to know whether all the Italians and Scotchmen resident in Northern Italy in the eighteenth century spoke English with an American accent. It is probably inevitable that the financial side of the film industry should be monopolised by American capital; it will be tragical if the histrionic side is to be monopolised by American actors as well. A welcome contrast was afforded by "The Last of the Mohicans.” This picture based, like "Anthony Adverse.” on an "adventure” novel, gained everything that the other lacked simply because the adapters had the wit to base the film on the author’s story, instead of selecting those portions of it which they considered would appeal to the servants' hall mind. Randolph Scott as Hawkeye and Henry Wilcoxon as Major Duncan Heyward were outstandingly good, the latter giving an excellent interpretation of the stupidity and arrogance of a certain, and by no means extinct, type of ‘‘officer and gentleman." Tn the scenes of the battle for Fort William Henry we saw what a magnificent game war in the eighteenth century can be made to appear. Whether it really was so magnificent may be doubted, but at the same time we cannot help feeling that the contending sides thoroughly enjoyed any demonstration of mutual nobility. such as the public discussion between the two leaders on the crucial question whether the conquering French would see fit to allow the con¬ quered English "the honours of war.” And when Monroe died, with his enemy. Montcalm, paying his respects at the beside, and the latter’s escort saluting respectfully in the background, it was evident that all present were revelling in the glamour that surrounds the shopkeeper’s funeral. "The Last of the Mohicans” was preceded by a first-class Walt Disney Silly Symphony entitled "Elmer the Elephant.” The misery that may be inflicted on an unsophisticated elephant by the inconvenient length of his trunk, together with the peculiar ability to overcome an emergency that the same trunk confers on its proprietor, were convin¬ cingly demonstrated. It is a great pity that we cannot have a few more of these. First Division News. MAY. The Resident. First Division, reports that he visited Serian by P.W.D. lorry on the 30th, leaving Kuching at 8.20 a.m. and arriving at Serian at 11.30 a.m. The road was very rough but in fair condition and several very heavily loaded buses were passed on the way. It appears that every bus which travels along the road is overloaded, some of them being too heavy for the road in its present state. The condition of the road on the return journey on the following day was deplorable, owing to heavy rain the previous night and the passage of heavily- loaded buses on the sodden ground. Serian bazaar appears to be very prosperous. There are now fourteen new shops there and applications have been made for four more shops, but these must wait until the backs of the present shops have been filled in and the road regraded. In Kuching nine Tamils were charged with being members of an unlawful assembly, and were fined each and costs, and all were required to sign a bond to be of good behaviour. The majority of rubber gardens in Kuching have now been registered although a few more come in every day. On the coast a large number of persons including Chinese were found to have gardens without titles. All were ordered to apply for titles at once. On the night of May 13th a constable on duty in Siniawan bazaar was attacked by two Chinese, but was not seriously hurt. He claimed that he knew the men but there was not sufficient evidence to proceed against them. For the first time for many years Bau female prison was empty for nearly three weeks during May. It is possible that this indicates a fall in female crime but it is more likely that the present prosperity enables them to pay their fines and avoid prison. The death of Orang Kaya Runngi of Kampong Krokong, Gunong, is one of the very few recorded deaths from snake-bite in this country. There were three convictions of Dayaks in the Ulu Sadong and each accused was fined $50 with the alternative of three months' imprisonment. An appeal against the decision of the District Court, in which one, Bong Kui, tried to prove that Boon Yun Kui had enticed his wife away was heard by the Resident on the 31st, and the decision of the District Court was upheld. The issuing of stencils to all owners of rubber gardens in the Sadong District brought to light many holdings undemarcated, or without title, or not reported to the Census Officer in 1935. Many owners made application for demarcation at once but it was impossible to receive all owing to the crowds that came in together. In Lundu S.C. No. 414 Ali was sentenced to one month's imprisonment under section 223 of the Sarawak Penal Code for negligently suffering one, Konen bin Sahak, to escape from confinement. Forty-six crocodiles were caught during the month in the Lundu District, and rewards amounting to $28.11 were paid. The following table gives the individual output of gold from the various mines for April, 1037 Constabulary Sports. The annual Kuching Central—Depot Sports were held at the Budrudin Ground on the afternoon of Proclamation Day, Monday, May 24th. The weather was fine throughout and the track was in excellent condition, this being the first time the sports have taken place under such conditions. Times, heights, and distances were not of a very high standard but all the events were well contested and some exciting finishes were witnessed. There were nine entries for the rickshaw race, necessitating two preliminary heats, the track being too narrow to allow overtaking with nine running at the same time. Inspector Michael Juan brought off a surprise win in the putting the weight with a distance of 36' 2 1/2" beating the nearest Sikh competitor by 1' 3". S.C. Hajura Singh again ran remarkably well and was Victor Ludorum with 21 1/2 points against 7 1/2 points by his nearest rival for the honour. Kuching Central won the Champion¬ ship Cup with 67 1/2 points against the Depots' 28 1/2. The prizes were presented after the sports by Mrs. W. H. Kelley. A good crowd of spectators turned up for the Sports and the Constabulary Band played selections between events. Messrs. Birt and Sinclair officiated as judges and Mr. W. J. Chater was timekeeper. H.M.S. “Herald” v. Kuching. PLAYED AT PADUNGAN—27TH JUNE., 1937. Both teams took the field at 5 p.m. and right rom the kick-off the game was fast and full of excitement. For approximately the first quarter of in hour the Kuching team pressed hard and forced the ball into the net three times, but little did they realise that their opponents were not to be so easily lefeated, and that the "old Bull-Dog” was just about to get a grip on something. After the third goal had been netted there was a noticeable slackening off in the Kuching attack, something which seemed to suggest that victory was assured, and anyway was easy. For a time there was a half¬ hearted battle from goal to goal and then, shortly before half time, the Herald scored. Half lime score 3—1 in favour of Kuching. Right from the commencement of the second half it was clear that our visitors meant business. Apart from one or two loose break aways they never left the Kuching half. Their passing was accurate and clever and their following up something from which I sincerely hope local players in all classes of the game will have learnt a lesson. There was no element of luck about any of the goals scored. The ball was netted five times in this half, and well and truely netted. To conclude—Well done Herald We hope to have many more enjoyable games in the future. Result.—Herald 6, Kuching 3. Kuching : Reid ; Jacques, Buang; Cargill, Taha, Yahya; Bates, Seng Chiang, Oh Loo, Crocker, Sli. —Contributed Kuching Badminton Association. VISIT OF SINGAPORE PLAYERS. The following is taken from The Sunday Times of May 9th. Kuching Visit. The two local boys, Leow Kim Fatt and Yap Chin Tee, returned to Singapore last Wednesday looking fit and well. In an interview with them on arrival in Singapore, they spoke highly of Kuching’s hospitality and the enthusiasm shown by all Kuching enthusiasts over their visit, so much so that they were actually requested to stay longer than they could possibly manage. It appears that badminton was only seriously taken up in Kuching some two years ago and it is a healthy sign that in such a small place there are now parties affiliated to the Kuching Badminton Association. Most of the players there are very young and in the opinion of the local players should develop into formidable players with more experience. The European population in Kuching appears to take a keen interest in the game and the champion¬ ship tournaments held there usually find Europeans among the competitors. While in Kuching the local boys were the guests of Mr. Kitto, the vice-president of the Kuching Badminton Association, and they were entertained to dinner by the president of the Association. Dr. Wong Cheong Way. at his residence before their departure for Singapore. The results of games played in Kuching were as follows :— Leow Kim Fatt beat Yeo Cheng Chin 15—4, 15—4. Yap Chin Tee beat Chan Kheok Hian 15—8, 15—6. Kim Fatt and Chin Tee beat Cheng Chin and Keok Hin 21—7. Kim Fatt and Chin Tee beat Cheng Chin and Seng Swee 21—2 and 21—6. Kim Fatt and Chin Tee beat Ah Chew and Hun Chong 21—3 and 21—11. Leow Kim Fatt beat Johoari 15—2, 15—2. Chin Tee beat Abg. Bolhassan 15—1. 15—1. Leow Kim Fatt beat Chan Kheok Hian 15—0, 15—4. Chan Kheok Hian beat Yeo Cheng Chin 15—7, 13—13 (2—5) and 15—9. Leow Kim Fart beat Yap Chin Tee 15—7, 13—13 (3—5) (Chin Tee retired) : Miss Tan Sai Hua and Yap Chin Tee beat Miss Au Gek Bui and Leow Kim Fatt 21—14, 10—21 and 21—7; Leow Kim Fatt and Yap Chin Tee beat Mathew Hon and Morgan Chai 21—1. 21—7. Leow Kim Fatt beat Tan Seng Swee 15—2. 15—7. Yap Chin Tee beat Nyit Joon 15—2. 15—7. H. M. Calvert and Kim Fatt beat W. J. Chater and Chin Tee 16—21, 21—10 and 19 19 (5—2) Chan Kheok Hian beat Ang Ah Chai 15—2. 15—6. The following comments made by the local players are passed on for the benefit of the Kuching players : Service. This requires considerable improve¬ ment, especially in singles play, although the doubles service is quite good. Net Play. Very little net play was resorted to by the players, this is very impound. especially when an opponent is exceptionally good in overhead work. Jerks. Jerky shots were never adopted by any of the players. This is a useful stroke to deceive an opponent as to the direction of play. Backhand. The tendency of the players is to use the forehand side of the racquet to return a backhand stroke. As badminton is a very fast game, this is indeed a defect which must be remedied at once. Plan of Attack. The players do not seem to plan their line of attack. This is especially important when meeting a player of about the same standard. More Singles Play. It appears that the players play more doubles games than singles. They should practise more singles to improve their game rapidly. The above comments are given more with the idea of improving the standard of the game in Kuching than an effort to criticise unduly the various weak points shown by the Kuching players against the local boys. Kuching Badminton Association. At the Annual General Meeting of the Kuching Badminton Association held on 14th June. 1937, the following were elected office bearers for the year 1937/1938 :— Patron : His Highness the Rajah. President : Datu Amar. Vice-Presidents : Mr. H. M. Calvert, Mr. F. R K. Kitto, Mr. Chai Ah Jap and Mr. ChiAng Ah Yew. Hon. Secretary : Mr. Chia Bok Gee; Hon. Asst. Secretary : Mr. Lim Boo Chiang; Hon. Treasurer : Mr. Sim Seng Teck; Hon. Superintendent: Mr. Lee Swee Hock; Hon. Asst. Superintendent: Mr. Morgan Chai; Hon. Auditor: Mr. L. Gwee Ah Shin. Committee. -Messrs. Wee Hock Siew, Andrew Hon. Lim Teck Guan, Drahman bin Kassim, Abang Bolhassan and Abang Kushairi. Board of Referees.—Messrs. F. R. K. Kitto, W. J. Chater. T. Y. Tan, Yeh Sui Yen, Andrew Hou. Kuek Chin Bee. Chan Mah Kheok. Ang Ah Chai. Mathew Hon, Ong Seng Chiang. Yeo Ah Choo, Abang Wahab. Johari and Chin Nyit Joon. Entries for the Association's open tournaments for 1937 close on 15th July. Events will include singles and doubles (men), singles and doubles (ladies), and mixed doubles. All matches will be played at the Maderasah School Hall. Flayers have been regraded for the forthcoming tournaments; a third grade, "C”, having been added to the "A" and "B” grades of last year. All particulars may be obtained from the Hon. Secretary. Sarawak Club. 1937 TENNIS TOURNAMENT. The results to date are as follows :— MEN’S HANDICAP SINGLES. First Round.—Cargill scr. beat Baughan +15 odd games and +30 even games 6—1, 6—4. Kitto ser. beat. Digby +30 7—9, 6—2, 5—5 (unfinished), 5—7, 6—4. 6—2. Rothera +15 odd games, and + 30 even games beat Benson +15 6—3, 6—4. Second Round.—Kitto scr. beat Cargill scr. 6—2, 2—6, 6—4. Philp +15 odd games and +30 even games beat Rothera +15 odd games and +30 even games 7—9, 7—5— 7—5. Second Division News. MAY. The Resident, Second Division, visited Lubok Antu from the 19th to the 22nd to settle some outstanding cases. Two women and one man were sentenced to two years’ imprisonment each for killing a newly-born child. This used to be considered only a finable offence amongst Dayaks but now it appears to be prevalent. It is seldom that a case can be proved as the usual excuse is that the child died at birth, and an example was there¬ fore made in the present instance. Another Dayak was sentenced to six months’ imprisonment and to pay $60 pati nyawa for causing death by breach of the Order relating to the sotting of pig-traps. Another case, in which a prosecution was instituted for the same offence, but in which the victim was wounded only, resulted in the offender being fined $30 and ordered to pay hospital expenses of $30 and compensation amount¬ ing to $10. In Lubok Antu, Dabong, of Tarum Buai, reported a “scare" in his house. It was asserted that some person or persons had pushed sticks up through the floor. This kind of story, although it has only just started in this district, is so common now that little notice need be taken of it. In Simanggang Lias bin Yahya was sentenced to one year's imprisonment for theft of Dutch money and various other articles from a building. This is his third conviction for theft. Rubber Restriction Inspector Abang Sedik, an ex-Native Officer, was dismissed and sentenced to one month’s imprisonment at Sebuyow for illegally fining Dayaks for alleged breaches of the Rubber Restriction Orders, and embezzling the proceeds of these fines. In Engkilili Tuai Rumah Manchu, Bab, Ahit, and Malong, were returned their pledges, which were placed in the fort about four years ago owing to the report that they were feeding rebels. In Saratok an inquiry into the cause of Song Nguong’s death was heard on the 13th and the 25th There is little doubt that Nanga Malong Dayaks know far more about the Chinese hawker’s death than they pretend to, but, as there was nothing on which to frame a charge, the four Dayaks held on remand have been released. In this connection pledges have been taken from the Dayaks at, Nauga Malong. Several cases of influenza were reported in Saratok, and amongst the victims was Edward Jerah, the chief clerk, who was sent down to Kuching for hospital treatment. The Native Officer, Rohan, and the Court-Writer, Kabong, were also patients at the end of the month. A big increase in the number of boys attending the Government Malay School in Saratok has eventuated after the parents have been stirred up. It is hoped that Kabong, will respond in a similar way. There is a report from Kabong that jungkat fishing catches have not been good. A Chinese at Spaoh was found tapping, at 4 p.m., a garden belonging to a Paku Dayak. He was summoned and fined $15. About one thousand deeds, involving about two thousand titles, were made out in Betong district during the month. Over $1,700 was collected by the sale of revenue stamps. Third Division News. MAY. On Coronation Day members of the Island Club entertained all British subjects in Sibu to a curry tiffin at which the Resident proposed the health of His Majesty King George VI. Three Coroner’s inquests were held at Sibu during the month. Two were cases of Foochow women drowned in the main river through slipping off landing-stages while washing clothes, which is a common occurrence in this district. The third inquest was on the body of a Foochow tapper who was found hanging from a rubber tree at Leba'an by a length of galvanized iron wire. A verdict of “suicide while of unsound mind" was returned. The few trips made by the s.s. Sayres, which mode her final visit to Sibu on the 17th, seem to have doubled the immigration work. Applications for immigrant landing permits run into some hundreds a month. In Binatang a verdict of “suicide" was returned at an inquest held on a female Foochow, aged nineteen, who was found hanging from a rubber tree. A verdict of “death by misadventure" was returned at an inquest on a male Foochow, who died as a result of the injuries sustained when a pile of planks fell upon him at the Bee Ang sawmill. A curious fact was noticed by the District Officer, Lower Rejang, during his tour of the Julau aud Ulu Binatang. A number of young Dayak men were observed to have their lips heavily rouged with the local species of lipstick (bichu). Upon inquiry it was revealed that this somewhat effeminate practice was indulged in so that the youths might bo con¬ sidered to be in the habit of chewing betel-nut, a practice to which, in fact, they were not addicted. It would be interesting to know if this deception is practised in other parts of the State. Two Katibas Dayaks were fined one picul and half a picul respectively for tuba fishing. The sentences were lenient in view of the old age of the accused and the circumstances of the case. One case of besudi, or trial by ordeal of hot water, instituted in order to discover a thief in Kapit, resulted in all the participants being fined and also suffering from scalded hands. The deaths have occurred of T.R. Blikaw and T.R. Rioh. The former was a noted rebel of earlier days and was forbidden to return to the Gaat from his “exile” in the Balleh. The latter was mandal for Penghulu Atan and possessed great power in the Sut. His loyalty to Government as regards the rebels, however, was not above strong suspicion. Most of the houses deserted as angat in the Kapit district, on account of deaths during the epidemic, have been reoccupied under Government persuasion, aided by a little obat antu in the shape of Condy’s fluid. Mr. N. E. Hughes arrived at Kapit on the 27th en route for Long Nawang, Dutch East Indies, via Beluga. As Native Officer Abang Ahmat was proceeding to Belaga in connection with Rubber Restriction Mr. Hughes accompanied him in the outboard. Apart from three Dayaks taken on in Kapit, the District Officer understands that Mr. Hughes will endeavour to enlist Kayan labour from Rumah Penghulu Taman Usun Hang to take him over the border. The present high water makes it probable that he may have some difficulty in the Ulu Baloi. On the night of the 20th a terrific storm occurred at Song, and both the Song and the Katibas rose with amazing suddenness. Many landslides took place and several gardens on the banks of these rivers lost rubber trees. In two or three cases the newly-affixed identification plates were lost also. During the month numerous ‘‘batak'd” Dayaks, in Nanga Meluan district, returned up river, and it is expected that the remainder, of these people will arrive during June. They have all been ordered to settle on the banks of the main river, and to build houses of not less than ten doors at strategic points selected by Government. It is probable that these Dayaks will be required to deposit pledges which will be returnable when the permanent houses have been completed. This matter, however, is still under consideration. On the night of the 25th a Dayak youth was drowned just below Meluan. It appears that deceased, who had fever and a high temperature, spent the night with several other Dayaks on the gravel bed, and it is believed that he walked in his sleep and fell into the river. At a coroner's inquest a verdict of “death by misadventure” was returned. An extraordinary case occurred at Balingian. A Dayak, named Jueng, was summoned for non¬ payment of tax, and said that he was willing to pay, but that he dared not, as his father-in-law, Ampok, had told him that he, Ampok, would murder him if he did. The Petty Court sentenced Jueng to two weeks' imprisonment, but the sentence was not executed, both Jueng and Ampok being left at large. The sentence was quashed by wireless on revision, and Ampok was arrested as a suspected lunatic and sent to Kuching. The Mukah Show was held on May 23rd and 24th, and there were more and better exhibits in the produce sections than last year. Mr. Ong Kee Hui, of the Agricultural Department, came from Kuching and exhibited a large number of vegetables, oils extracted from locally grown products, and instructional articles, including a model wet padi sawa, which was explained to a large number of people by an agricultural assistant who had recently returned from training in wet padi cultivation at Krian, Parit Buntar, near Penang. There were also a large variety of pest control exhibits, including traps, poisons, and various examples of commercial anti-pest contrivances. Fourth Division News. MAY. The Senior District Officer. Miri, states that Wednesday, May 12th, being Cornation day was marked by various sports fixtures including a cricket match, an American tennis tournament, and a dance at the Gymkhana Club. Toasts and speeches were delivered at the Gymkhana Club and Miri Recreation Club, and free cinema shows were given to members of the constabulary, children of British subjects, and others. Owing to a quarrel between the local Imam and Khatib, reported last month, it was decided that in future the Imam himself should bacha nika and appoint the Khatib and Belal as principal witnesses. The usual fee of $2 paid by the contracting parties should be divided as usual, $1 reverting to the Imam and 50 cents each to the Khatib and Belal if they attended. If they do not attend the second dollar is to be divided between any other two main witnesses called by the marrying couple. A film, entitled The Raven, was banned in Miri, as being purely morbid and gruesome. Reports of deaths and epidemics continue to arrive in Marudi from all parts of the Baram district. The dresser will be travelling next month in the Baram, Akah, and Pata rivers and will be away for five or six weeks. On the 21st news was received of the death of Belulok Pang, Kenyah Long Watt, of Long Latoh in the Apoh river. He was believed to be over ninety years of age and from early in the century worked as a Government chief for over twenty years until he became too old. On the 4th one Lance-Corporal and three men arrived in Baram as an escort to cash brought up from Miri by Messrs. G. G. Daubeny and Mason Amery. During certain periods a patrol was on duty in the Foochow concession to prevent possible persuasive measures being taken by owners wishing to sell their holdings against those unwilling to sell. If the deal goes through and all the holdings are purchased it will be very necessary to patrol the area for some considerable time to prevent robbery, as a very large sum of money will be distributed amongst the inhabitants. The engineer of m.l. Mermaid, Akip bin Haji Rais, hurt both legs badly on the 22nd and was sent to Miri hospital. Part of his clothing caught in the fly-wheel, causing him to lose his balance and fall on the engine. The District Officer, Limbang, reports that Penghulu Belulok has complained that his anem- biak are refusing to join him in rebuilding his long-house. He has been informed that, if this does occur, his services as Penghulu will no longer be required. There has been a fair amount of influenza prevalent amongst the local natives in Lawas. This has sometimes turned out to he malaria. M.L. Rubberneck crashed into a submerged log between Awat-Awat and Sundar, and. though the return trip to Lawas was accomplished, slight repairs to the bows were necessary. These are now being executed by a Brunei Malay who appears to be doing the work very neatly. Mr. Banks, Curator Sarawak Museum, returned on the 16th from his trip in the ulu Trusan, where he had been looking for rhinoceroses, and left for Limbang on the 18th. He was unfortunate not to find the traces of any rhinoceros at all, since it had been reported to the Officer-in-Charge only a month before that one had recently been seen on the Trusan side of the British North Borneo boundary. The Murut Penghulu, Tai Langob, has since reported that this rhinoceros is believed to have been taken by marauding Dayaks from British North Borneo, hut no details can be ascertained. It is, of course, an impossible border to control and natives on both sides cross over at will. Mr. and Mrs. Clifford eventually left Lawas district on the 11th on transfer to Baram where Mr. Clifford is expecting to open up a new branch of the estate. Mr. Clifford has been manager of the Lawas Estate for over thirteen years. Mr. and Mrs. Clifford were very well known in the Fourth Division and their name is a word to conjure with in four territories. They have been replaced at Lawas by Mr. and Mrs. Thomson from Temburong.  