VOL. LXI.
No. 929.
The Sarawak Gazette
Price
KUCHING, Monday, February 2nd, 1931.
20 CENTS.
The Sarawak Gazette		 			
MONDAY. FEBRUARY 2nd. 1931.
Contents.

Birth.
Low. -At Miri on 31st December, 1930, to Mr. and Mrs. Low Ah Kow of Messrs. Sarawak Oilfields, Limited, Stores Department, a girl.

Death.
PERRETT. -On 8th January, at Kapit, Mr. W. G. Perrett, Chief Officer, s.s. Angby, Sarawak Steamship Co., Ltd.

1930.
Any review of the past year is bound to be coloured, to a certain extent by those ominous words “trade depression,” since it was during 1930 that the full effects of the general depression in trade were first felt. At the time of writing, the prices of all major agricultural products stand considerably lower than they did early in 1930, and for a country so largely dependent on agriculture as Sarawak, this is indeed a serious state of affairs. Rubber, our most important product, has slumped, and with it the prosperity of a large section of the community. Incidentally, as far as Malaya and the adjacent countries are concerned, there has of late years arisen an alarming tendency to regard the price of rubber as a kind of barometer of general prosperity, and to ignore other products which would not leave them at the mercy of the vagaries of the rubber market, whose fluctuations have always been notorious. In Sarawak, at any rate, we do not keep all our eggs in one basket, but at the same time far too large a proportion of the population rely entirely on rubber for their livelihood. If the present slump period has done nothing else, it has at least driven home the foolishness of such a policy. It has emphasized the need for a diversity of products as opposed to a blind dependence on one commodity to the exclusion of all else.

Owing to our preoccupation with rubber, we are apt to regard the present depression in trade as a purely local affair. This, of course, is not the case; it is world-wide, and is produced by economic conditions beyond the control of Governments. So wide are the ramifications of our modern industrial system that, to take only one instance. Japanese competition in the cotton trade simultaneously affects a number of mill operatives in Lancashire and the Melanau population of the Sarawak coast. It sounds a far cry from Manchester to the Rejang delta, but the production of sago, from which size is made, has always been the main occupation of the Melanaus; thus when cotton mills stand idle and the demand for size is reduced, these people have to look for some other means of livelihood.
This co-relation of industries, however, cuts both ways, and any real revival in trade in the West will automatically benefit the people of this country. The revival, when it comes, must therefore be general throughout the world.
This is the dark side of the picture. -trade depression. On the bright side, we have the fact that in spite of this depression the past year was one of steady progress.
Development in the administration of the State included the establishment of a new Government station at Engkilili, a place of growing importance owing to its position as one of the centres of the pepper trade; in June, 1930. an Assistant District Officer and a Field Officer from the Department of Agriculture were permanently posted to the station. Rejang has been transferred to the control of Sarikei, thus centralizing the administration of the Lower Rejang.
A new town of brick and concrete, built on thoroughly up-to-date lines, has been completed at Sibu, and the bazaars at Simanggang and Betong, which were destroyed by fire, have now been rebuilt. Public works everywhere proceeded steadily, having received an added impetus from the abundance of cheap labour available and the low price of materials, factors which have benefited all constructional work throughout the State. But most important of all. the slump has stimulated padi planting, notably in the Third Division, where during the whole of 1929 Chinese were actively encouraged to plant. Thus, for the first time in many years, we see large tracts of land under padi by Chinese: present reports indicate a bumper crop. It will therefore be seen that the slump, unpleasant though it is, has its uses: there is no teacher like adversity.
In spite of bad trade conditions and the resultant wide-spread hardship, the country has remained absolutely peaceful, and serious crime has been rare. At Sibu there were two demonstrations of unemployed Chinese, but these, although entirely peaceful in nature, were found to have been organized by a number of bazaar loafers and professional mischief-makers who were promptly rounded up and repatriated to China. As far as can be seen, recent events in China have had no repercussions in Sarawak, although it would be foolish, of course, to ignore the fact that the political situation in China cannot be without its influence on the Chinese community here.
Unemployment, though present, has not vet reached serious dimensions, and it is gratifying to note that the authorities have the situation well in hand. Schemes for coping with any increase of unemployment include a number of public works designed for the ultimate benefit of the unemployed themselves. As an instance of this, the present programme of road construction in the Third Division may be quoted. Here, the unemployed largely consist of smallholders whose gardens are not yet bearing. and they are employed on making roads which will eventually connect their holdings with main trade centres and so facilitate communications enormously.
The work of all Departments has greatly expanded and still continues to expand. The good effects of this policy are too obvious to require stressing.
On the whole, therefore, taking everything into consideration, we have much on which to congratulate ourselves and may look back on the past year with satisfaction.

Local and Personal.
January.
The new Astana Pengkalan has now been completed, and is an imposing structure. It is built of concrete and roofed with red tiles, and has an upper story which can be used as a point of vantage from which to view regattas or other activities on the river.

The arrival of H.M.S. Petersfield on January 3rd provided a welcome excuse for the prolongation of New Year festivities in Kuching. Celebrations included a dinner and dance at Astana, a dinner for the ship’s company, two football matches, and a dance at the Sarawak Club in honour of the officers.

Captain A. C. Benfield of s.s. Vyner Brooke has proceeded on leave to England, leaving Kuching on January 3rd. With him on board the Vyner Brooke travelled Mr. G. T. M. MacBryan. who has resigned his appointment in the Sarawak Civil Service, and Mr. P. H. Flood-Page, who goes home on seven months’ furlough.

Visitors to Kuching during the month included Mrs. Webster of Miri, who came down to spend New Year with her brother, Mr. B. A. Trechman, Mr. E. Tarring of Messrs. Perry and Co., and the Rev. J. M. Hoover, who passed through on his way to Singapore to attend the annual Methodist conference.

On January 5th Mr. F. A. Moore arrived by the Kuching to take up an appointment as a Cadet in the Sarawak Civil Service.

The Kuching also brought Mr. and Mrs. Osborne Sheppard. Mr. Sheppard, who comes to Sarawak to advise on Land Office Reorganisation, has recently retired from the post of Surveyor-General of Egypt, and was a member of the Egyptian Government Commission appointed in 1917 to formulate and establish the methods of Land Registration in that country.

The Straits Times of January 14th reports the death of Mr. L. G. Attenborough, A.R.S.M., M.I.M.M., who retired from Malaya two years ago. Mr. Attenborough will be well known to many of our oldest residents, since he came to this country in 1899 to join the Borneo Co., Ltd., and worked in Sarawak for about 8 years at Bidi, where he was in charge of the gold-mine for a considerable period.
After leaving Sarawak Mr. Attenborough went to Perak as Manager of the Borneo Company’s Bruseh Hydraulic mine, and was at one time President of the F.M.S. Chamber of Mines. He was looked upon as one of the leading men in the mining world and at various times read papers before the Institutes of Mining and Metallurgy.

The following note appeared in the Sarawak Gazette for August, 1881: -
Passengers per s.s. Rajah Brooke for Sarawak, 10th ultimo,-Rev Fathers C. Saleilles, A. Gossens and Ed. Dunn.
Both the Rev. Father Dunn and the Rev. Father Gossens have now completed 50 years’ service in Borneo. Monseigneur Dunn has, of course, been Prefect Apostolic of Sarawak for many years, and Father Gossens is now in British North Borneo.

We advise any of our readers who may be visiting Singapore to give the Sikh taxi drivers in that town as wide a berth as possible. They are usually entirely ignorant of the geography of Singapore, and in many cases are also unable to speak a word of either Malay or English. Those who are unacquainted with Hindustani and who do not happen to know their way about the city are therefore at a considerable disadvantage, will find them about as much use as the proverbial sick headache. They are also apt to be extremely insolent, and their cars seem to have a knack of suddenly breaking down completely, usually in the middle of a crowded throughfare, -this recently happened to the writer three times in two days.
How these men obtain licences to drive taxis is a mystery, -certainly in no other modern town in the world would licences be granted to them. One always imagined that the necessary qualifications for a taxi-driver were at least a rough knowledge first of the town in which he plies, and secondly of the language spoken in that town, but apparently in Singapore this is not the case.
Unfortunately, Sikh hired-car syces seem to be very much in the majority, and it is often impossible to call a car driven by a Malay. There are certain ranks, however, where one can rely on finding a Malay syce, and it usually saves a great deal of time and temper to take a rickshaw round to these instead of calling the first taxi available, which will almost inevitably be driven by a Sikh or other Indian.

We note from a Home paper that Bishop W. R. Mounsey, who was Bishop of Labuan and Sarawak from 1909 to 1916, has been commissioned by the Bishop of Truro as Assistant Bishop in the Diocese of Truro.

Another Home paper gleefully informs us that “At Singapore, special internment cages are crowded with bankrupt planters waiting to be shipped home free as distressed British Subjects.”
Well, well, well!
After reading this we have no doubt that feeding the caged planters now rivals the new Tanglin swimming pool as a Sunday morning diversion. We can imagine Singapore mothers giving their little ones a treat by taking them to this human zoo: “Look Duckie, here’s a beauty, he used to manage quite a large estate in Selangor. Don’t spill the gin, darling, give it him quite gently and he won’t bite you!”
It is this kind of bilge, all too frequent nowadays, that makes us wish we could personally give the newspapers responsible that extremely trenchant piece of cockney advice-“Come orf it!”

Sir Adam Ritchie and Mr. D. T. Lewis, director of the Borneo Company, Ltd., paid a visit to Sarawak this month, calling at Miri, Sibu and Kuching. They travelled down from Miri in H. H. M. Y. Maimuna, which His Highness the Rajah had placed at their disposal. 
Both gentlemen left for Singapore on February 19th.

Obituary.
We regret to announce the death of Mr. W. G. Perrett, late Chief Officer of s.s. Augby. Mr. Perrett died suddenly and was buried at Kapit on 8th January, after serving on the s.s. Augby from 13th August 1930. He originally joined this ship as Chief Officer on 23rd November 1928, but resigned on 25th July 1929, subsequently rejoining the s.s. Rajah of Sarawak as Chief Officer from which ship, he was transferred to the s.s. Augby.
Mr. Perrett was well known in the Rejang River, since almost all his service in the Sarawak Steamship Co. was spent in vessels trading to Sibu and up river ports. He was a familiar figure at the Island Club, Sibu, and his loss will be greatly felt by his many friends at Rejang Stations.
Born to a tradition of the sea-his father commanded one of the famous Australian wool clippers-and having himself been trained under sail, he represented a fine type of British Merchant Service Officer, being popular alike with his superiors and subordinates. He was at Calcutta shortly after the outbreak of war and obtained a commission in an Indian Regiment seeing service in Mesopotamia, where he was twice wounded. On the close of hostilities, he returned to the sea again continuing in his profession up to the time of his death.
Unfortunately, Mr. Perrett’s death is the third fatality in the European staff of the Sarawak Steamship Company which we have had to record within three months. 

Visit to Sarawak of His Excellency Admiral Sir Arthur Waistell, K.C.B., Naval Commander-in-Chief of the China Station, and Lady Waistell.
H.M.S. PETERSFIELD AT KUCHING.
At 4 p.m. on Saturday, 3rd January. H.M.S. Petersfield, tander to H.M.S. Kent, the flagship of the China Station, arrived at Kuching bringing His Excellency Admiral Sir Arthur Waistell, K.C.B., and Lady Waistell. The ship was met at Pending by Mr. N. E. Hudges and Captain Gibson, who piloted her to Kuching; as she entered the reach below the fort H. M. S. Petersfield fired a  Royal Salute of 21 guns, which was answered from the battery at Fort Margherita.
His Excellency and Lady Waistell were met on board by the Dayang Leonora and Mr. P. M. Adams, Acting Resident, First Division. His Excellency then landed at the Astana Pengkalan with his staff and inspected a Guard of Honour of Sarawak Rangers which was drawn up on the Astana lawn under the command of Captain R. E. Le Sueur.
In the absence of His Highness the Rajah, Her Highness the Ranee received His Excellency. With Her Highness were all European members of the Council Negri then in Kuching.
Champagne was handed round and Her Highness proposed the health of Admiral Sir Arthur and Lady Waistell.

UNOFFICIAL DINNER AT THE ASTANA.
In the evening Her Highness the Ranee gave a small dinner-party at the Astana to which were invited all officers of H. M. S. Petersfield and about twenty local residents. Cards and dancing were afterward provided for the entertainment of the guests.

FOOTBALL MATCH BETWEEN K.F.C. AND H.M.S. PETERSFIELD.

DINNER FOR THE SHIP’S COMPANY.
On the afternoon of Sunday, 4th December, the K F.C. played H.M.S. Petersfield’s team on the Club ground. In spite of the fact that owing to recent heavy rains the ground resembled a morass more than anything else, a spirited game resulted which ended in a draw, the score being 2-2.
The Petersfield’s goalkeeper played an outstanding game and was certainly responsible for saving his side. In the Kuching team Chater and Mackay were strong in attack and Kelley and Hockaday as full-backs deserve mention.
After the match both teams, together with as many members of H. M. S. Petersfield’s ship’s company as could be spared, adjourned to the Government Lay School in Kampong Jawa, where dinner was laid for over fifty persons. The walls of the school were hung with the flags of all nations and the tables were decorated with rows of miniature coloured lights and greenery, making a most effective ensemble. An excellent dinner was served sharp at 7.0 p.m.; after the coffee, Mr. H. C. P. Adams, who was responsible for all the arrangements and organization in connection with the dinner-no light task! -rose, and, after a short speech of welcome, proposed the health of His Highness the Rajah, which was drunk by all present. The company was then asked to drink the health of His Majesty the King, after which the piano struck up and a round of songs commenced; musical “turns” completed a very pleasant evening.

FOOTBALL MATCH WITH THE SARAWAK HANGERS.
DANCE AT THE CLUB.
On Monday the football team of H.M.S. Petersfield played the Sarawak Rangers, the game resulting in a win for the latter side by three goals to one. The match again took place on a soggy ground but produced some really sparkling play, and was notable for the spirit of good humour and sportsmanship evinced by both sides; it was a thoroughly enjoyable game to watch.
The Rangers were brilliant in attack and proved too strong for their opponents, though they missed several easy chances at the mouth of H. M. S. Petersfield’s goal. Especially good were Freddy Lim and Sergeant Ismail, the latter’s neat work being worthy of special praise.
In the evening a dance was held at the Sarawak Club in honour of H. M. S. Petersfield’s visit.
After H. M. S. Petersfield’s departure, the following telegrams were sent to the ship from Kuching: -
6th January, 1931.
Commander Baker,
H.M.S. Petersfield.
All best wishes to yourself the officers and ships company of H.M.S. Petersfield.
Chief Secretary and Civil Service Officers.
6th January, 1931.
Admiral Sir Arthur K. Waistell, K.C.B.,
H.M.S. Petersfield.
All best wishes to yourself and Lady Waistell for a pleasant voyage.
Chief Secretary and Civil Service Officers,
and the following replies received: -
7th January, 1931. 
Chief Secretary, Kuching.
To Chief Secretary and Civil Service Officers Kuching from Captain Officers and Ships Company H.M.S. Petersfield your message very much appreciated, we thank you all for the kindness and hospitality shown us.
7th January, 1931.
Chief Secretary,
Kuching.
To Chief Secretary and Civil Service Officers from Admiral Sir Arthur K. Waistell K.C.B. many thanks for your kind wishes we shall always look back on our stay at Kuching with the greatest pleasure.

VISIT OF THE YACHT “INTREPID” TO KUCHING.
MANILA TO NEW YORK.
On Monday the 19th of January we had the pleasure of welcoming Mr. Barcal an American from Manila and three fellow adventurers-Messrs. Foster, Barclay and Phillips-who are sailing from Manila to New York.
Mr. Hared is evidently a very keen sailor, and had his yacht made according to his own design by a Chinese in Manila. He conceived the idea of sailing back to New York in her some time ago. But for various reasons had to defer the voyage until now.
The yacht is very sturdily built upon orthodox lines and is cutter-rigged. The dimensions being roughly 46 feet length overall and about 12 feel beam, and has a 9 h.p. Petters marine engine, by way of auxiliary. Unfortunately for them their engine petered out, and that is one of the reasons why they put into Kuching for repairs, although they intended visiting Kuching in any case. The cause of their engine trouble was that they went too close in shore in the early hours of one morning off Tatau and got into a very bad sea way, with the result that the vessel shipped a good deal of water, which got into the engine and caused the bearings to seize. The engine was duly repaired and they set off again on their travels on Saturday the 24th of January for Singapore,w hich they hoped to reach in about four days. Thence they propose visiting Sumatra and Penang on their way to Colombo and the Red Sea; they hope to arrive in New York before August this year, doing the trip by comparatively easy stages.
We think that all nautical men will agree that Mr. Barcal has taken upon himself an adventure which will be fraught with many difficulties, for most of his crew-consisting of the gentlemen above mentioned-comparatively speaking hardly knew one end of a boat from another before they started and the only other assistance was supplied by two Philipinos.
We take our hats off to him, and wish them all bon voyage.

A New Hospital for Sibu.
CHINESE RESIDENT’s MUNIFICENT OFFER.
Mr. Lao King Howe, a prominent Chinese gentleman who has resided for many years at Engkilo, Sibu, has generously has generously offered to contribute half the cost of erecting and equipping a new hospital at Sibu. The hospital, which will be built on the most modern lines, will be named the “Lao King Howe Hospital” in remembrance of the donor whose munificence made its construction possible.
Mr. Lao King Howa made his offer owing to the fact that after many years spent in Sarawak he is now finally returning to China. The new hospital is estimated to cost $82,000, half of which large sum will be defrayed by Mr. Lao King Howe.
His Highness the Rajah has personally addressed a letter to Mr. Lao King Howe, thanking him for his most generous offer, and gratefully accepting it on behalf of his Government. The text of His Highness’ letter is given below:-
“To Mr. LAO KING HOWE, Engkilo, Sibu. 
SIR,
The Chief Secretary to my Government of the State of Sarawak has communicated to me your munificent offer to bear part of the cost of theerection of a new hospital at Sibu, to be named after you.
I wish in this letter to express my deep appreciation of this act of generosity on your part., and to assure you that I accept this gift on behalf of my Government with heart-felt gratitude.
This hospital will remain a lasting memorial to your liberality. It stands as a signal mark of your interest in the Chinese community of Sarawak, and represents a milestone on the path of progress in this country.
(Signed) C. V. BROOKE,
Rajah.”

Insured Boxes and Small Packets.
The Postmaster-General informs us that as from 1st February. 1931, there will be introduced here an Insured BOX Service and a Service of Small Packets.
The Insured Box Service, which is applicable only to places in Sarawak with which the Insured Letter Service is extended and to certain foreign countries which admit Insured Boxes, is designed to provide for the transmission in the letter mails of articles of gold and silver, precious stones, platinum, jewellery and other articles of a like nature which are prohibited from transmission in Insured Letter.
The postage to be prepaid is 8 cents per 2 ounces or part of 2 ounces with a minimum charge of 40 cents up to 10 ounces. The rates of insurance and maximum limits of insurance are the same as for Insured Letters.
Insured Boxes must not exceed 2 lbs. in weight and must not measure more than 12 inches in length, 8 inches in breadth and 4 inches in depth.
The “Small Packet” Service is designed to provide for the transmission of small articles of merchandise etc., at a reasonable rate of postage and with the speed of the letter post, and is applicable to all places within the State at which Post Offices are established and with foreign countries which have adopted this Service.
The postage to be prepaid on Small Packets is 6 cents per 2 ounces or part of 2 ounces with a minimum charge of 20 cents.
Small Packets may not exceed 2 lbs. in weight and must not measure more than 18 inches by 8 inches by 4 inches, or if in roll form 18 inches in length by 6 inches in diameter.
Small Packets may be registered but cannot be insured.
Dutiable articles may be enclosed in both Insured Boxes and Small Packets.
Pending the publication of revised Post Office Regulations further particulars of the above Services may be obtained at any Post Office at which they are in operation.

Mr. Carveth Wells at it Again.
LIONS AND STRAWBERRIES IN MALAYAN JUNGLES.
“Almost unbelievable in its strangeness” was the description given by the “Lady Correspondent” of the Belfast News-Letter to an account of life in the Malayan jungle which Mr. Carveth Wells delivered to the Alpha Club of Belfast, and we are inclined to agree with her. Mr. Wells, we learn, was “one of four engineers sent by the British Government to make investigations in the Malay Peninsula.” Evidently news of this mysterious land had filtered through to London, and it was thought just as well to send out a few engineers to make inquiries. Remarkable indeed were Mr. Wells’ experiences, and yet “he suggests vitality and perfect fitness. It is difficult to imagine how he ever regained his health after enduring some of the conditions he described.” At times, the correspondent tells us, his diet consisted of lions and strawberries. At others his three meals a day were of chicken. These menus never changed for several years. Among the things he saw were: “Fish that never dream of swimming but climb trees, lizards which shed their tails and immediately replace them with new ones, and birds which feed their wives on strychnine."

MATRIMONY NOT ENCOURAGED.
Other extracts from this engaging narrative are worth quoting “The lecturer drew a vivid picture of a Malay village. It was easily recognisable because it was always built on piles and usually had water beneath it. There was a great deal of rain, and when nine inches fell in three hours it was only regarded as a shower. The marriageable girls were kept locked up, and if a young man ventured to pay them any attention he was chased with a knife by the father.” Then again: “Mr. Wells described his home in the jungle. His camp consisted of two little houses, and the roof was infested with lizards, rats, mice and other undesirable companions. It was necessary to put up a tent to keep them at bay. Night in the camp was a very alarming experience.” Mr. Wells was careful to point out that there was a person in the audience who could corroborate, what he said, but the correspondent who sends us the extract from the Belfast paper disclaims all responsibility. He thinks the reference to feeding on lion and strawberriesis worth inquiry. Altogether it was a thoroughly entertaining lecture. A number of women members of the club acted as models and displayed Malay costumes to advantage. And then tea was served. After the description they had heard of the Malay jungle where conditions are “so very different from almost any place, else” no doubt the members of the audience, felt in need of it. - (Straits Times, Dec 29).
Our readers may remember that Mr. Carveth Wells is a gentleman who makes a practice (and probably a very good living) of lecturing in the British Isles and America on life in the jungles of Malay. -yes, this is how he spells it. Here is a chance for some enterprising Sarawakian when home on leave to put Mr. Wells wise to some aspects of life in Borneo and draw a commission on the results: after all, as the American gentle man remarked when pocketing the wad of an acquaintance, there’s a sucker born every minute! If Malayan jungles produce menus of lion and strawberries and birds that eat strychnine, poor old Sarawak can at least rise to buried cities and similar phenomena; it only needs an inventive brain. But just one thing. -if any of our readers feel inclined to set upon their own as “lecturers.” we strongly advise them to make no mention of scenes they may have witnessed in the Island Club. Strange though it may appear, there is a limit to human credulity! - (Ed.).

The Malay Doctor.
Matter to interest medical practitioners as well as horticulturists is contained in the current issue of the Gardens’ Bulletin of the Straits Settlements. It is entitled “The Medical Book of Malayan Medicine,” and is described as having been translated by Inche Ismail Munshi, probably in Penang about 1886. The manuscript was in the possession of the Pharmaceutical Society of Great Britain, by whose permission it is now issued, with the addition of medical notes by Dr. J. D. Gimlette and a determination of the drugs mentioned by Mr. I. H. Burkill. Who wrote the original treatize is not known, and there are only conjectures as to how Inche Ismail came to make his now famous translation. It is believed that he undertook it at the request of an officer employed in Malaya at that time, who added various comments of his own. The original compiler, whoever he may have been, accomplished a notable piece of work and was evidently fully possessed of that valuable adjunct of the doctor - a confidence in his own powers to cure. He gave 543 difference recipes, and was apparently still in good form when the manuscript came, to an end. In some cases he gave five or six different cures, the last one headed “should even the foregoing fail.” which should be sufficient to persuade the most recalcitrant patient that at last the remedy had been found A glance through the translation indicates that every possible ailment was dealt with, not forgetting “violent headache, accompanied by pains in the bones and loss of vigour” Evidently “that tired feeling” was as well known in Malaya 50 years ago.as it is to-day. -(Straits Times. Dec. 19)

An Old Milano Story.
From Capt. E. V. ANDREINI.
Two eggs were hatched at Mengkilo across river from Sibu and out of one came Abang Mahraja the first chief of those parts and out of the other a Sawah snake named Dayang Idong.
When the snake grew old it turned into a dragon so Abang Mahraja sent her away to Lubok Delok near Retus.
Abang Mahraja married a woman named Sadigan at Mengkilo. During this time Mengkilo ceased to be near the sea the land coming up where formerly was sea. Piso, son of Abang Mahraja, removed to Lapuyang with his people and married one of his own people named Liwan. Their daughter, Lujah, married a Kayan man named Lungan who was of the same tribe Kayan and Milanos all being one but the chief of that branch was called a Kayan chief because he lived at a place called Kayan in the ulu Rejang.
This pair had a son named Kam during whose time a man called Jelawing disappeared with a Yang woman and later escaped from the Yang country bringing back with him some padi seeds and planting the first padi in this country. Soon after this they were attacked by Klatnyong and Dank and the tribe were separated. Piso, Lujah and Kam removed to Matu with their people.
Tegagoh, Serikad and Pobang stayed at Stebuh and from there whilst hunting they came across the Tian to where they removed as they found sago there. This was the first sago.
One of these people was supposed to have dreamt that the sago palm was edible.
E.V.A.

Book Prices in Singapore.
Some months ago the Straits Times, in a series of articles, brought up the subject of book prices in Malaya, emphasizing the fact that a book costs the purchaser in Singapore just about double, the London price, and asking for some explanation of this phenomenon. A few interested parties trotted out the old arguments of freight, passages for European employees, etc., but no convincing explanation of the problem has yet appeared, probably for the very good reason that none exists.
Not long ago the writer obtained a three-and- six penny novel from a Singapore firm, for which he was charged the sum of $3.20, this being rather more than double the retail price of the book in England. Had he sent home for the book, the total cost, including sixpence postage, would have worked out at about $1.72. This leaves a balance of $1.48 to be accounted for, and one is rather inclined to wonder where this goes, -presumably, into the pocket of the local firm.
Other such examples may be quoted indefinitely. For instance, a seven and-six-penny volume sells for $4.50 in Singapore, or about ten and sixpence; Punch (6d. in England) will cost the purchaser 50 cents (1/2d.) at any Singapore book-stall; periodicals such as the Sphere and the Illustrated London News (1/-) cost 70 cents, and so on. It is all a little puzzling, and more than a little annoying; after all it can hardly be argued that passages home and leave pay for Europeans raise the cost of books to their present ridiculous level in the case of Asiatic shops of which there are many in Singapore. yet the prices in these shops are usually quite as high as in the European stores. For want of any other explanation, the conclusion which the average man comes to is that the book shops are shamelessly profiteering.
The remedy, of course, is easy, -order your books direct from England. At the same time, it takes two months to get a book out from home and only two weeks to get it from Singapore and it is a trifle galling to think that if one wants a new novel quickly one has to pay through the nose to get it.
In conclusion. if any of our readers have a little spare capital available for investment, we recommend them to eschew rubber or tin companies and to finance a book stall or buy a partnership in a Singapore book-shop: it looks like easy money.

East by P. & O.
A BILL OF FARE OF 1862.
Travellers by the magnificent fleet of the P. and O. Co. would find some interesting topics for smoke-room and lounge conversation in the speech delivered by Lord Inchcape, as chairman, at the recent annual meeting of the company’s shareholders. For instance, he mentioned that he had received a letter from a lady enclosing a P. and O. dinner bill of fare of the steamer Simla in 1862, which she had found among her mother’s papers- It was as follows: -
P. & O. S.S. SIMLA
BILL OF FARE
15th day of January, 1862
Mutton Broth
Roast Turkeys
Roast Sucking Pigs 
Roast Fore Qrs Mutton
Roast Geese
Roast Ducks
Roast Fowls
Roast Beef
Roast Haunch Mutton
Corned Beef
Boiled Legs Mutton
Boiled Fowls 
Fowl and Ham Pies 
Kidney Pudding 
Sheep’s Head. Braised 
Pig s Feet Stewed
Chicken Saute 
Curry and Rice.
SECOND COURSE
Fruit Tarts.
Black Cap Pudding.
Sandwich Pastry
Baked Custards
Apple Turnovers
Jam Tartlets
Sponge Cakes.
Brighton Rocks
Pancakes
Rice Puddings
Lord Inchcape thought the digestion of the company’s passengers 70 years ago must have been stronger than it is to-day. The feast is certainly appalling. As showing how things change and go on changing. Lord Inchcape mentioned that he went to India in May, 1874, in a P. and O. steamer from Suez, having crossed Egypt by land. She was 2,441 tons gross register, had a flush deck and close bulwarks; all her cabins were below, oil lamps, no electric light, no fans. He was in a first-class cabin with seven others, and they had two wash-basins! There was no music room, no writing room or lounge, no smoking room. A number of the cabins were off the dining saloon; the cabins shared an oil lamp with the saloon, and the carpenter came round at 10 o’clock and turned the lights out. A candle for a cabin was only provided on the doctor’s order. And this magnificently appointed liner raced along at 10 knots, and going down the Red Sea in the month of May, he added was no joke. – (China Express & Telegraph).
A cynic who has had to travel even quite recently in one of the P. and O. Company’s present “magnificent” fleet of vessels, and who has had the misfortune to be accommodated on D deck, might remark that things have not altered so very much in the last fifty years, as far as this Olympian company is concerned Plus ca change, plus ca reste a memre chose, he might murmur reflecting that the passage through the Red Sea in this year of grace 1913 can, under certain circumstances, be quite as little of a joke as it was in 1874.

Kuching to Bintulu via Kapit, Belaga and Tubau.
Anyone contemplating a spell of local leave might do a great deal worse than make this trip. It takes one through stretches of virgin country of particular beauty and affords almost every variety of travel from the journey down the coast in the Auby-if one is lucky- to an open prahu- The rivers range from the noble Rejang to the Unan, a small stream with hardle enough water to float the smallest boat, and the country from the plains of Sibu to the scrub-covered hills of Kapit and mountains clad with virgin jungle. This route from Bintulu to Belaga incidentally, was the one used by the Brunei Malay traders in the days when the unsettled state of the Rejang Dyaks made the normal method of approach rather too risky to be pleasant.
Kapit. for those who do not know it consist of a large fort and a bazaar inhabited by Chinese and Malay traders. The latter are almost all Bruneis and the queer sing-song intonation of their speech is a great contrast to the normal Sarawak dialect. On the river bank in front of the fort a gun is mounted on a circular platform which is connected with the fort itself by a narrow causeway. Until comparatively recent years it was customary for a sentry to walk up and down this causeway and hail all boats going down river, he had orders to fire on any suspicious- looking boat not responding to the hail.
Kapit. grounds are beautifully laid out and are among the prettiest in the State, much resembling-if one makes allowances for palm trees – a park at home. Behind the fort there is a lake surrounded by a series of small hills, round which wind well-kept paths, and on top of which are seats where one may rest and admire the view.
Altogether Kapit is a charming station, and in spite of its wireless masts and the fact that it is now in direct steamship communication with Singapore, there is still a certain romance attached to the place. The gun platform, the causeway and the drawbridge to the officers’ quarters are all vivid reminders of the piping times of head hunting and inter-tribal raids, - times not so distant as some people imagine. It should be borne in mind that the last big peace making took place at Kapit in 1924. and the last expedition in 1918.
At daylight on Armistice day, we left Kapit in a prahu propelled by an outboard motor, and by midday we reached the foot of the famous Pelagus rapids. We had been previously held up for four days by high water, and even now there was a considerable “fresh” coming down, so much so that such Dyak boats as we passed were going up-stream by dragging themselves along by the branches of trees on the banks; paddling was more or less useless.
One’s first sight of the Pelagus rapids is unforgettable. The river widens to a basin bounded by steep hills and studded with rocky islets, between which the water swirls in a coffee-coloured flood, breaking here and there into streaks of yellow foam. Smooth, fast-running stretches alternate with patches of tumbling, raging waves; and the air is filled with the boom of rushing water.
We had agreed to meet some Dyaks here who were to take our boats up the rapids, but by some miscalculation they had not arrived, and we heard that there was no chance of their turning up for some hours. There was therefore nothing for it but to build a langkau of kajangs on the side of one of the hills and wait lor the next morning. Of course, it rained; and what with the rain and sandflies and leaky kajangs the night was made about as uncomfortable as possible.
Daylight saw us at the first rapid. Ascending rapids is a novel experience, and one which certainly has its lull share of thrills. It must be remembered that our ascent was made at a time when the river was a good deal higher than usual, and the sight of heavy logs pounding down-stream among the rocks at a rate of knots, turning and twisting like mere twigs, is apt to make one reflect just a little uneasily as to what would happen should anything go wrong. In order to go up the smaller rapids the prahu is edged as close as possible to the bank, and the Dyak crew leap breast deep into the water holding a length of rattan, which is fastened to the bows. Then the fun starts. Everybody shouts at once, the Dyaks leap like, goats onto the rocks. waving their arms balancing precariously on narrow ledges, and with a pandemonium of yells and splashes the boat is hauled through the broken water into the comparative quiet beyond. Then the crew come sliding and scrambling down the rocks and the boat is paddled or dragged bodily to the next stretch, where the process is repeated. It is a cheery business accompanied by much shouting and laughter, but on the other hand there is always the thought of what might happen should the rattan break. . .once down in that cauldron of seething water one would have about as much chance of survival as the proverbial snowball in hell. But the Dyaks know their business, and accidents are rare.
When one gets to the more formidable rapids all baggage, has to be taken out of the boat, carried over the rocks and dumped on the bank. The empty boat is then hauled along as before, to the same accompaniment of noise and acrobatics. As soon as still water is reached the barang is reloaded and off you go again.
Midday saw us safely above the rapids, and by evening we reached Pengliulu Ansi’s house, where we stayed the night, -the Penghulu himself had travelled up with us, and our crew was composed of Dyaks from his house. Once the rapids are passed. the nature of the country changes with surprising suddenness; hills, rocks and broken water give place to gently undulating land bordering a placid river. Indeed as far as appearances go, one might almost be in the Lower Rejang. One travels for hours through country ideal for agriculture, and almost uninhabited. Indeed, on the following day the only human dwelling we saw was one ramshackle Punan house,-were it not for the fatal bar of the rapids this area would simply shout for development.
The next night we spent at a Kayan house, and it is here, a full day’s journey by outboard from Penghulu Ansi’s house, that the aspect of the country changes again to normal up-river scenery. Here the rapids start again, and at one place there is a formidable whirlpool where we very neatly capsized owing to the boatman trying to be too clever and use his outboard motor; it struck a batang in the very worst part, and for a few breath taking moments we were whirled down broadside on, -no paddles could do anything against such a current. By a miracle of luck and judgment the Dyaks managed to get the boat under control just in time and guide her past the rocks into a backwater. Bur it was a near thing, and we had a few nasty moments Thereafter we reverted to the normal method of the rattan rope. Belaga was reached at eleven o’clock the next morning
At Belaga the Rejang divides into two branches, the Batang Baloi and Batang Belaga. The station itself is placed at the actual junction, the fort a large and well-built structure-commanding all three rivers. Our barang was taken ashore by a party of Kayans, one gentleman, we noticed, being adorned with an earring about four inches long carved from the crown or a solid- casqued hornbill!
Just below Belaga there is a big Kayan house of fifty-seven doors. To one used only to Dyak long houses, these Kayan dwellings are a revelation by comparison with which the Dyak structures seem flimsy to a degree. In this house there were at least two billian posts which it was impossible to encircle with one’s arms, and the floor consisted of planks of solid billian three inches thick and in some cases twenty-five or thirty feet long! The Kayans build no Tanju or Outside verandah, but the interiors of their houses are roomy, and there is a complete absence of the multitude of posts which complicate the run of Dyak houses,-one gets a clear view from end to end. the roof being supported on enormous rafters, usually adorned with carved ends. The individual rooms have walls of thick, well-finished planks, and the doors are often beautifully carved and painted; in this connection it is interesting to note that these Kayans call in upriver Kenyahs to do their decorating for them. At this house there are several good specimens of Keliling, the carved and painted repository of the remains of a former chief.
Kayan men almost invariably wear tiger-cats’ teeth in the upper part of their ears and heavy brass ornaments in the lobes. The astounding ear rings worn by their womenfolk are famous; some of these women must have three to four pounds of solid brass hanging from each ear, the lobes of which droop down past the shoulders! They also tattoo their arms from the elbow to the knuckles, thereby giving one the impression at first sight that they are wearing long black mittens. Kayans are pleasant folk, and make charming hosts.
Altogether we spent four nights at Belaga. The days were employed, as far as the writer was concerned, in excursions up and down river to various houses and in chasing the elusive-very elusive-punai and pergam with which the place is said to abound. Penghulu Oyong Abun, a hale veteran with forty years’ Government service to his credit, lives a short distance up the Baloi and owing to his kindness we were able one night to witness a Kayan main in the fort. Kayans dance to the music of two or three stringed instruments which produce a pleasing rhythm, but one misses the gay thudding lit of the Dyak orchestra of Kromong and gendang. Also, we were not particularly impressed by the actual dancing, which seemed inferior to a good exhibition of Dyak ajat; but no doubt the performers were not representative of the best dancing available. At this main, too, we had our first experience of the Kayan drinking chorus, which is too well known to need description. It is really musical, though, and can be most impressive. especially if the arrack has been circulating fairly freely!
The best dancers were the two sons of Penghulu Oyong Abun, resplendent in war coats and head dresses which Abun had recently purchased at Long Nawang in Dutch Borneo. Awang Salleh, a Brunei Malay and the doven of Belaga traders, with 27 years’ experience of the district, informed us that Sarawak Kenyahs and Kayans no longer make their own accoutrement but rely on being able to buy them from Dutch territory. This seems a pity, and it is to be hoped that the art of fashioning these trappings does not entirely die out on our side of the border.
Having decided to return to Kuching by way of Bintulu, the writer asked advice from the local authorities, who were unanimous in stating that the recent heavy rains had made the usual route over Bukit Imparong Jayong unpassable, and that the jerata bawah would have to be taken. This meant travelling up the Batang Beluga and then walking overland via Sungei Unan to the Ulu Sungei Tubau whence one could get to Tuban and Bintulu. The journey took altogether four days and was not uaduls, strenuous consisting as it did of spells of paddling or poling in boats alternating with short spells of walking-the longest stretch of the latter lasted only four hours and lay between the Belaga river and Long Unan where the Unan joins Sungei Tubau. For two days, we travelled up the Belaga and here it was the same story.
The rapids in this river are quite the worst to be encountered during the whole journey, -indeed the Kayans say that they are impassable for boats at any season. In places the river falls twenty feet in a few yards and the resultant cascade-thundering through a defile between huge rocks-has to be seen to be believed! There are reaches too, where for more than a quarter of a mile there is not one inch of still water to be seen. At such spots one lands and walks for an hour or two. if such a means of progress can really be called walking: actually, it means a prolonged scramble over rocks and tree roots both as slippery as ice on the slope of a steep hill, with the rapids roaring a hundred feet below.
Long Unan is a delightful spot and affords excellent bathing, since one is on the gravel bed and the water is cool and clear. At the same time, the Kayans are emphatic in declaring that there are crocodiles in all the pools though this is hardly credible. On the last night of the trip, I was bathing in a pool beside our stopping place, and one of the Kayans said to me. with a cheerful grin – “Don't go too far down stream. Tuan, since there is a big crocodile just about there (pointing to a spot about twenty yards away). I’m not sure about the lobok up stream, but I expect there is one there too!” The chances are that he was pulling my leg, but that particular bathe terminated very suddenly!
We spent the first night in a Kenyah house and the remaining two in the jungle, erecting temporary shelters with some samu, a sort of light kajang-which we borrowed from our Kenyah hosts. Mercifully it did not rain on either night; mercifully, since the veriest shower would have penetrated the frail samit- but oh, the sandflies! These pests were everywhere, and did their very best to make life, unbearable. For the benefit of others who may not yet have come across them I will describe the only sleeping costume possible in the jungle. Soak a pair of thick socks in kerosene oil; wring them out, put them on, tuck in the ends of a pair of khaki slacks and secure the joint with elastic garters. Put on a shirt with, if possible, long sleeves, and then liberally smear your face, neck, wrists, hands-in fact any exposed portion of your skin with kerosene oil. Uncomfortable? -Possibly. But better than sandflies. You can at any rate sleep, and with this get-up a mosquito net is unnecessary Also, light a series of small fires round the langkau and don't use a lamp unless you have to.
But of course, there are other insects. Ants like the poor, are always with us, and whenever one halts on the krangan one is surrounded by swarms of wild bees These bees are curious insects; harmless unless you tread on them accidentally or succeed in otherwise annoying them, they swarm about every single articles of one’s baggage, and their taste seems as odd as it is catholic. One can understands them getting a bit of a kick out of the lees of one’s early morning coffee, but whatever could they see in a bag of coarse salt? Yet we had one such bag with us and whenever, we stopped it was lit rally covered with the creatures. Perhaps, though they were only working up a thirst for a good swig of nectar; salt may be for them the equivalent of our anchovies and olives.
From Long Unan about ten hours poling and paddling down the Tubau brings you. if the water is sufficiently high, to Tubau itself, a small station at the junction of the Tubau and Bintulu rivers. By a strange coincidence we arrived in the middle of one of the District Officer’s periodical visits, so the rest was easy. After five delightful days spent at Bintulu-that prince of coast stations-forty-eight hours in a small boat brought the writer to Kuching.

Our Lawless Language.
We’ll begin with a box, and the plural is boxes;
But the plural of ox should be oxen, not oxes. 
Then one fowl is a goose, but two are called geese.
Yet the plural of mouse should never be meese.

You may find a lone mouse or a whole nest of mice, 
But the plural of house is houses, not hice.
If the plural of man is always called men.
Why shouldn't the plural of pan be called pen?

If I speak of a foot, and you show me your feet, 
And I give you a boot-would a pair be called beet? 
If one is a tooth, and a whole set are teeth, 
Why should not the plural of booth be called beeth?

Then one may be that and three would be those.
Yet hat in the plural would never be hose;
And the plural of cat is cats, and not cose. 
We speak of a brother, and also of brethren,
But though we say mother, we never say methren.

Then the masculine pronouns are he, his and him, 
But imagine the feminine, she, shis and shim.
So English, I fancy, you all will agree, 
Is the funniest language you ever did see.

OLD SARAWAK.
From the Sarawak Gazette 60 Years Ago.
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE
No. 11.] TUESDAY, 14th FEB., 1871. [Price 5 Cts.
Some disquiet has been caused among the up river and Tatau people by parties of Dyaks arriving from the Upper Rejang and Kanowit all being unprovided with passes from Sibu or Kanowit Forts. As it is simply impossible under these circumstances for the Government of Bintulu to know who are friends or enemies, it would be very desirable that all parties coming to work produce in this district be provided with some document showing from what house they came, and also bearing their names. A list of the villages and the names of Tuaha on the Upper Rejang with those unfriendly or suspected marked accordingly would be useful.
In compliance with the request made by Government in the Gazette of the 1st December, 1870, the following is published for general information: -

LATEST TELEGRAMS.
London, 20th January, 1871. General Cbanzy lost 20,000 more prisoners at Lemans, but has been reinforced by 50,000 men. The King of Prussia has been proclaimed Emperor. The Germans occupied Alencon.
22nd January. The army of the North was defeated at Quentin. Germans have occupied Tours. Longuy has been burnt. Great but unsuccessful sortie has been made from Valerian. Chanzy and Bourbaki are retreating.
25th January. Jules Favre has arrived at Versailles, and proposed the capitulation of Paris if the garrison are allowed to leave with the honours of war. Bismarck declines.
Trochu is ill General Vinny commands Paris.
Garibaldi repulsed Germans at Dijon.
27th January. It is officially reported that Jules Favre returned to Paris, yesterday, and that he will return to Versailles to-day with official arrangement of the terms of capitulation No firing since midnight.

Sarawak Library.
His Highness the Rajah has kindly presented the following book:-
Kindly presented by Dr. Gilbert Brooke:-

First Division News.
December, 1930.
Extracts from the First Divisional Reports for December, 1930, by Mr. P. M. Adams, Acting Resident: -
Resident’s Court. -Two criminal and six civil cases came before the Court. A case of causing grievous hurl was dealt with and two Malays were sentenced to terms of imprisonment.
General. -I inspected Santubong Kampong and gave the Tua Kampong authority to control sanitary arrangements in his kampong and to forbid any more sheds being erected on house sites.
His Highness the Rajah, accompanied by Her Highness the Ranee and Dayangs, arrived on the 3rd.
One film was banned as being unsuitable for this country.
I handed over to Mr. Bruce on the 6th and proceeded to Singapore on short leave, returning on 22nd. All outstation native members of the Council Negri arrived for council week and were suitably entertained by the Secretariat for Native Affairs.
Sergeant Drummer Delphi Area of the Sarawak Rangers band was murdered on the night of the 18th and Bandsman Benito Sosa was arrested and charged with the crime.
The Offices were closed Christmas Day and Boxing Day and again on 29th, the latter being Council Day when several new members took the oath. On the same day the ceremony of trooping the colours was performed by the Sarawak Rangers, His Highness the Rajah being present.

DISTRICT OFFICE.
December, 1930.
The Acting District Officer, Mr. W. S. B. Buck, reports: -
Judicial. -The only case of importance during the month was a preliminary inquiry into a charge of murder against. Benito Sosa, Philippino, a True Bill being returned. Accused was committed for trial in the Resident’s Court.
Staff. -The District Court Interpreter, Mr. Tan Kui Sang, retired on the 31st instant after over 31 years of service with the Government. His place has been taken by Leong Ah Khoi of the Divisional Treasury. Owing to the fact that the police have now taken over the issue of passports it has been found possible to reduce the office staff by one clerk Kwan Ah Bee, Court Peon, was summarily dismissed on 19th instant and replaced by Jong Thian.
Coroner’s Inquests. -On the 18th instant a report was received from the Fort that Sergeant Drummer Delphi Area, Philippino had been murdered by another bandsman. An inquest was opened the following day and adjourned sine die.
Batu Kawa was visited on the 5th and 12th instant in company with the Acting Resident and Acting Commissioner of Police. The station was satisfactory on each occasion.
District Court. -Twenty-eight cases were heard, all were civil.
Magistrate’s Court. -One hundred and ten cases were heard, twelve of which were criminal and ninety-eight civil.
Police Court. -Twenty-one summary cases were brought before the Court.

LAND OFFICE.
December. 1930.
The Land Officer, Mr. T. M. Griffiths, reports: -
On the 2nd I left Kuching for Bukit Pam to prepare for temporarily taking over the work on the Simanggang Road Land Reserves in January and returned on the 5th.
On the 10th I visited the Lundu Road pepper lots at Sungei Rayu to discover how many of these lots had been taken up by pepper planters. It was found that there was also land suitable for peppers growing to the west of the Sungei Billian. Work is proceeding on the verification of the boundaries of the bazaar property and three blocks have now been completed. During the month four Apprentice Land Inspectors arrived in Kuching for training, two from Limbang and two from Betong. One clerk was engaged this month.

UPPER SARAWAK. BAU.
December. 1930.
The Acting Assistant District Officer, Mr. P. Murray-Scott, reports: - 
General. – Nothing of importance occurred during the month. The only visitors to the station were Mr. and Mrs. Keiley, who arrived on 13th December and left again on 18th December.
Courts. -No cases of importance came before either Court.
P.W.D. -Roads were in good condition in spite of very heavy rains towards the end of the month. A landslide occurred in the cutting at the Seniawan-Bau-Buso Road junction on 29th December, completely blocking it for three days. Seniawan Bridge was widened to permit of the road contractor’s lorry conveying material further along the road.
Bau Government School. -A new committee has been elected, who have engaged two new masters. The school is expected to reopen on 4th January, 1931.
Prisons. -Prisoners were employed on whitewashing all Government buildings, and the upkeep of roads within the station. A gang was also employed for three days on reopening the Seniawan Road after a landslide. Health was only fair.
Health. -The general health of the station was bad and several cases of malaria occurred. These were all amongst the police. Mosquitoes are very numerous and the local Health Department seem absolutely incapable of dealing with them.
Rainfall. -Heaviest recorded in 24 hours ‘85 inches. Total for the month 7’38 inches.
Bidi Gold Mine. -186.18 ounces of actual gold were obtained for the month of November.

LUNDU.
December, 1930.
I proceeded overland to Lundu on 8th December. The Dresser was sent round by sea. He is on the instructions of the Principal Medical Officer, to proceed to Lundu whenever the Acting Assistant District Officer does so. He was fully employed during the whole of my stay.
General. -The station was clean, and all Government buildings in good repair. Mr. Mace, Survey Department, was still stationed there.
Court. -There were no cases of importance, but a good number of civil claims were heard, I went to Simatan on the 17th, but there was only one case. The Court House at this latter station, and the Court Writer’s quarters, are in very bad condition.
Survey. -The following analysis was submitted by the Assistant Superintendent of Surveys: -
Survey costs 14 cents per chain. 90 cents per acre. I left Lundu on 20th December and was back in Bau on 22nd December.

SADONG.
December, 1930.
The Officer-in-Charge, Mr. J. J. Hill, reports: -
Court. -Court work has been very light during the month and only one case calls for mention. Chong Kong Shin was sentenced to 3 months for breach of trust section 406.
P. W. D. -The Government carpenter was employee on repairs to the Saging road bridges. The Government pipe-fitter was employed on the Saging water supply scheme altering stand-pipes, etc., and general upkeep of the pipe line. It was found impossible to surface the Gunong Ngili-Saging Road as the Colliery were unable to supply the shale necessary. It is hoped that this may be carried out early in the new year. A further contract was given to one Gundi to stud the lower part of the river bank with 12 feet long Kayu Bahru. This was carried out satisfactorily and payment was made. The Bharu has apparently all taken root and it is hoped that further erosion will now cease.
Contracts were given out for widening and raising of the Kampong Saging road and most of the work was nearing completion at the end of the month. Practically every Malay in the kampong turned out to work, and it is satisfactory to note that no request for work since these contracts were given out have been made to the Government. A contract was also made to make a new shed which will be used as a wood and pipe store, pipe-fitter workshop and band-cart shed. This work was nearing completion at the end of the month.
Medical. -At the Government Hospital one patient was admitted and was still in hospital at the end of the month. At the Dispensary 80 patients made 142 attendances. Thirty-five N.A.B. injections were given of which 15 were for primary yaws, 3 for tertiary yaws, 2 for crab yaws, 8 for secondary yaws, 6 for muli and one for gumma. The accounts show revenue $121,55 and expenditure including salaries and rations $108,60.
Agriculture. -Mr. G. St. F. Dare visited the station on the 13th instant. On Sunday the 14th, in company with Mr. Dare, I visited the Bugis padi planting farm. The Bugis have now finished planting and the padi is some nine inches high. The work appears very satisfactory and it would appear that a good crop can he anticipated. On our way back to the station the Government Controlled Coconut Garden was visited.
General. -The Offices were closed on the 25th and 26th, being Christmas Day and Boxing Day respectively.
Numerous Dyaks have come down during the month with requests that the new regulations with regard to jelutong should be cancelled and the old regulations put into force again.
On the 31st an accident occurred at Lubok Alit in which two Malay girls of 15 were drowned. The accident occurred when five girls, aged between fifteen and twenty-five years, were returning about 4 p.m. from their parents padi farms at Tanjong Tara in a prahu jalor; reaching midstream they were caught by a strong wind and the boat capsized. The matter was reported to Government at 8 p.m. and within a quarter of an hour the Dresser was in attendance. On his arrival it was found that one girl was dead. The other three were attended to and only one appeared to be in a critical condition. The body of the fifth has not been recovered up to date.
During the month 17 vessels entered and 16 cleared the port.

Sadong Collieries Report.
December, 1930.
Extracts from the Sadong Collieries Report for December, 1930, by Mr. J. W. Evans, Manager: -
The output, export, local consumption, conversion into coke, and coal stock figures for the month were as follows: -
The output obtained from the shallow workings during the month exceeded expectations.

Prize-Giving at St. Mary’s School.
On Friday, 19th December, the teachers and scholars of Mary’s School were honoured at their annual prize giving, by the presence of Her Highness the Ranee, who was accompanied by the Dayangs Leonora, Elizabeth and Valerie.
The Sarawak Union again kindly lent their building, as the hall of the present school is now far too small for the scholars and there is no place there they can be all assembled.
The Archdeacon, who was in the chair, asked for the school report to be read. The Principal said she had been away on leave and Miss Harkness had been in charge nearly all the year. There were 296 scholars on the registers, 101 of these being boarders. There had been a full staff of teachers who had done much hard work during the year, and she mentioned in particular the gain to the school in the services of Mrs. Proctor, a trained teacher of considerable experience. At the Cambridge Examinations, held for the first time, in Sarawak in 1929, the school had two passes: Miss Tan Ho Eng. a teacher, passed the Junior examination under the coaching of Mrs. Pitt-Ha dacre, and Leong Choo, a scholar, passed the Preliminary. This year six girls sat for the Preliminary and a teacher for the Senior. the latter being coached by Mrs. Champion. The Girl Guides and Rangers have met regularly under the direction of Miss Carlton. Levelling for the site, of a school boarding-house was neatly completed and it seemed very necessary that, in spite of great difficulties, the building should be begun in the near future The discomforts and inconveniences of the present building made it a continual struggle to keep clean and tidy, and the accommodation was insufficient for the numbers. The building was in a most dilapidated condition and could only be kept habitable by constant care and heavy expenses in repairs.
The Chairman then asked Her Highness to present the prizes.

Open Tennis Tournament.
The Committee of the Sarawak Club have sanctioned the holding of an Open Tennis Tournament on the Club Courts in April this year, run on the following lines.
The Tournament will be open to all Nationalities and will commence on Friday, 10th April.
Two events-Men’s Doubles and Men’s Singles.
Entrance Fees-Doubles Event $2.50 per head, Singles Event $3 per head.
Courts will be reserved for match play on the following days: -
A prize will be given to the Winners of each event to be paid for out of Entrance fees- a suitable percentage of which will be set aside for expenses (halls and soft drinks).
Competitors (with the exception of members of the Sarawak Club) will be exempted from the usual Court fees.
Only actual competitors will be admitted to the Courts.
Those desiring to participate in the Tournament are requested to notify the Honorary Secretary and Treasurer, C/o Borneo Company. Limited, by Tuesday, 31st March, the last day of entry. Entrance fees must be sent with applications.

The Sarawak Regatta.
We were fortunate with the weather for the Kuching regatta, -New Year’s Day dawned promisingly, and turned out bright and sunny.
From an early hour the river was gay with a host of craft of every description. Small sampans puddled about in mid-stream cheek by jowl with graceful prahu hung with curtains, behind which a gleam of coloured silks revealed the presence of Malay Indies; flouting fruit stalls wandered up and down, the proprietors crying their wares as they went; other boats crowded the banks, maneuvering in and out of the shipping. -it was a striking scene reminiscent almost of Venice, the bright-hued
jackets and sarongs of the watermen producing a delightfully kaleidoscopic effect. On both banks of the river numbers of kajang sheds were erected to accommodate spectators. The Maimuna, which was anchored on the far side of the river, served as a grand-stand, and Their Highnesses the Rajah and
Ranee, the Dayangs, and the Astana party, watched the proceedings from the upper storey of the new Astana Pengkalan.
The races were all well rowed and produced some good finishes. The regatta as a whole was a delightful spectacle and provided an enjoyable day’s racing, but in spite of this there seemed to be something wanting. To one used to outstation regattas, the absence of long boats manned by crews of seventy
or eighty peddlers took away a good deal of the attraction, since in our opinion no boat-racing anywhere can compare with these; crews wildly yelling, paddles flashing in the sunlight and flinging up a shower of spray, -who has not thrilled to see half-a-dozen of these boats leap into view round a bend of the river and come dashing down towards the winning posts! One missed the variety of Native races that one finds assembled at, say, Sibu, on the occasion of a regatta, -Melanaus from the coast, Sea Dyaks in their smartest chawats, their womenfolk decked not in all their finery, Kayans and Kenyahs from the remote up-river districts; one missed, too, the atmosphere of intimacy and informality which accompanies these outstation events.
This, of course is unavoidable in a place the size of Kuching, and it must be admitted that the Regatta was in every way an unqualified success. Our thanks are due to the Regatta Committee for their excellent organization and management.

New Race-Meeting in Kuching.
We understand from the Honorary Secretary to the Sarawak Turf Club that His Highness the Rajah has sanctioned an additional Race meeting in 1931 to be held on the 21st and 23rd of February.
The usual holiday in honour of Her Highness the Ranee’s birthday has accordingly been altered to take place on 23rd February.

SARAWAK TURF CLUB.
PROVISIONAL PROGRAMME FOR THE SPRING MEETING, 1931.

FIRST DAY, SATURDAY, 21ST FEBRUARY, 1931.
RACE NO. 1
APPRENTICES' STAKES.
Value $100. Second to receive $50. Third $25.
A handicap for any pony in Division II and III. Distance 4 furlongs. Entrance Fee $10. Open to Apprentice Jockeys only.
First prize to Jockey $20. Second $10. Third $5.

RACE NO. 2
THE TUAN MUDA'S CUP.
Value $150. A piece of plate of the value of $100 presented by His Highness the Tuan Muda with $50 added. Second to receive $75. Third $25.
A handicap for Division I ponies. Distance 6 furlongs. Entrance Fee $10.

RACE NO. 3
THE SATOK STAKES.
Value $150. Second to receive $75. Third $25.
A handicap for Division II ponies. Distance 5 furlongs. Entrance Fee $10.

RACE NO. 4
THE B.C.L. STAKES.
Value $150. $100 presented by The Borneo Company, Limited, with $50 added. Second to receive $75. Third $25.
A handicap for Division III ponies. Distance 6 furlongs. Entrance Fee $10.

RACE NO. 5
SIMPANG TIGA CUP.
Value $150. Cup valued $50 contributed by Mr. F. A. W. Page-Turner with $100 added. Second to receive $75. Third $25.
A handicap for Division I ponies. Distance 3 furlongs. Entrance Fee $10.

RACE NO. 6
THE MATANG STAKES.
Value $150. Second to receive $75. Third $25.
A handicap for Division II ponies. Distance 4 furlongs. Entrance Fee $10.

RACE No. 7
THE PENDING STAKES.
Value $150. Second to receive $75. Third $25.
A handicap for Division III ponies. Distance 3 furlongs. Entrance Fee $10.

RACE NO. 8
THE RANEE’S CUP.
Value $150. A piece of plate of the value of $100 presented by The Highness the Ranee with $50 added. Second to receive $75. Third $25.
A handicap for ponies of any Division. Distance 1 mile. Post Entries. $5 on first entry. $5 on acceptance.

SECOND DAY, MONDAY, 23RD FEBRUARY, 1931.
RACE NO. 1
THE SEKAMA STAKES.
Value $150. Second to receive $75. Third $25.
A handicap for Divisions II and III ponies. Distance 4 furlongs. Entrance Fee $10.

RACE NO. 2
THE SLUMP STAKES.
Value $150. Second to receive $75. Third $25.
A handicap for Division I ponies. Distance 5 furlongs. Entrance Fee $10.

RACE NO. 3
THE COUNTRY CUP.
A cup value $100 presented by The Turf Club with $50 added. Second to receive $75. Third $25.
A handicap for Division II ponies. Distance 6 furlongs. Entrance Fee $10.

RACE NO. 4
THE SARAWAK STAKES.
Value S150. Second to receive $75. Third $25.
A handicap for Division III ponies. Distance 5 furlongs. Entrance Fee $10.

RACE NO. 5
THE TURF CLUB STAKES.
Value $150, Second to receive $75. Third $25.
A handicap for Division I ponies. Distance 4 furlongs. Entrance Fee $10.

RACE NO. 6
THE STATE SPRINT.
Value $150. Second to receive $75. Third $25.
A handicap for Division II ponies, Distance 3 furlongs. Entrance Fee $10.

RACE NO. 7
THE TOWN STAKES.
Value $150. Second to receive $75. Third $25
A handicap for Division III ponies, Distance 4 furlongs. Entrance Fee $10.

RACE No. 8
THE RAJAH’S CUP.
Value $200. A piece of plate value $150 presented by His Highness the Rajah with $50 added. Second to receive $80. Third $35.
A handicap for ponies of any Division. Distance Race Course (about 1.1/3 Miles.) Post Entries. $5 on first entry. $5 on acceptance.

REGULATIONS.
Penalties. -Winners of any race at this Meeting after publication of weights shall carry a penalty of 7 lbs. for each race with a maximum of 11 stone 7 lbs.
Allowance. -Professional Jockeys who are Sarawak subjects and have never ridden more than two winners at any Meeting under Sarawak Turf Club Rules, may claim an allowance of 5 lbs.
Entries. -All nominations accompanied by Entrance Fees, description of ponies and declaration of colours to be made to the Honorary Secretary not later than noon 31st January, 1931.
Scratchings. -Owners scratching ponies before 5 p.m. on 20th February for first day. and 5 p.m. on 22nd February for 2nd day, will receive back half their entrance fees.
Handicaps for the 1st Day will be posted on the Notice Board at the Sarawak Club at noon on 7th February and for the 2nd day at noon on 22nd February.
Course will be open for training on 17th January, at 5.30 a.m.
Ponies must run on the 1st Day to be eligible for entry in Races for 2nd Day.
Owners are requested to see that their syces and jockeys obtain necessary badge for entrance to Paddock.
Totalizators and Cash Sweeps as usual.
Communications to be made to
F. A. W. PAGE-TURNER,
Honorary Secretary,
Sarawak Turf Club.

Turf Club Notes.
The Race-course opened at 5.30 a.m. on 17th January. The weather conditions were not at all pleasant, rained most of the night and a slight drizzle was falling at 6 a.m., which no doubt accounted for the small attendance. The following ponies were at exercise, Kismet, Azab, Pengarah, Nugget, Kim Mah, Happy Boy, Water Polo, Mudalian, Beaver and Workman.
Last year it will be noted that certain improvements were made to the stables, and billian attap roofing was fitted in place of the leaf attaps. A new Bandstand was also completed.
This year the improvements consists of brick and cement steps leading to the Grand-stand in four places, and a covered way from the Grand-stand to the Totalizator and tea-room.
Ghalib has been re-registered under the ownership of “Mary Kongsi” and is classified under Class III.
On the 19th of January it was decided by Members of the Committee that the prize money for the Spring Meeting be reduced by 20% if there are less than five entries.
The Provisional Programme for forthcoming Meeting and Statement of Accounts for past year will be found elsewhere in this issue.
Prizes. -No Second prize will be awarded if there are less than runners and no Third prize if there are less than 5.
Unlimited Sweep. -Those who have been good enough to dispose of Tickets are reminded that Sold and Unsold Counterfoils, together with full remittance, must reach the Hon. Secretary not later than 14th February.
Mr. F. A. W. Page-Turner has been good enough to take over the duties of Honorary Secretary from Mr. Fenwick. For the present the Books of Account will be kept by the Borneo Company, under the supervision of our late Honorary Secretary and Treasurer.
Members are respectfully asked to pay their subscriptions for 1931 as soon as possible.

Traffic Regulations.
SPRING RACE MEETING, 1931.
After the hour of 11 a.m. on 21st and 23rd February, 1931, all Motor Vehicles must proceed to the Race course via Padungan or Ban Hok Road only, and up to the hour of 7 p.m. on these days, must return by the Sekama Road only.
Exceptions:-
His Highness the Rajah's Cars.
The Chief Secretary
The Resident. First Division.
The Principal Medical Officer.
The Honorary Secretary—Sarawak Turf Club.
In cases of extreme urgency permission may be obtained on the course for other cars to return via Ban Hok Road.
After depositing passengers at the Grandstand, vehicles will line up on the extreme left- hand side of the Grandstand road, one behind the other and within three yards of each other facing away from the Grandstand.
Rickshaws and Bicycles may proceed to the Race course at any time, and by any road, and must park on the Bandstand plot. They will not be allowed to remain on any part of the road leading to the Grandstand.
All vehicles must move to their parking grounds without delay, as directed by the Police.
WARNING : -
The driver of any vehicle endeavouring to turn in Grandstand road, will be prosecuted for causing an obstruction.

Second Division News.
December, 1930.
Extracts from the Second Divisional Reports for December, 1930, by Mr. J. B. Archer, Resident: -
During the absence of Mr. Ditmas, Acting Assistant District Officer, I visited Engkilili on the 2nd, returning the same day. There were a few matters to attend to and I arranged for a contractor to start on the bazaar drains. The bazaar itself was in a particularly bad condition, probably owing to the absence of an European Officer. The addition to the police barracks was progressing well. The police force there has been increased by three men. Mr. Ditmas returned from sick leave on the 17th and returned to his station on the 18th.
Mr. Middlemas, Superintendent of Surveys, and Mr. McLaine, Auditor, arrived on the 3rd. The former came to make final arrangements with regard to the arrival of the survey party early in January next. It was agreed to rent two shops in the bazaar to serve as an office and as quarters for the office and field staff.
A temporary bungalow has been built on the river bank for Mr. Harnack. These arrangements will mean a large saving as regards money. Mr. Middlemas returned to Kuching on the 5th.
Mr. McLaine remained in Simanggang until the 18th, when he went to Engkilili, returning on the 22nd and finally leaving for Kuching on the 26th.
The first foundations of the new Government offices were laid at Simanggang on the 12th. These are due to be completed in July, 1931, and will eventually house the Resident’s Office, District Office, Court House, Native Officers’ Office, Treasury, Land Office, Post Office and Forest Office-Fort Alice will then become a jail, to which will be attached a Police Office, Prisons Office and Armoury.
The affairs of the Simanggang Sawmill Co. have been the cause of much bother to Government for some months and the works are now shut down.
On the 22nd Messrs. Daubeny, Morse, Ditmas, Goodall and McLaine arrived to spend Christmas. A regatta and land sports were held on Christmas Eve to which natives from all over the Division attended. A football competition occupied half the month, the final being played on Christmas Day.
A meeting of European and Native Officers and Penghulus was held in the Resident’s Office on the 23rd to discuss the padi question, and much valuable advice was received from practical padi planters.
I left for Kuching on Boxing Day with seven Native Members to attend the Council Negri and was still away at the end of the month.
With regard to public works the Astana and the Engkilili bungalow were completed, the Saratok bungalow nearly completed, the Simanggang Bazaar drains finished, an extension to the Simanggang School built, the new Engkilili barracks begun, Kampong Ulu bridges at Simanggang rebuilt and the new Government offices at Simanggang begun.
Many Dyaks were getting short of rice at the end of the month-and it is probable that times will be hard with them until the harvest. At the same time there are the same numbers of Dyaks applying for permission to buy guns. The engkabang in the Division is not expected to be much and the hopes of everyone are on the coming padi harvest.
A few unemployed Chinese were given work at Betong and Saratok, but none have applied either at Simanggang or at Engkilili.
Mr. D. C. Hudden, Acting Assistant District Officer of Simanggang, left for Kuching overland via the Sadong river on the 12th on local leave and was still away at the end of the month.
Penghulus Jaul and Nyalu were promoted Orang Kaya and Pengarah respectively and accompanied me to Kuching.

SIMANGGANG.
Extracts from the report of Mr. D. C. Hudden, Acting Assistant District Officer: -
Considerable trouble was caused by the involved state of affairs of Tan Teck Soon, whose coolies reported that they had no pay for months and were without means to obtain food.
A great deal of the Court’s time was taken up over the bankruptcy affairs of Chop “Joo Hong,” whose belongings are to be sold by auction next month.

ENGKILILI.
Extracts from the report of Mr. W. P. N. L. Ditmas, Acting Assistant District Officer: -
On Thursday the 18th I arrived back from sick leave in Kuching; I was accompanied from Simanggang by Mr. A. L. McLaine, who came to audit the books.
I moved into the new bungalow which was not quite completed; work was continued for about two days more.
Mr. McLaine checked the books, cash and opium and found all correct. On 20th two of Mr. McLaine’s audit clerks proceeded to Lubok Antu, where they checked the books and cash, returning on the following Monday.
Abang Madaut and Abang Abu-Talep were on their way to Kuching for the Council Negri. The offices in the Fort have been enlarged, the Fort quarters having been converted. Several walls have been taken out, the result being a great improvement as everything has been very cramped in the past.
The extra two doors which are being added to the police barracks are nearing completion.
Seventy Dyak doors in this district have not paid their tax yet for 1930. The Tuai Rumahs are being sent for and will be made to pay.

SARIBAS.
Extracts from the report of Mr. R. L. Daubeny, Acting District Officer: -
Jemat, Mail and Sandam (f.) sentenced to 3 months’ imprisonment for non-payment of fine; Tapa sentenced to 6 months’ imprisonment for theft, section 379 I.P.C; Ngindang and Rindan (f.) fined 1 picul and 20 catties respectively for incest; Bekut sentenced to 6 months’ for non-payment of fines amounting to $72 in all. There were various claims in the Civil Courts, including four land disputes.
The prison gang has been employed on the usual routine work and has also assisted the unemployment gang.
The contractor has completed the police barracks at Debak and forfeited $100 on his contract for not using the proper timber for some of the framework. This completes the programme for building under Special Expenditure laid down for this year for the district.
The unemployed gang has completed the road running diagonally in front of the police barracks up to the Fort and had started work on the kampong road at the end of the month.
 
KALAKA.
Extracts from the report of Mr. L. K. Morse, Acting Assistant District Officer: -
The Babang Dyaks opened a number of land cases during the month, all of which were dismissed as it was found that the Babang lands had been
declared common land by the Court some years ago, and further instigation forbidden.
His Highness the Rajah was pleased to promote Penghulu Nyalu to the rank of Pengarah of the Kalaka, the Penghulu also proceeded to Kuching with the Resident to receive his Commission from His Highness.
The Saratok Hospital was finished during the month. The total cost, including the purchase of the old factory, being $1,597.97. At the end of the month the Officer’s Bungalow was completed, with the exception of some of the paint work.
The Chinese coolies and prisoners were engaged in clearing round the hospital, and in remaking some of the roads around the station.
The Native Officer’s house at Kabong was nearly finished at the end of the month; the building appears to be very well built. I understand that the contractor has lost money on the building.
At Roban, the store, police latrines and bridge at the end of the Roban road were all completed early in the month.

LAND OFFICE.
Extracts from the report of Mr. B. Summers, Land Officer, Second Division: -
On the 9th of the month the Auditor, Mr. McLaine, checked up-to-date the quit rent books against the cash receipts, and found these to agree.
The garden assessment book was found impossible to check, owing to dates and receipts of payments not having been entered. In the future, alterations will be made to all these books, to rectify any recurrence of this.
During the month, one Malay and one Dyak were engaged as Apprentice Land Inspectors, and sent to Kuching to undergo training.
The number of inspections monthly still remains very small; many of these are gardens requiring inspection prior to mortgage or transfer, and in many cases they are far apart.
With an increase of staff an inspector can be allotted to a district to work through, thereby saving much time at present wasted in travelling.

POLICE AND PRISONS, SIMANGGANG.
Extracts from the report of Mr. J. C. H. Barcroft, Officer-in-Charge of Police and Prisons: -
Police. -One lance-corporal was promoted to corporal and 5 constables to lance-corporals.
The Assistant Sub-Inspector and a tailor went round the Division to measure all ranks for the new uniform. A stock of carbines and equipment has been received from Kuching and will be issued at the beginning of the new year.
Drill and general efficiency was quite satisfactory throughout the month.
Prisons. -During the month prisoners were employed on general routine work, repairing roads and ditches, mowing, etc.

Regatta and Sports in Simanggang.
FOOTBALL COMPETITION.
EXTRAORDINARY GASTRONOMICAL FEATS BY EUROPEANS.
The clerk of the weather was unexpectedly kind, and the multitude which thronged the pleasant pastures of Simanggang on Christmas Eve enjoyed their share of the good things provided by the hardworking Committee so ably headed by the genial Resident-and so on ad nauseam-but who ever wants all this stale journalese tripe can get it from the Sarawak Gazette year after year, when the Kuching Regatta is described by the Editor with a sameness which is amazing for its mechanical similarity.
Any reader, therefore, who has managed to get as far as this may just as well know right away that there will be no list of the committee, no list of officials, the proud owners of boats will not see their names in print, and no eulogies will be spread around on the system of “you scratch my back and I will scratch yours.”
As regards the boat racing there were the usual heated disputes-every Dyak owner being quite certain that he had won. and relying on the system, that ultimate success in all claims may be assured by outshooting one’s opponents. The Simanggang Challenge Cup was won by a particularly uninteresting looking craft. The boat first past the post in the bongs race was disqualified for bumping, boring and generally making a nuisance of itself, but having no reliance in the integrity of the umpire, a most respectable European from Saribas, the disgruntled
owner journeyed all the way to Kuching to see His Highness the Rajah with the intention, no doubt, of petitioning to appeal to the Supreme Court. So far the unhappy umpire has not been cited as respondent, but he assures us that he still feels that he is living under a cloud.
Near the grand stand was that place particularly beloved by Dyaks. -a free bar. From start to finish an air of bacchanalian joviality pervaded (oh blast the journalese again!) the place, and some of the weaker heads had perforce to miss the last races. having either subsided quietly into a cool ditch or been led away in a bellicose mood by any of the police who could stand. Side-shows littered the banks of the river, and one could have one’s photograph taken and developed in three minutes. The ultimate portrait was not always a happy likeness, albeit the price was not calculated to build up hopes. The greasy poles and duck hunt proved too easy for most of the boy», who quickly formed an organization to wipe the grease off by turn.
The afternoon was spent in watching agitated officials trying to keep the track clear for the land sports. Perhaps the most important event was the Government Clerks’ race, where a handicap on a weight-for-age-long-service-conduct-general-health system was adopted. The winner certainly received a good start, but the business-like way in which he stripped himself of his trousers before the respectful crowd displaying running shorts underneath showed that, senior as he was. he meant to win or bust. A race had been staged for Europeans, but what with the customary Christmas cheer, and other impediments to swift footwork, it was found impossible to obtain any entry.
Opinions differ, but what possibly pleased the crowds best was to see their genial Resident fall into a deep ditch in his abortive efforts to stop a free fight which was taking place between contestants for the greasy pig Such a spectacle is infrequent, but on these occasions who can grudge the crowds a little real enjoyment?
Other celebrations included the final for a football cup given by that genial Resident again, which was played off. on Christmas Eve. Of the sixteen teams no less than thirteen were Dyaks, and although only one of them reached the semi-final their rather vigorous style of play put the wind up many a gentler Malay-Mr. Hudden, having wisely got in first and chosen the best team, managed to win by 3-2, beating Mr. Barcroft’s eleven after extra time had been played. The latter team included both the promoter and Mr. Summer; and it was considered generally that the latter’s rather stern visage and stentorian voice had much to do with the closeness of the score. Mr. Hudden did not stay in Simanggang to see his team slip and slide their way to victory, being at that time engaged in visiting Kuching he is still endeavouring, we hear, to find out who exactly received the massive hall-marked, sterling silver cup, so kindly presented by the genial… (once more and we shall scream the place down! Ed.)
On Christmas Night there was the usual dinner at the Residency. Some say that there were eight guests and some nine. Personally, we should not like to decide either way, as a particularly thick haze descended after dinner, and not even the presence of an ecclesiastical gentleman, stripped to the waist, prevented frequent collisions during such old-world dances as the Lancers and Sir Roger de Coverley.
There were also great doing» in the Recreation Club, where amongst other things were organized a pool tournament and a drum and bugle recital.
On New Year’s Eve those who had stayed the course attended a beano in the Club, where Malay and Chinese repasts had been laid. We have it on reliable information that several Europeans ate both dinners, but we do not choose to comment on such acts-immoderate guzzling is not wit!
That is all about there is to say-except that we are now going to break our promise and pat somebody on the back. Mr. Barcroft deserves a very good thump for running most of the show.
THE OPTIMISTIC FIDDLER.

Third Division News.
December, 1930.
Extracts from the Third Divisional Reports for December, 1930, by Mr. C. D. Adams, Resident: -
Resident’s Court. -One civil, one criminal and one civil appeal from the District Court were heard. Capt. Dyson of s.s. Kuranda was fined $250 for breach of Shipping Regulations, bringing his ship into Rejang from Singapore overloaded.
General. -The new road to the Heng Hua Colony at Sungei Teku was completed, and by information received there is no more swamp the rest being all hilly country to the Oya River.
The Selalo Tulai Road was completed except for one mile which is very swampy and impossible to do anything with until Sungei Pradom is drained, which will be taken in hand next month.
All temporary wooden houses in the bazaar area were demolished.
The Secretary Chinese Affairs paid his usual visit and I accompanied him to the Heng Hua Colony and also to Igan to inspect Chinese padi fields planted on land borrowed from Dyaks.
Divisional Engineer, Mr. Whiteside, returned from local leave on the 9th instant.
The new tennis courts for the Sibu Recreation Club were opened on the 10th instant.
S. L. Chamois left for Kuching on the 12th instant for annual docking.
Divisional Land Officer, Mr. Pascoe, visited Kanowit and Song and at the latter marked out a site for new bazaar; the Chinese have most of the wood ready and hope to commence building after the collection of engkabang crop.
Electrical Engineer, Mr. Clark, paid a visit to Mukah during the month.
Assistant Superintendent of Surveys, Mr. Hammond, spent most of the month in the Binatang and Sarikei District.
I left for Kuching on 25th instant to attend Council Negri and was still away at end of month.

SIBU.
The District Officer, Mr. W. F. Dick, reports: -
Courts. -There have been the usual large number of civil claims during the month.
Fines and fees amounted to $1,009.99.
General. -The Secretary for Chinese Affairs, Captain C. D.  Le Gros Clark arrived on the 3rd instant and left again on the 11th instant.
Wong Nik Hua, a schoolmaster at the Kwong Hua School, was warned for caning one of his pupils excessively.
The Conservator of Forests, Mr. D. E. Calver, arrived on 17th instant and left again on 21st.
A report was received on 20th that ex-Penghulu Asoon (see November report) was on his way down to Sibu and expected to arrive on 22nd. This report turned out to be incorrect. Asoon deciding not to come down until after the illipe-nut crop.
Very good reports of the illipe-nut crop are being received and many Dyaks, Malays and Chinese are already on their way up river.
The District Officer, Matu and Daro, Mr. E. V. Andreini, arrived on 21st instant preparatory to proceeding to Kuching to attend the meeting of the General Council.
The Acting Assistant District Officer, Sarekei, Mr. J. O. Gilbert, arrived on 24ih to attend Christmas festivities in Sibu. And take charge of the station during the absence of the Resident, Mr. C. D. Adams, the Registrar, Mr. H. B. Crocker, and myself.
I left the station on 25th for Kuching to attend the meeting of the General Council and arrived back on 31st instant.

MATU AND DARO.
The District Officer, Mr. E. V. Andreini. reports: -
An inquiry into a case of maiming under section 429 was heard and evidence forwarded to Sibu, but was not considered sufficient to go forward for hearing.
Medical. -The usual inspections of bazaars at Matu and Daro were made and a noticeable improvement in cleanliness reported. Dresser Thomas Mowe relieved Julius Chong who proceeded on leave.
General. -I left for Sibu on 22nd in order to proceed to Kuching for the Council Negri and was still away at the end of the month.

MUKAH.
The Acting Assistant District Officer, Mr. A. Macpherson, reports: -
Courts, November. -Thirteen Dyaks were fined for breach of Forest Regulations and seven Dyaks were imprisoned for non-payment of fines.
Travelling. -I returned from Ulu Mukah on 5th and left again for upriver on 20th returning on 3rd December, accompanied by Awang Mustapha.
The Mukah Dyaks have all been visited. The former District Officer’s orders that side-streams should be cleared and all Dyaks rebuild on the banks have been carried out. except in the case of two houses, one in Sikat and one in Pasai. These latter have been given one month to move or a fine of one picul per door will be imposed and the Tuai imprisoned.
Credit reflects on Abang Mustapha for his work in getting the Dyaks to rebuild substantial houses on the water’s edge.
Sixteen Dyaks were brought down and imprisoned for various offences. Mostly for non-payment of fines and refusing to appear in Court. The Dyaks do not appear to be well off and many are experiencing padi famine for the second and third year in succession, and the low price of jelutong contributes to the general depression.
Dairy Farm. -The herd numbered thirty head at the end of the month.
Prison. -The gang numbered forty-one at the end of the month. They were employd in the general upkeep of the station. The jail is very crowded, especially the dapor and health is not good.
Balingian. -This station was not visited, the sea being too rough when I was at liberty to go there.
General. -The Divisional Treasurer, Mr. D. O. MacGinn and Divisional Electrical Engineer, paid a visit to the station.
Courts, December. -There were no cases worthy of mention.
Dairy Farm. -The herd numbered twenty-eight head at the end of the month.
Prison. -The gang numbered fifty-four at the end of the month. They were employed in the general upkeep of the station.
Balingian. -This station was not visited. The sea being too rough when I was at liberty to go there.
General. -I was away from office on 15th and 16th with malaria.
Datu Awang Udin and Native Officer Abang Haji Bahandin left for Sibu on 15th on their way to the Council Negri at Kuching.
The Divisional Electrical Engineer, Mr. W. Clark, visited the station on 22nd leaving on 24th.
The Acting Assistant District Officer Oya, Mr. Elam, spent Christmas at Mukah.
The Rev. Fathers Epping and Bauck, of Dalat spent New Year in the station.
Rainfall. -The total rainfall for the month was 12’40 inches.

SARIKEI, BINATANG AND REJANG.
The Acting Assistant District Officer, Mr. J. O. Gilbert, reports: -
General. -Capt. C. D. Le Gros Clark, Secretary for Chinese Affairs, visited the district from 6th to 8th and he reported things quiet in both places, the Chinese main question being unemployment. He urged them to go in for padi planting wherever possible.
On the 8th there was a fight at Binatang between the Hockien wharf coolies. It appears the Foochows were doing the work at a much lower rate, and the Hockiens resented this, as it had been their monopoly for ten years, so they attacked the Foochows with sticks. The Foochows got the worst of it and had the police not intervened early in the encounter more damage would probably have been done.
The Island Trading Company at Selalang has shut down for six months; this has caused a lot more unemployment in the district. It appears that the cost of production at Selalang is far in excess of the Company’s branch at Brunei.
The Conservator of Forests, Third Division, Mr. B. J. C. Spurway, paid a visit to Sarekei the outstanding amount on Pepper Post Royalty. An arrangement was made that $1 should be paid on every picul of pepper going out after 1st December. 1930.
A small regatta was held at Binatang over the Christmas holidays.
P. W. D. -Work proceeded as usual with road construction.
The new bazaar 70-feet road is now completed, and the street lights are fixed, it is now ready for anybody who wishes to build in this area.
One new clerk’s quarters was started during the month. This is for the Land Department.
At Binatang the Gamuan Road has been widened to 18 feet at the bazaar end.
Trade and Customs. -The pepper is coming to an end, there only being about 1,000 piculs more for export.

OYA AND DALAT.
The Acting Assistant District Officer, Mr. E. H. Elam, reports. –
General. -I left Oya on the 1st and after spending three days at Dalat, proceeded up river to visit the Tamin and the Baoh river. The new Penghulu had settled many outstanding cases and fines amounting to $89 were collected. One case of incest between stepfather and daughter was heard. All the houses in the Tamin have more than 10 doors and these in the far ulu, which before have never been visited, are all very solidly built, billian being very close to hand and also in great quantities. In the Tamin the Dyaks are well off as their padi crop promises to be good and the engkabang very plentiful; they also work billian. I walked from the Tamin across to the Baoh, visiting the two houses in the Jijeh. Next day the Baoh was reached. Here the people are poor. The Dyaks say that the new jelutong regulations are very severe on them since most of the trees in the Baoh are undersized, and as there is no engkabang and no billian, they have no other means of obtaining a livelihood. I met Mr. Temple Waite, of the Sarawak Oilfields, Limited, at Rumah Aduh in the Sungei Runtok and went to his camp for one night and as he had decided to close down there and return to Mukah. I went down the Sebakong with him and returned to Oya via Mukah. The district seemed very orderly far more so than the Ulu Oya, and the new Penghulu seems to have great authority in the district. The Ulu Oya was visited by policemen this month and two criminals brought down. It is reported also that Father Clark of Kanowit Mission is starting to put up small houses at Nanga Tisut and Nanga Pako.
Datu Awang Udin and Native Officer Haji Bahandin, together with Datu Pengiran Mohamat (Oya) and Native Officer Haji Pengiran Mohamat (Dalat) left for Kuching via Sibu on 22nd to attend the Council Negri.
Other visitors, to the station were Mr. W. L. Clark, Divisional Electrical Engineer and the Rev. Father, A. Mulder.
Dalat was visited from 1st to the 4th and again from 19th to 24th. I went to Mukah for Xmas returning on the 29th.
Forest. -Forest Ranger Drahman Sanai proceeded to the Sungei Narub on the 17th to start making the rentis from there to the Sungei Baoh where there is going to be a forest reserve. He returned on the 29th having completed half of the work. Forest Guard Blajang was sent to Sibu on the 22nd for medical treatment and Forester Masher arrived from Mukah to fill his place on the 31st.
Six Chinese have requested permission to start a sago refinery just above Medong and they were told to start clearing the site while permission was being obtained from Sibu.
P. W. D. -The people of Kampong Sua made a new road to the lighthouse during the month, the bridge over the Sungei Nyior having had to be moved at the end of last month owing to erosion. A large quantity of billian planks have been bought preparatory to building the bridges on Day’s road next year. The bazaar road at Dalat badly needs repair, owing to continued flooding and this will have to be raised next year during the fine season.
Staff. -Charles S. B. Law returned from leave on 22nd and resumed duty at Dalat as Court Writer, J. L. Tambik moving down to Oya again.
Marine and Shipping. -M. L. Nellie, which has been in good order for the last 6 months, broke down on the 24th. The engineer reports a bent shaft and bent stern and loose bearings. She is now in dry dock waiting for an engineer to overhaul her.

KAPIT.
The Acting Assistant District Officer, Mr. R. G. Aikman, reports: -
Courts. -A preliminary inquiry was held into the death in very suspicious circumstances, of a Dyak woman named Timbong in the Mujong. The minutes of the inquiry have been sent to the Resident, Third Division. A man named Iko has been detained in connection with this inquiry.
Work in the Courts was light during the month and there are no cases worthy of mention.
Dairy Farm. -The herd numbered 42 head on 31st.
Prison. -The prison gang was mostly employed on the upkeep of road, bridges and grounds. Health was better than of late.
Song. -I visited Song on the 17th and again from the 22nd to the 24th.
General. -I was away in the Balleh and Gat from the 4th to the 9th, and on the 18th, I visited the Katibas and Tekalit. I then proceeded by way of S. Janan overland to the Yong and returned to Kapit on the 24th.
Assistant Surgeon Mason arrived on the 10th and after a visit to the Balleh and Gat left on the 22nd for Sibu. He treated some 350 persons during his visit.
Native Officer Abang Aboi left for Sibu on the 19th and was still away at the end of the month.
Native Officer Awang Samsudin arrived from Belaga on the 24th and was still here at the end of the month. He brought with him three Badangs from Long Limau who asked for assistance from Government as almost all their property had been destroyed by floods.
Christmas Day and Boxing Day were observed as public holidays and the offices closed.
Penghulus Atan, Jugah, Jingga and Ugak were down during the month, the latter in connection with the death of Timbong (f.) mentioned above.
Mr. L. D. Kennedy, Superintendent of Customs, visited the station from the 6th to 8th and Mr. C. E. Pascoe, Divisional Land Officer, visited Song on the 18th, returning to Sibu next day.








