VOL. LXI.
No. 931.
The Sarawak Gazette
Price
KUCHING, Wednesday, April 1st, 1931.
20 CENTS.
The Sarawak Gazette		 			
WEDNESDAY. APRIL 1st. 1931.
Contents.

Death.
DAUBENY. -At “The Brow.” Combe Down, Bath, on 13th February, 1931. Edith, wife of Major C. W. Daubeny, formerly Superintendent of Police and Prisons, Sarawak Civil Service.

Local and Personal.
March.
On March 10th His Highness the Rajah left Kuching in the Maimuna for a visit to the Rejang River. His Highness visited Sibu, Sarikei, Binatang and Kapit, returning to Kuching on March 16th.
Mr. C. D. Adams, Resident, Third Division, left for home on furlough by the Kuching on March 25th.
Mr. W. F. Dick has been gazetted to act as Resident, Third Division, during Mr. Adams’ absence. We must congratulate Mr. Dick on his appointment.
One of the periodical “change-rounds” is at present taking place among junior members of the Administrative Service. Mr. F. L. Crossley goes to Matu as Officer-in-Charge to replace Capt. E. V. Andreini, who has gone to Sibu as District Officer; Mr. W. H. C. C. Morice goes to Miri as cadet in place of Mr. S. G. Hansom, who is being transferred to the Second Division; Mr. F. A. Moore takes Mr. Morice’s place at Limbang; and Mr. W. P. N. L. Ditmas is leaving Engkilili to do duty in Kuching.
We regret to have to report a fatal road accident, which took place in Kuching on the evening of March 16th. Mr. Lim Tan Lok, a bill-collector for Messrs. Ong Ewe Hai, Ltd., was cycling along Rock Road towards the town with two friends; just in front of the Residency the party of cyclists met a motor lorry coming in the opposite direction. For some reason Mr. Lim Tan Lock swerved in front of the vehicle and was run down, sustaining grave injuries to the head and shoulders.
He was taken to hospital immediately, but died without recovering consciousness.
We understand that at the subsequent inquiry the driver of the lorry was exonerated from all blame, it being proved that the accident was in no way his fault.
On February 28th Mr. T. A. Reid returned from three months’ convalescent and vacation leave. Mr. Reid spent most of his leave at Simla, and brought back glowing reports of the winter sports there, which were in full swing during his visit. Few of us connect such sports as ski-ing and skating with India, but Mr. Reid states that snow lay heavily during the whole of his stay. Simla seems to be a splendid place in which to spend local leave when the greenhouse atmosphere of the landas begins to pall.
At the same time, a few days ago the following announcement appeared in the daily wireless news:
“Southend-on-Thames estuary had a snow visitation before London to-day; clouds, snow and darkened air making it impossible to see fifty yards ahead. Soon, the town was completely snowed up and main roads from London were blocked, access only being possible by rail. Shipping in English channel was held up. Lightships reported snow squalls were so dense that crews were unable to see the length of their ships. Equally severe storms occurred in north and south England. Several main roads to Scotland are blocked with snowdrifts. Snow ploughs were requisitioned to clear streets. In Felixstowe seas were the heaviest ever know. Telegrams from Dover, Folkestone, Brighton, Eastbourne and scores of other places reported worst snowstorm for years. Air Ministry announces Arctic conditions are to likely continue.”
All of which goes to prove that there are worse places than Sarawak during the merry month of March.
On March 5th the Rev. Father Halder left by the Kuching to proceed on home leave. We hear that Father Halder, who seemed in the best of health and spirits, had a rousing send-off from Sibu, members of all communities combining to do him honour; certainly, his presence in Kuching for a few days was very welcome, and we were glad to see him in the Sarawak Club on more than one occasion. Fortunately, Father Halder’s beard escaped intact from the celebrations connected with his departure, so he was able to take all of it home with him to astonish the inhabitants of his native Tyrol.
Father Halder has our best wishes for a pleasant leave which is surely well-earned: This is only his second home leave in 34 years service! He also takes with him numerous commissions for the famous Tyrolese beer mugs, -we wish we could have commissioned him to bring back some of the famous Tyrolese beer!
By the same boat the Venerable Archdeacon and Mrs. Champion proceeded on leave. May they have a pleasant stay at home and return to us soon. -we miss them in Kuching.
Our readers may be interested to know that a glance at our despatch book revealed the fact that apart from Borneo, Great Britain, Malaya and the Dutch East Indies, the Sarawak Gazette is read in such distant countries as Japan, Canada, the United States, Switzerland. Russia, China. Austria, the Philippine Islands and Tahiti. This list merely shows the places in which we can boast regular subscribers, but we have no doubt that such an influential, erudite and readable journal must find its way to many other strange corners of the world. We would not even lie surprised to find an odd copy or two in Aberdeen.
Ing. L. H. Krol, until recently chief of the Geological Survey of West Borneo, and well-known to many of our readers, has been transferred to headquarters at Bandoeng, Java, where he is to take charge of the Sumatra Section of the Netherlands East Indies’ Geological Survey. Ing. Krol’s work in Borneo will be completed under the direction of Dr. C. P. A. Leylmans van Emmichoven, who comes from Samarinda, East Borneo.
Mr. Krol writes to us to say that he hopes that any of his Sarawak friends who may chance to go to Bandoeng will not forget to call on him. He will always be glad to see them, and will be very pleased to show them over Bandoeng, to introduce them to the clubs, and to act as an interpreter when required. In addition to this, Mrs. Krol will always be ready to assist ladies with their shopping
Mr. Krol’s office address in Bandoeng is: Geological Laboratorium telephone sub. exchange G.B. His house address can be found in the telephone book.
We are very sorry to lose Mr. Krol, but we trust that he may find time to pay us a flying visit now and again. Mr. Krol made friends wherever he went in Sarawak, and he has our very best wishes in his new appointment.
We read in the British North Borneo Herald (March 2nd) that our neighbours in North Borneo have been experiencing a severe drought. In Sandakan an emergency water supply, carried by motor lorry, has had to be arranged for the bungalows at the northern end of the town which are not served by pipe line, since all tanks are empty and the wells have gone dry.
The town is looking very parched, very few really green patches of grass being left.
Mr. J. B. Archer, Resident, Second Division, met with a nasty accident half-way through the month. Mr. Archer was walking home from the office when he unfortunately trod on a scythe, which was lying concealed in some long grass. The blade gashed his heel badly, severing a tendon.
Mr. Archer at once proceeded to Kuching in the m.l. Anne. The damaged foot was treated, and Mr. Archer is now back again in Simanggang.
The usual examinations for Government Officers were held from March 16th to the 21st. The following outstation officers attended: -Messrs. J. R. Combe. W. H. C. C. Morice. D. V. Murphy. F. L. Crossley, D. C. Budden, J. C. H. Barcroft, L. K. Morse and J. J. Hill.
Visitors from the North are loud in their praises of the new Miri swimming bath. Miri is certainly fortunate in possessing this most desirable of amenities. -we fear that if present economic conditions continue, it will be a long time before we have one in Kuching.
One more oddity: “Ripley.”' some of whose collection of curiosities we published last month, states that a hen in Minnesota has laid a perfectly square (sic) egg. For once. “Ripley” must be mistaken, -surely this is not a hen at all but our old friend the whitlow bird, whose ancestors were responsible for the pyramids. We commend this long flight-all the way from Egypt to the U.S.A. -to our local bird migration experts.
The Printing Office set of bound copies of the Gazette, which is greatly in demand for reference purposes, lacks the volume for the year 1887.
It would be greatly appreciated if anyone in possession of a duplicate volume of the 1887 Gazettes would present a copy to the Printing Office, thereby making the set complete. Failing this, it is thought that some public-spirited person might care to exchange his volume for that of another year, -the Superintendent of Printing Office has several extra copies available for purposes of exchange.
We have been earnestly requested to insert the following short rhyme in this column: we do so without comment.
D.E.C. gave a tip to a waiter!
(Truth’s stranger than fiction, they say) 
But Doggie lost nought by this Beautiful Thought,
For the horse wasn’t entered that day.

Her Highness the Ranee leaves the State.
DEPARTURE FOR ENGLAND OF HER HIGHNESS THE RANEE AND THE DAYANGS LEONORA. ELIZABETH AND VALERIE.
On Wednesday, March 25th, Her Highness the Ranee and the Dayangs Elisabeth and Valerie left for England by the Kuching. The Dayang Leonora left a fornight previously, and is at present staying with friends in Singapore.
On Saturday a farewell dinner and dance was given at the Astana in which some sixty-five guests had the honour of being invited.
The departure of Her Highness and the Dayangs leaves a gap in the social life of Kuching which it will be difficult to fill. We can only hope that the interval which must elapse before Her Highness’ next visit to the State may not be too long.
We are sure that all our readers will join with us in wishing Her Highness and the Dayangs a pleasant voyage home.

Obituary.
It is with great regret that we record the death of Mrs. Edith Daubeny, wife of Major Charles W. Daubeny, for many years a member of Sarawak Civil Service.
Mrs. Daubeny died on 13th February, after an illness of some two months, during the last three weeks of which she was for the most part unconscious. Mrs. Daubeny leaves three daughters, the youngest of whom, Mrs. Ivo Parker, was recently living at Miri. Her only son, Jack was killed in the Great War.
The funeral service was held in Combe Down Church on 17th February, the interment takking place at Shalburne, where Mrs. Daubeny’s father used to be Rector.
Major Daubeny joined the Sarawak Service as a cadet in 1883 and retired with the rank of Superintendent of Police and Prisons in 1906. Mrs. Daubeny first arrived in Sarawak in the year 1891.

The Country of the Headhunters.
A PROTEST FROM PROFESSOR L. H. KROL.
(BEING EXTRACTS FROM A LETTER FROM PROFESSOR KROL TO THE EDITOR OF THE HAAGSCHE POST).
“Many travels, many tales” must have been the thought of Eric Mjoberg while writing this book on Borneo, so welcomed by the press.
We know, of course, that anyone visiting New Guinea is necessarily a target for arrows; a globe trotter in Java naturally pays his respects to the Sultans of Solo and Djokja; any traveller, in Sumatra will undoubtedly have seen a tiger and a herd of elephants, and unless a visitor to Borneo can prove the loss of boat and baggage in some rapids, it may he generally doubted whether he has ever been there.
Mjoberg evidently knew of this recipe, but considered a “rijsttafel” of this kind too tasteless There had to be hot sambaI on the menu, and no less a person than Professor L. van Vuuren accepts the invitation to partake of it, and he burns his mouth badly. For instance, he allows Mjoberg to discover the Tibang Mountain. This had already been recorded on the map of van Nieuwenhuis. with a given altitude of 1704 metres! He considers too, that Mjoberg is “not to be held from attaining his object by plague epidemics, nor swift flowing currents, nor rapids nor multitudes of very poisonous snakes, nor fear inspiring bees and leeches.” And finally, “Mjoberg wins the friendship of the dreaded natives-the terrible headhunters.”
It would be of great interest to Medical Science in general (and to that branch of it represented by the D. V. G. and the Medical Service of Sarawak in particular), to learn exactly when Borneo has been visited by a plague epidemic. Others might be interested to learn precisely how much trouble plague could cause in uninhabited districts (e.g., Penrissen, Gunong Moeroed, and Batu Tiban).
It might also be of geographical interest to know which swift-flowing rivers are obstacles to the ascent of Gunong Poe from Lundu: of Gunong Penrissen along the left-hand branch of the Sarawak river, of Gunong Moeroed along the track described by R. S. Douglas, Resident of Baram, long before Mjoberg’s arrival: or of Batu Tiban from the Dutch Military post at Long Nawang in the Batang Kayan, Gunong Poe (Loernoet) and Gunong Penrissen have been thoroughly mapped by the Netherland Indies Topographical Service, and by no less a person than J. J. K. Enthoven (vice sheets VI and VII Top. Maps W. Afd. Borneo scale 1 = 200000). and the track to Moeroed and Tiban bad been made, but-there we meet with innumerable poisonous snakes. Now this statement is a “terminological inexactitude” of the blackest order. Every junglewallah knows that snakes are not aggressive, and never worries his head about them, for they are seldom met. During my last journey through Central Borneo which lasted all told three months, I saw but three snakes, only one of which was venomous (a brown cobra). That a biologist sees them more frequently than a lieutenant or a geologist is possible, but that he certainly does not see them more often., than Dyak is certain, since to a native snakes mean food, and his senses are sharpened accordingly. That the non-poisonous python. should attack people sleeping in a boat -a thing Mjoberg says happened a number of times in Sungei Boh -is fabulous nonsense.
Bees can be bothersome insects, especially when a halt is made at gravel-beds surrounded by blossoming trees They are attracted by perspiration and the smell of dried fish, etc., and are also attracted by salt A bath in the river, a change of clothing, and the trouble is past. They sting very seldom-unlike wasps, which always attack if disturbed. -but in any event such happenings are really not of daily occurrence.
And then leeches. Here the translator, J. C. Cornells, has omitted to consult his dictionary, and Herr van Vuuren copies this germanism. In Dutch these animals are called leeches, but we who live in the Indies call them Patjats. Now every junglewallah in his travels is bound to come into unpleasant contact with them, but with a good pair of putties and a hand.'ul of tobacco available, the trouble is small. But that anyone has ever failed to reach his destination on account of them is unknown to me, while the fact that van Vuuren speaks of it shows his ignorance, and proves the famous style in which Mjoberg writes his book. Professor van Vuuren should know better than to support this Swedish charlatan, and so do injustice to many young Dutchmen whose daily work takes them through the jungles of Sumatra anil Borneo, and who meet the ever-poisonous snakes and blood-thirsty Patjat. -without writing home to complain about them. With regard to Mjoberg’s friendship with the terrible natives-the headhunters-we find a small extract from the Sarawak Gazette of 2nd January. 1931. which is illuminating:
“Mjoberg was hardly as popular during his stay in Sarawak as he might have been; he had a method of dealing with natives which was peculiarly his own.”
About Sarawak, van Vuuren, a ala suite Mjoberg, says: “Alas, that this beautiful country fell into the hands of a lawless Government and European invaders who were out for adventure.” So great an insult to a number of respectable Europeans, who could not defend themselves because the book was written in Swedish. I have never before seen in the prospectus of any book, and that a Dutch Professor dare make such remarks without first examining the matter shows that he has not the slightest idea of what the
English in genera! and Sarawakians in particular call “fair play.”
Since the late Rajah’s death there has been no question of a lawless reign by a weak successor, Sir Charles Vyner Brooke, a very reserved and simple man inherited after the war a heavy task. Half the officers had served in the war (he himself worked in an ammunition factory and in the anti-Airforce Brigade) and the other half had kept the flag living in Sarawak. Mars had swallowed a great deal of money, and the European “Invaders” did their jobs on half pay or less. It was highly necessary to remedy the precarious situation caused by the war, and to do this a strong hand was essential. The Rajah found help in the late Major Moulton, very much maligned by Mjoberg. But, as far as Mjoberg himself was concerned, he was very unlucky to find Moulton as Chief Secretary, since he (Moulton) had been for some years Curator of the Museum, and so knew exactly what had to be done. Moulton no doubt watched Mjoberg, and, it seems, with justification, for in the Sarawak Gazette we read: “No one, however, can accuse Dr. Mjoberg of not making the most of his stay in this country; for one thing, it was found necessary to search his baggage before he left for Europe, owing to his inability to discriminate between what constituted his private properly and what belonged to the Sarawak Museum.” These facts have known for a long time, but did not think it necessary to publish them before.
Sir Charles Vyner Brooke has succeeded in modernizing Sarawak in a few years. Hard work is done by a big staff of officers, who shew abundantly that they work with heart and soul for the good of the people entrusted to their care, although they may do so in a manner which differs more or less from our Netherland India method. And Sarawak has in its favour the fact that officers have not to be moved over great distances, so that the contact between the people and themselves is much closer than elsewhere.
Since Mjoberg’s arrival in the country there has been only one European “Invader” in Sarawak, namely Mjoberg himself.
And now, for the Chronique Scandaleuse of which Kuching is the theme. What would be the attitude of Professor van Vuuren if foreign service men of our Netherland India Government, having been more or less cashiered, were to write similar rubbish about our own towns and outstations, which are roughly the same as Kuching? In all of them we find incidents which would have been bettered by not happening, but has the whole of the European population of the Indies to suffer for such happenings? There are things about which a self-respecting person does not write-the Chronique Scandaleuse of small place and the “puberal customs” of the Dayaks are instances. Descriptions of the latter are plentiful in the scientific works of Nieurvenhuis, Hose and others but they do not belong to a popular book, even if not written for a young ladies’ boarding school. No person has lost by not knowing such things. This brings me to the review published ibnin the Haagsche Post of the 20th December, 1930.
The critic seems much attracted by the chapters in which Mjoberg treats of headhunting, and the effects of different poisons. What the Ethnologists Nieurvenhuis and Hose have to say on these subjects is perhaps too advanced for him, as are too the works of the late Mallinkrodt –“Hetadatrecht van Borneo” does not invite criticism. What do the Dutch and English in Borneo know of Dayaks? To learn this, must you go to school with a Swede? How quick are we Dutchmen to accept something foreign, and. seemingly, the more ridiculous the better!
Let it suffice if I tell the critic that Mjoberg has been present neither at a headhunting party, nor at the feasts which follow them. There is more in headhunting than Mjoberg ever knew, and, in any event, headhunting in Borneo has to all intents and purposes ceased.
I am afraid that Mjoberg‘s head would be in great danger, were he ever to journey to the Batang Kayan country again. The dead in that district are very annoyed at their craves being ransacked by a European looking for old Chinese pottery. and these unpacified dead are asking, according to the old custom, for the sacrifice which is due to them, and which alone will appease them-a human head. Let the critic of the Haagsche Post ask the officers of East Borneo, the officers of the Batang Kayan or Mr. Witkamp (named by Mjoberg himself) whose head is at the head of the list!
Now I have squared my account with the Dutch Professor van Vuuren, who should have known better, and have finished with the critic of the Haagsche Post who could have known better. I have no longer the mind to talk with the Swede, who is as silent as the grave about all the help he enjoyed, and whose only object is to push forward his own personality.
The Netherland Indies attracts more and more interested people, who, like Mjoberg can go wherever they like, very often with a “recommendation” from Buitenzorg. Loads and loads of Ethnographica are taken away from the Indies to foreign museums.
The Fourth Pacific Congress has already hinted that we should not be too liberal in giving permission to buy or collect specimens. Let us hope that this warning be observed, and that in future the Indies may be spared from scientific investigators of Mjoberg’s type. I am sure I speak also for Sarawak, a country which I have known for five years, from Kuching to the farthest corners of the jungle, and where I have always enjoyed the greatest friendship and hospitality and the most obliging help in my work from everyone.
It would be on my part a sign of ingratitude and cowardice if I. knowing Sarawak, and knowing the East and West Coasts of Borneo as I do, did not protest against such a book as that of Mjoberg’s, even though it is supported by an authority no less than Professor van Vuuren.

Proverbs of Boh. Doh.
IN WHICH BOH-DOH TREATETH OF RUMOUR.
1. Rumour, my son, is the child of Gossip, and cousin many times removed from Truth.
2. She is born of accident and cradled of accident. yet she dieth not, for the tea-tables of fair ladies shall receive her. and her growth thereat is swift.
3. She shall be hedged by this, and bolstered by that, and become a song in the ears of men. For the perfect lie is more beautiful than the perfect woman, and sweeter far than truth.
4. It shall be told “on the best authority,” and with “My dear, I saw them” shall it be clinched.
5. For to lie is the lot of man, and happy is he who lieth well.
6. For he shall not be at home to bores, neither shall relations trouble him, and his lies shall be called diplomacy.
7. Seek not Ionely eminence. George Washington lied not or so it is written in the Chronicles of the U.S.A, where men lie much. And what did he gain by it?
8. My Son. let us reason together and consider the source of rumour.
9. The father of lies is the devil, but no new lie springeth full grown as did Pallas from the head of Zeus, the father of gods and men. The desires of its sponsors shall nourish it, and as they wish, even so shall they believe.
10. And with “it is reported” shall they clothe it.
11. There be three great liars, nay. four, whose equal I know not. The Devil, an American newspaper reporter, the Editor of the Sarawak Gazette, and Ananias. And Ananias runs unplaced.
12. My son. hearken to my words
13. Rumour hath many forms, and as a straw to test the wind doth she appear in the organs of officialdom.
14. Even so “it is officially denied” covereth on occasion more than mere denial.
15. Yet never shall it overtake rumour. For rumour flieth on rainbow wings, and official denials are ever leaden-footed.
16. My son, when thou playest bridge with ladies, if thou winnest it is a rumour, but if thou losest it is a fact.
17. In like manner shalt thou back ponies on behalf of the fair sex
18. A lie is truth born out of wedlock.
19. My son. be sparing of lies. Cleave to the truth, yet not with bigotry, so shalt thou acquire a reputation for truthfulness-
20. For this shall stand thee well in that evil day when a lie atone can save thee, and not once or twice only in the life of man doth such a day come.
21. For what saith the prophet-“A lie is an abomination unto the Lord, but a very saving help in time of trouble.”
22. Rumour beareth a charmed life, and from old age only shall she die- They shall bury her in “the last ditch” and from her grave shall spring the chestnut tree.
23. And the nations shall mourn the beautiful sister of Truth.
24. When thou hearest “I have heard,” “It is said,” “I am credibly informed,” retain thy half-pence, for contradiction cometh in the morning.
25. Even as sambals are to curry, so doth the salt of a half-truth season lying.
26. But forget not the eleventh commandment. “Thou shalt not be found out,” for these are words of wisdom, and should be ever before thine eyes. And blessed is he who rnaketh them the guiding star of his life, Selah.

Don’ts for Outboard Motorists.
The current issue of Mirage prints an interesting article by “Petros” on the subject of the pitfalls of outboard motoring. The writer concludes with a series of “don’ts” which we commend most heartily to any of our readers who may have been taken in by the specious attractions of this most treacherous means of transport. They make a particular appeal to those of us who have had to paddle for hours against a five-knot current, with the dead-weight of a useless engine on the transom to encourage our efforts. Oh. those blistered palms! -Oh. those aching backs! These hints should be read, marked, learned, and inwardly digested by all whom the vagaries of duty render liable to a trip by outboard motor-boat.
DON’T start off until you have six coolies with paddles.
DON’T be alarmed if the engine start “revving” madly all of a sudden-it only means that you have hit a log and broken the shaft or lost the propeller; you can paddle home after that in peace.
DON’T kid yourself, because you have gone for two or three hours without a hitch, that you are going to arrive safely and on time; within the next hour you are likely to have all possible permutations and combinations of the troubles suggested above and a few more of your engine’s sole monopoly. Remember that every outboard motor has at least one unique trick peculiar to itself, which it springs on you when you think you have mastered all the others.
DON’T smile in a supercitious manner when you pass a “shop-prahu” manned by Chinese, and progressing at half a mile an hour; before long they will be passing you and the smile is apt to change places.
DON’T go too near light native craft and so swamp them; you are more than likely to want their help later on.
DON’T go without food if you intend a few hours’ trip. If you reckon you can arrive in five or six hours, take bedding and food for two days, and if you think the journey will take two or three days, then kiss your surveyors fondly good-bye and fill the prahu with all the food you can lay hands on, as Heaven only knows when you will ever return.

Potted Biographies.
RESULTS OF THE COMPETITION.
Although entries to this competition were not as numerous as we could have wished, enough were received to justify the award of the prizes promised. Though the standard of the biographies was hardly up to Mr. Bentley’s level, many entries showed ingenuity of rhyme and composition. After due consideration we award the first prize to H.C.S. Miri. and the second to “Jill” while three more by “Styx,” H.C.S. and a competitor who prefers to remain anonymous, deserve honourable mention.

FIRST PRIZE. 
E.V. Andreini
Is not so green. He has given us many pleasant interludes with hie archaeological inexactitudes. 

SECOND PRIZE.
The Superintendent of Surveys 
Is gifted with strange ways 
In the club, all he does 
Is to buzz.

HONOURABLE MENTION
Frederick Ambrose Page-Turner 
Used to work as a charcoal-burner. 
Hence his first 
Thirst.

HORTON, Reginald, Dominic, George, Henry. Newnham, M. John
Is not me kind of person one would wish 
to impinge on. 
But when he was christened 
His eyes must have glistened.

Captain Le Gros Clark
Loves the dark
And devious ways
Of Foochow» and Khehs.

Several competitors spoilt their chances by submitting entries which, though excellent in design, were not what we asked for. Limericks and other verses, however amusing, are not “Potted Biographies” in the sense required, and therefore cannot be admitted to the competition. At least two entries, one of which would easily have gained first prize, were disqualified owing to the fact that they really could not be reproduced. Not everyone is gifted with a sense of humour, and we are not of the stuff of which that American Editor was made, who, as a revolver bullet crashed into the wall of his office two inches above his head, smiled a beatific smile and murmured- “I knew that personal column would be a success!”
Among the “also ran’s” we print the following for the entertainment of our readers; we wish to make it quite clear that the editor is the author of none of them:

J. Beville Archer
Is what the French call an “Old Marcher.” 
In spite of the weight of years, 
He still loves you, my dears.

Arthur A. Rennie’s
The man for the pennies. 
He’s got Snowden’s wiles 
Beaten by miles!

Boyd. Mr. Justice Stirling, 
Grew thin, and his hair stopped curling; 
Finding lime juice and bay rum futile.
He went to Hong Kong mid was treated in new style!

and here, down among the dead men, where we hope they won’t be seen: -

Mr. N. E. Hughes
Has such very pronounced views 
On the subject of his own importance, 
That it’s a pity he is of no significance.

Mr. Nigel Erskine Hughes
Feel are so large he has great difficulty in purchasing shoes
He searched the bazaar from nine until one 
And eventually got a Malay boat-builder to make him some!

The rhyming is not up to much, and of the subject-matter we are hardly competent to judge. “Oh wad some power the giftie gie us…” Anyhow, they didn't get a prize!

Musings from Simanggang.
Miss Banun, the other day. so writes that gentleman (or is it a lady, to judge from some of the intimate details?) who supplies the tittle-tattle for Notes in the Gazette, is apparently the first native lady to be fined for a motoring offence. But the Saribas ladies always have been go ahead, and it is not uncommon for the bright young people of both sexes to exchange passionate love-letters. That this emancipation should spread to staid Simanggang is but a sign of the times.
Judge, therefore, my surprise (I nearly wrote pained surprise, but even in Sarawak journalese can be carried too far) when a bevy-a galaxy -a gaggle-a pride-a whisp-or whatever one calls a multitude of beautiful ladies (Sir Nigel, your name sake, Mr. Editor, will tell you) after paying a decorous and modest call at the Residency on Hari Raya, where entertainment in the way of indigestible cakes and the host falling over the back of his chair was provided. -announced its intention of calling then and there on the bachelor officers of the Station!
Eventual results proved a good example of the psychology of the average European, and proved or disproved any amount of complexes This, I believe, is the correct way to write nowadays, but personally I have not the slightest idea what psychology means, except that it is something to do with a soul-even Public School Greek taught me. that; and what a complex is I simply do not know, but I understand it is something to do with S.A., at least that is how a charming young miss pronounced it the other day.
To return to our herring. The District Officer, being used to entertaining the little girls of the village, was quite at home with their mothers and elder sisters and found the call good practice for his coming examination. The Land Officer with grim looks placed upon the table the contents of his non-alcoholic cellar-not much of it, to be sure, -and with a take-that-or-be-blowed-to-you air sat down to watch the gaggle guzzle. The Police Officer was taken unawares. Clad in a puce and purple dressing gown and a pair of newly worked slippers, this gentleman was caught leaning against the Fort jala-jala idly watching the oriental scene, or to put it more politely, gazing at nothing at all with his customary post-prandial-curry look. A few skirmishes, however, at the foot of the steps delayed the callers, and in a few moments the host was standing at the top of the stairs welcoming his guests, while Dog’s Head beer and a few bottles of stout had been carefully arranged on the table. With the help of a few sodas, Montserrat Cordial and some orange bitters the ladies were suitably fueled, and strange to say had very little difficulty in arriving at their next destination-Kajang Palace, the home of the Surveyor. Warned in time by the butterfly spectacle ascending the. Fort, the owner had made hurried preparations, and the females on arrival were gently distended with coffee and ginger beer, mixed, we believe, and some really good examples of home-made cake. The intention expressed of then visiting the Padre was, however. nipped in the bud-not that he would have shown any antipathy to such a call-quite the contrary, but in view of the gastronomical efforts of the past two hours, the ladies were advised not to risk the walk to Bukit Sabun and back.

On Thursday the 12th March, the first post of the new offices in Simanggang was erected in the presence of a small crowd, the time chosen- half past five in the morning - proving rather a handicap for most people. In the absence of the Resident, the Assistant District Officer was expected to make a speech, but what with the grizzly hour and the rest, it was left to Datu Haji Dulrashid to perform this duty. Owing, as we have written before, to the rather distressing hour for the ceremony, it is difficult to find out exactly what did happen. It seems, however, that there were present four grandsons of people who helped to erect Fort Alice. Later on in the morning it appears that a party of Chinese Towkays erected another post, which is only right, since had it not been for the energy and perseverance of Chinese in the past the history of the Batang Lupar would have been very different. It was pleasing to note that Mr. F. A. W. Page-Turner who has recently retired after fifteen years in the Second Division, most of which was spent as Resident, was in Simanggang on a visit and took a hand in the ceremony. The plan of the offices is a three-sided building built of billian on a concrete foundation whilst inside walls will be of asbestos material. A steel and concrete strong-room is being constructed in the part to be used as a Treasury, and there will be a special room for filing records. The whole of the old Astana site has been lowered and levelled and the building will extend as far as the previous Astana kitchen. At present the main framework, with the exception of the roof, has arrived, and as most of the timber is already prepared, it is expected that the building will be ready for opening in July.
In the Official Report for the Second Division will be found (if it is published) a short account of the visit of the Assistant Resident of Sintang, N.I. to Simanggang.
Mr. Scheuer was accompanied by Mrs. Scheuer and Mr. Burgermeestre, Acting Controleur of Semitau. The party arrived in Lubok Antu on the 27th of last month after a two hours’ walk in the rain from the nearest Dutch Station, Badan. In years past this Station was an important outpost with a proper garrison, but in these peaceful times it has lapsed into a very small post in charge of a Native Officer only. The road from Badan to this station is good, and except for a few bits of swamp and some slippery hills is an easy two hours’ walk. The Assistant Resident was accompanied by two of his Malay Native Officers and eight Dyak Chiefs. It is remarkable how a few miles one way or the other changes completely the titles held by these Dyaks. Five were styled Pateh and three Temonggong whilst both Malays bore the title of Demang. The party visited Simanggang and expressed surprise at the grass lands round about the Station.
When one lives in a place nothing remains entrancing. For long, or perhaps it is that our senses become blunted. Simanggang. however, at wavs sterns to delight visitors It has still much of the restful air which gives the place name of “Sleepy Hollow.” The town seems to have stopped still for a few decades; or, if perhaps not quite that, it has advanced along the path of progress a little more slowly than its fellows.
The shallow livers guard the approach of any but the smallest vessels, and the comparatively dense population of Dyaks forbids Chinese immigration except in limited numbers. From the Second Division have sprung all that big Dyak population which now inhabits the greater part of the Rejang and its tributaries-the upper reaches of most of the Melanau Rivers, and now considerable parts of the Fourth Division and even the Fifth.
Simanggang is one of the historical places in Sarawak, well beloved by His Highness the late Rajah, who torso many years never appointed a Resident to take charge, but retained it as his own special Division.

Overheard the other day. -
“Oh I say, do you know how B-is?”
“Why what’s the matter with him?” 
“Didn’t you know? He got wet the other
day in the dry dock.”
THE OPTIMISTIC FIDDLER.

Mainly About Nothing.
FAMOUS FILM STAR IN SARAWAK.
DOUGLAS RINALDO VISITS LAND OF ROMANCE.
COMMUNISM IS BUNK SAYS STAR OF TALKIE FIRMAMENT
Impressive in the extreme were the arrangements made to receive Douglas Rinaldo, famous Movie and Talkie Star, on his visit to Kuching.
The great day opened promisingly, King Sol in brightest mood smiling down on the hearts of the assembled multitude, which numbered at the lowest computation five hundred thousand persons. A posse of our stalwart Sarawak Police under the supervision of the Commissioner in person-maintained order in the vast throng, for which the band of the Sarawak Rangers whiled away the time by rendering on their gleaming instruments those matchless melodies endeared to us from the cradle by the muses of Hayden Coffin and Dame Clara Butt Special quick excursions and a motor charabanc service had been arranged to bring outstation visitors to the Metropolis for the occasion.
Notable among the many celebrities assembled on the wharf to do the famous visitor honour were the Archduke Ferdinand of Russia, Lord Rothermere, Their Serene Highnesses the Amir and Almirah of Khergh, Mr. Hiram B. Schwitzlemeyer. Napoleon Buonaparte, Mrs. Beecher Stowe, Jack Dempsey, Miss Tallulah Bankhead, the first Duke of Wellington (who, it was interesting to note, was cordiality itself to his old antagonist), the Baroness Schnlwitz von Bogel. Professor Dingleberry, the Dowager Empress of Morocco and Mr. N. E. Hughes. While waiting for the arrival of the star an animated altercation arose in this distinguished assembly as to whether 7 or 8 was the correct number of ex-wives of the idol of the cinema public whom they were about to receive. In the course of the argument rocks, dim bells, pineapples, Lewis guns, scimitars, stink-pots, bombs, bayonets, brick bats, tear gas. Ink-stands, spears, cannon balls, pumpkins and lumps of pig iron were resorted to and blows were freely exchanged. Indeed, it seemed probable that an unfortunate fracas might ensue, but Patrolman Kelly arrived on the scene and by his tact quickly restored order, proposing with lightning promptitude the figure 17 as a solution equally honourable to both parties. The ready-witted constable’s solution at once appealed to ill and was unanimously accepted, Patrolman Kelly being heartily congratulated by all present, many of whom were bleeding profusely Napoleon Buonaparte warmly denied having threatened to pass the Duke of Wellington one “across the boko,” loudly protesting that he would never use such an ungentlemanly epithet to describe His Grace’s aristocratic proboscis, from which, incidentally the claret was pouring in a ruby stream. The late Empreror’s explanation was graciously accepted, and on Mr. Schwitzlemeyer restoring to their rightful owners the seven hundred and twenty-nine gold and silver articles which he had abstracted from their pockets during the fray, general harmony once again reigned supreme.
For his resource and pluck. Patrolman Kelly is to receive the thanks of the Mayor and corporation of Kuching in a gold casket.

TREMENDOUS WELCOME.
MAMMOTH CRASH FROM CLOUDS.
As the steamer bearing Douglas Rinaldo came into sight, a roar of acclamation burst from half a million worshipping throats. Guns boomed, cymbals crashed, drums banged, bombardons, droned, sackbuts twittered, lutes thrummed, clavichords tinkled, haut-boys tootled, psalteries twanged and the air was mazy with coloured streamers and confetti. Seventeen thousand rockets went up simultaneously from the roof of the Supreme Court, and nine hundred and two dirigibles and other aircraft circled and stunted above the town, dropping showers of tasteful leaflets on which were printed eulogies of the hero of the hour, with, on the reverse side, a neat acrostic advertising a well-known brand of gripe-water.
Unfortunately, two squadrons of twenty-six bombing planes co-opted specially for the occasion collided in midair, the resultant wreckage falling to earth and killing outright no less than three thousand and sixteen of the crowd, most of these being women and children. Ambulances were rushed to the scene of the disaster, however, and all debris was quickly cleared away by Municipal Lorries.

RINALDO IS SUPREME ATTRACTION.
As the steamer docked, the roar of welcome baffles description. Quietly, unassumingly, Rinaldo stepped onto the quay dressed in faultless morning clothes and wearing in his hatband a gardenia, his favourite flower. He announced his presence by that gently Rinaldian cough known to so many millions of Talkie fans, and which so many have tried, albeit unsuccessfully, to imitate. Short, modest, with no suspicion of phlegm behind the uvular, it is yet characteristic of one who must forever rank among the greatest of mankind. At this juncture the band were seen to fall flat upon their faces, and Lord Rothermere, exploded with a loud report, several bystanders being spattered with fragments of his Lordship’s anatomy. Fourteen hundred dogs went mad together and were removed to safekeeping by the Municipal Dog Snatcher who doffed his Dog- snatching hat in honour of the event and stood for a moment gazing reverently at a treasury voucher which was being waved by a tiny tot perched on top of the Customs Office.
Douglas Rinaldo on landing was immediately surrounded by six hundred and fifty-right reporters. and smilingly granted an interview, which was relayed to the outskirts of the crowd by approximately one thousand loud speakers.

CLOUD WILL LIFT DECLARES WORLDS GREATEST MIRTH PROVOKER.
Fiscal problems, said the world-renowned comedian, are now engaging the attention of the whole world. I think the present period of depression wilt soon pass but, in the meantime, let us keep stout hearts. I do not think that communism is any remedy for the depression. I think the Russian Five Year plan will fail.
I believe in a future life though I am not a strict Churchman. I am always cast for humorous rules but it is my ambition one day to play Hamlet.
I make it a rule to eat seven oranges and two heads of lettuce every morning and I take plenty of exercise such as swimming and fencing. In the Movie business one has to keep lit.
I don’t care at all really for fame or wealth all. I want is a quiet home with kiddies round me.
I think the F.M.S Railways are the best in the world.

DRAMATIC INCIDENT.
Enthusiasm was now at fever pitch, with guns crashing, sirens hooting and flags waving everywhere, but the climax of emotion was reached when a young and attractive girl burst her way through the serried ranks of bystanders, dashed onto the wharf and. thrusting aside the Rev. Victor Bundook. the learned prelate deputed by the City Fathers to read the address of welcome flung herself on the filmstar’s manly bosom, crying that she was his first wife whom he had forgotten, but who had never forgotten him. The star folded her in his arms, kissed her on the brow and then laughed heartily, all the spectators, including the venerable pastor, joining in the general merriment. That monster audience simply rocked with delight but not for long, for as the young lady detached herself from her loved one’s embrace she was unfortunately clubbed to death by the dog snatcher, who mistook her for a kangaroo, it seems. Then was that huge concourse overcome with grief. Torrents of tears poured from all those thousands of lachrymal ducts and the huge crowd, touched to the inmost core, burst into heart-rending sobs, not the least affected being the aged prebendary himself. Big strong men who had known the horrors of battle and sudden death were making frank use of their handkerchiefs, and it is safe to say that there was not a single dry eye in that record assemblage. Just at this most dramatic moment a diversion was created by the appearance of a flight of wombats, which were seen to circle gravely round the Film Star’s noble head, and the sight of this phenomenon was the occasion for an outbreak

OLD SARAWAK.
From the Sarawak Gazette 60 Years Ago.
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE
No. 14] THURSDAY, 30th MAR 1871. [ Pries 5 Cts.

It is to be hoped that the late arrival Mons. Poncelet. will receive the liberal assistance and patronage of the inhabitants of Sarawak. A piano tuner and general musician cannot fail to be of use to our circle and a man possessing much qualification is not easy to be found in the East. His abilities would be specially appreciated if he could play the new harmonium in Church and teach the boys to sing creditably. This is itself would entitle him to the gratitude of our community, and the congregation I feel sure will respond to my views and hope that the Church authorities will not fail in benefiting by this gentleman’s assistance.
Mons. Poncelet holds a testimonial from the Dutch Resident at Amboina as to his character, etc.

OUTSTATIONS.
His Highness the Rajah sailed on the 14th instant in the s.s. Royalist on a visit to two or three of the outstations, chiefly those on the Saribas and Batang Lupar rivers. He has been at Saribas, where he stayed two days, proceeding thence to Simanggang and intending to attend his visit to Marup and neighbouring places.
Affairs on the Saribas river were on the whole in a satisfactory state. A few trifling among Ibe Dyaks had to be decided such as are sure to arise on a river removed to some extent from the immediate supervision of a Government officer, but the people were well disposed and generally free from complaint. This fact is perhaps of some importance considering the former character of the inhabitant and their isolated position.

A report has readied us from Sibu, that the people have been much alarmed by some bad characters prowling about under their houses, with some bad intent. One man has been wounded, but luckily the parang or sword with which he was struck turned, and he only received a blow from the back of the weapon instead of the edge, his assailant escaped.
The Resident of Sibu has given Orders that no one should go out after dark without a light, and it is to be hoped that these mischievous marauders may shortly be apprehended.

First Division News.
February, 1931.
Extracts from the First Divisional Reports for February, 1931. by Mr. P. M. Adams Acting Resident: -
Resident’s Court. -Seven criminal cases were heard during the month. Of these, one was murder, one assault, two criminal breach of trust in respect of Government property, one cheating and two other offences.
Lim Chuan, an inmate of the Lunatic Asylum, Kuching suffering from homicidal mania, was found guilty of murdering another inmate named Chong Kong on the 10th. He was sentenced to be detained as a criminal lunatic during His Highness the Rajah’s pleasure.
General. -The new filing system was introduced. A meeting was held to consider the proposal to build a new Mosque, and it was pointed out to the subscribers that the funds available were hopelessly inadequate to carry out the scheme. It was agreed that subscribers should be given the option of withdrawing all or part of their subscriptions, and when it was certain what funds remained to repair the old Mosque thoroughly and make extensive improvements. It is estimated that between $10,000 and $18,000 will be available.
It was discovered that many Tua Kampongs had been withholding Government monies collected. All books were called in and as a result of this T. K. Sudin of Samarahan and T. K. Karim of Sambier were sentenced to six months each and dismissed. Since this many reports have been received concerning Sudin, and it is clear that he has been extorting money from the natives for years, but had such a remarkable influence over them that they did not dare to complain.
It was not found possible to visit the substation, during the month.

DISTRICT OFFICE.
February, 1931.
The Acting District Officer, Mr. W. S. B. Buck, reports: -
District Court. -Sixteen cases were heard, one which was criminal and fifteen civil. A case was brought by Secretary for Chinese Affairs against Tan Tsoan Tong and eight others for contravention of Secret Societies’s Order, 1930, No. 8-1, under section 5, and a conviction was obtained.

Magistrate’s Court. -Seventy-one cases were heard, six of which were criminal and sixty-five civil. Forty-four summary cases were brought before the Court, resulting in forty-three convictions and one acquittal.
Judicial. -Criminal cases during the month remained about the same figures but there was a considerable drop in civil claims probably owing to the Chinese New Year. The only cases of note were charges of house-breaking against Chua Ah Chin, Hylam, who was convicted and sentenced to terms amounting to two years in all.
General. -Two coroners inquisitions were held during the month, verdicts of death from natural causes, and death from tuba poisoning self-administered being registered.
I should like to suggest that the main drive up to the Government offices (District Office side) be macadamized or else the heavy gravel be rolled in or otherwise dealt with. At present it is impossible to ride a bicycle on it and in view of the regular traffic it takes, would well repay any necessary outlay of expenditure.
Batu Kawa was visited regularly during the month and the station was in a clean and quiet condition.
The usual holidays were observed for Hari Raya and Chinese New Year.

LAND OFFICE.
February, 1931.
The Land Officer. Mr. T. M. Griffiths, reports: -
Stapok Lots. -These one and half acre lots situated at approximately the fourth mile Rock Road and known as Stapok Lots were alienated and registered in lots.
Quit Rent. -Payments are being made very slowly. This is of course in many cases attributable to the difficult conditions prevailing at the present time.
Shop Lots. -The investigation of the ownership and boundaries of alienated areas of the bazaar properties is proceeding and ten blocks of shop- houses are now completed. A commencement on the final block has been made.
Simanggang Road. -Owners of gardens between the 10th mile and 27th mile situated in the Simanggang Road Land Reserve are very reluctant in applying for their titles, covering land allowed under the Land Reserve Investigations.
At the time of inspection much opposition was shown by the owners on account of the resumption of uncultivated land. Every means was tried by them to obtain a larger area than was possible under the Reserve Regulations.
The cutting of the rentis of the northern boundary of the Land Dyak Reserve has reached a point close so the Sadong River, and a few days more work should complete it. Notice boards have been erected wherever the rentis crosses a river or path.

UPPER SARAWAK AND LUNDU.
February, 1931.
The Acting Assistant District Officer, Mr. P. Murray-Scott, reports: -
General. -Nothing of importance occurred during the month, and work was extraordinarily light. Police patrols again reported no evidence of further smuggling from Dutch Territory, though it is possible that it has not yet been entirely stamped out.
The death of Pengarah Saboh of Kampong Emproh, Left-Hand Branch, which occurred sometime in January, was reported on the 2nd.
Courts. -Very few cases were heard, and none were of any importance.
P.W.D. -All loads were in very fair condition, though they suffered at times from the heavy rains.
Prisons. -Prisoners averaged 42 men and were employed for the most part on roads within the station.
Health. -There was a great improvement in the health of the station, and especially of the Jail.
Rainfall. -Heaviest recorded in 24 hours 1.05. Daily average .29. Total for the month 8’22 inches.
Gold Mining. -255.72 ounces of actual gold were obtained by the Bidi Gold Mining Company for the month of January, 1931.
Lundu. -I did not visit this station during the month under review, but nothing of importance was reported by the Court Writer.

SADONG.
February, 1931.
The Officer-in-Charge, Mr. J. J. Hill, reports: -
Court. -Court work during the month has been very light and only three cases call for mention. Acham was sentenced to three months for theft under Section 379. Junit was sentenced to six months for cheating under Section 417 and Luie was sentenced to three months for theft under Section 379.
Medical. —-At the General Hospital no patients were admitted, one was discharged. The Hospital was empty at the end of the month.
At the Dispensary 61 out-patients made 72 visits for treatment.
Health. -On the 14th instant the Dresser-in-Charge of Sadong Hospital took over the duties of Sanitary Inspector from J. A. Harry who proceeded to Kuching on the 14th instant.
Agriculture. -The Director of Agriculture Mr. J. S. W. Bean and Mr. G. St. F. Dare paid a short visit to the station on the 10th instant in connection with the Bugis Padi Planting Scheme and the Government Controlled Coconut Garden.
Prison. -The health of the prisoners has been good. The prison gang averaging 11.4 was employed on the upkeep of the station.

Sadong Collieries Report.
February, 1931.
Extracts from the Sadong Collieries Report for February, 1931, by Mr. J. W. Evans, Manager: -
The output, export, local consumption, and coal stock figures for the month are as follows: -
The Mohammedan fasting month, followed by the Raya Puasa holidays and the Chinese New Year celebrations, had a greatly diminished effect on output.
The old custom of granting advances to employees for these recurrent events was discontinued and in accordance with Treasury Circular No. 1/3, no cash advances were granted.
The total rainfall for the month was 17’41 inches. The rainstorm which occurred on the night of the 26th, caused numerous landslides and floods, the chief of which was the large subsidence of the No. 12 Mine shale dump, and a fall of roof on the mine slant of No. 8 Mine, the extent of which is difficult to estimate, as the passage is completely blocked up and the mine rendered temporarily idle.

British Legion.
REMEMBRANCE DAY APPEAL.
We have been asked by the Honorary Secretary of the Sarawak (Kuching) Branch of the British Legion to publish a letter received by him from Headquarters in London thanking all persons in Kuching, Sibu and elsewhere in Sarawak (With the exception of Miri, who have their own Branch) who assisted in and contributed towards this noble Fund by the sale and purchase of poppies.
In addition to this letter, the Honorary Secretary has received another letter from Headquarters in London acknowledging receipt of a further sum of £3. S. 3d., which made the total sum remitted to London in respect of last year’s collection amount to £196. 1s. 1d. or $1,699.70.
F. O. BLAGG. Esq.,
Honorary Secretary, Sarawak
(Kuching) Branch,
British Legion,
Kuching. Sarawak. 7th January, 1931.
DEAR Mr. BLAGG,
I write to acknowledge with very sincere thanks receipt of your letter of the 6th ultimo with which you so kindly send Drafts to the valtfe of £192. 12s. 10d. as the result of the 1930 Remembrance Day Appeal and sale of Poppies in Sarawak for the benefit of Earl Haig’s Fund, and in enclosing herewith our official receipt P6933 for this amount. I would congratulate you and all concerned on this record collection, which speaks for itself for your Organization, and the generosity of ail who subscribed.
Lord Jellicoe, the Legion’s President. asks me to assure you and your co-workers of his warmest thanks for the praiseworthy effort made in the cause he has so much at heart, and he would be glad if you could find some means of conveying an expression of his gratitude to ail who contributed so generously to your Appeal.
The British Legion has a year of very hard work in front of it, as distress amongst the beneficiary of the Fund is more severe now than at any time since the War, and the support so sympathetically given will therefore be of the most material help.
In conclusion, I have to say that Lady Haig, Poppy Day’s Patroness, has been greatly touched by the volume of willing assistance given by public spirited men and women to this year’s Appeal, and has asked me, on her behalf, to thank you and your helpers for your valuable share in this.
Believe me,
Yours very truly,
(Sgd.) W. G. WILLCOX,
Captain.
Organizing Secretary,
Appeal and Publicity Dept.,
British Legion.

Spring Race Meeting Billiard and Pool Handicap.
The above competitions were held as usual at the Sarawak Club, but owing to few Outstation members visiting Kuching for the races it was not possible to have an Outstation section.
As usual the handicappers made their usual blunders, but in spite of them some close and interesting games resulted.

Sarawak Turf Club.
Members who have not as yet paid their subscription for the year ending 31st December, 1931, are respectfully requested to do so as soon as possible.
Hitherto. the Club has enjoyed an annual Grant of $3,000 from Government for the upkeep of the Course, etc., but his is now discontinued.
It may here be mentioned that anyone who by 31st January last had not notified the Hon. Secretary of his resignation of the Club, is liable and is expected to pay his subscription without its having to be applied for repeatedly.
Subscriptions $10 (Kuching Member) and $5 (Outstation Member; should be sent to The Borneo Co., Ltd., Kuching.

Turf Club Notes.
Below will be found a statement showing the financial details of the recent Spring Meeting. Taking into consideration the general depression in trade, and that Chinese New Year and Hari Raya occurred a few days before the Meeting, the Com-mittee has every reason to congratulate itself on the result, which show an excess of Revenue over Expenditure of some $96.
It has been suggested that a Meeting be held on June 6th and 8th.

Kuching Rifle Club.
The Donegall Bronze Badge, presented by the National Rifle Association, will be competed for on Thursday. 23rd April, 1930, at 4.30 p.m.
Conditions: -14 shots in two series at 200 and 7 shots at 500 yards. Bisley scoring. no handicaps. Sighting shots allowed but not convertible
The Badge becomes the absolute property of the winner, and entitles him to enter for the Donegall Cup and money prizes at every succeeding Annual Bisley Meeting.

Third Division News.
February, 1931.
Extracts from the Third Divisional Reports for February, 1931, by Mr. C. D. Adams, Resident: -
Court. -Two Civil cases were heard, including one appeal. Claims amounted to $1,111. Four Criminal cases were heard, one resulting in a conviction and three being adjourned.
General. -Her Highness the Ranee and the Dayang Elizabeth returned to Kuching on the 4th instant after a stay of five days, during which time a visit to a Dyak House at Bawang Assan was made.
All Penghulus and Tuai of Kanowit arrived and were detained here in the hope that Asoon appear, but it being reported that Asoon was on his way to Kuching they were all allowed to return.
Owing to decrease of staff, Mr. Betram Gray, of Tanah Estates, Limited, left for Singapore on the 7th instant.
The Divisional Treasurer, Mr. McGinn, visited Matu and Daro during the month.
Capt. Gibson, Harbour Master, visited light-houses in the Rejang Delta.
The Director of Public Works, Capt. C. P. Lowe, accompanied by Mrs. C. P. Lowe, paid a visit here in connection with Sarikei Wharf.
I left Kuching on the 19th instant and was still away at the end of the month.

SIBU.
The District Officer. Mr. W. F. Dick, reports: -
Courts. -Various people were fined for illicit dis-tilling of arrack in the Foochow Colony. Fines and fees for the month totalled $858.70.
Mr. H. G. Aikman, Acting Assistant District Officer, Kapit, left here on 5th for Sarikei to take over that station temporarily during Mr. J. O. Gilbert’s absence on local leave. Abang Enjah returned from the UIu Kanowit on 4th and reported that ex-penghulu Asoon threatened to shoot any Government people who went near him. All Penghulus and Tuai Rumah from Kanowit, Julaw, Entabai, Machan, Poi and Ngemah came to Sibu between 10th and 13th to confer about Asoon; chiefs from Binatang and Sarikei were also sent for and at a meeting held on the 14th it was decided to send T. R. Gani to see Asoon and try and induce him to come down to Sibu. T.R. Gani returned on the 18th and reported that Asoon refused to come down, the matter was then referred to the Resident, Mr. C. D. Adams, who was in Kuching.
Mr. E. V. Andreini arrived on 28th instant to take over the District Office.

MATU AND DARO.
The District Officer, Mr. E. V. Andreini. reports: -
General. -Mr. McGinn, Divisional Treasurer, audited the books of the district, arriving on the 10th leaving on the 13th. I visited Daro, Paloh and Bukau from the 10th to 23rd. I was transferred to Sibu at the end of the month and handed over to the Native Officer and the Court Writer.
Court. -On the 11th an inquest was held on the body of an unknown female discovered in the river near Tanjong Blatok and brought to Daro. It was found that she had been killed by some person or persons unknown. There were wounds on the body and both arms had been cut off. Up to the time of writing no clue to the murderer or murderers has been found, and it is thought that the deed was probably committed in the Sibu or Sarikei districts.
On the 16th P.C. Basuni who was making inquiries about the murder at Bukau, had his suspicious aroused by two Chinese who ran away on seeing him and arrested one Sang Tee. This man on arrival at Daro told me that the other was Wong Chi Chong, who was wanted by the Sibu Police in connection with counterfeit coining. I at once proceeded to Bukau but was too late to catch this man. though I managed to secure his clothing and effects which contain his passport and photo, and also several other letters and passports which, may be of assistance to the police in tracing other fugitives.
Trade. -Most traders at Matu now deal with Binatang, and the trade to Kuching direct gets less and less every year. In spite of low prices traders here have not had a really bad year.

KAPIT.
The Acting Assistant District Officer, Mr. R. G. Aikman, reports: -
Courts. -Owing to the absence from the station of the Magistrate there were no cases heard during the month.
General. -The Acting Assistant District Officer, Mr. R. G. Aikman, left on the rd to do temporary duty at Sarikei and was still away at the end of the month.
Native Officers Abang Abu Seman and Wan Hussein returned from Pala Wong on the 4th.
The Dyaks are at present busy harvesting and no reports as to the quality and quantity of their crops are yet available.
Native Officer Wan Hussein visited the Melinis and adjacent rivers from the 21st to the 27th. He reported that all was well there and that the Dyaks were busy harvesting.
Penghulu Jingga was down during the month.
A Chinese hawker named Ah Lak was drowned in the Bangkit, Katibas on the 9th through felling out of his boat while negotiating a rapid.
The Native Officer, Song, Abang Sleh, held an inquiry as a result of which a verdict of death by accident was returned.

BINATANG, SARIKEI AND REJANG.
The Acting Assistant District Officer, Mr. J. O. Gilbert, reports: -
Courts. -There was an average amount of work in the Courts during the month and there are no cases that call for special comment.
General. -I left for Singapore by s.s. Kuranda on the 7th on vacation leave and was still away at the end of the month.
Native Officer Tuanku Mohamat was transferred to Sarikei from Rejang, his place at the latter station being taken by Wan Brahim from Sarikei.

MUKAH AND OYA.
The District Officer, Mr. E. O. Bruce, reports: -
General. -I visited Oya on the 22nd, taking the Government dresser, and regret to report that Datu Pengeran Mohamat, senior Native Officer succumbed Io double pneumonia soon after our arrival. After attending the funeral, I visited Dalat, and returned to Mukah on the 25th.
Telephone communication with Oya was interrupted on the 1st but the break was located and repaired within a few hours.
S.S. Margaret called off the Kuala on the 21st. Messrs. Temple Waite and Summer, S.O.L. disembarked, proceeding up river later to continue geological and topographical surveys.
Total rainfall registered was 10’20 inches.
Courts. -A normal number of cases was dealt with.
The sentence of death passed upon Tigai bin Ikud, Melanau, for murder, was confirmed by the Supreme Court. He was executed on the 26th.
Police and Prisons. -The average daily number of prisoners was 42.3. They have been employed on the usual routine work, mowing, weeding, ditching, etc.
Police drill has been continued daily with good results. Material for new uniforms arrived on the 27th after numerous delays en route. A supply of comprehensive forms for records of criminal prisoners has been received, but the finger print material is not yet to hand.
A certain amount of engkabang has been delivered in the bazaar The price, however, remains too low for large transactions, which is a great pity, as there is a bumper crop, a great deal of which will probably be wasted.
Reports of a good padi harvest have been received from up river, especially in Penghulu Banyui’s district, farther down river they are not so good, but better than last year, which is very welcome news.

OYA AND DALAT.
The Acting Assistant District Officer, Oya and Dalat, Mr. E. H. Elam, reports: -
General. -On the 22nd, Datu Pengeran Mohamat of Oya died after 30 years; Government service, first as Native Officer and from 1927 as Datu. He was about to go on the Haj in spite of his old age, and Oya is indebted to him for reconditioning a very dilapidated mosque. Of his ten children, eight died, leaving only two daughters, one of whom is married to the Junior Native Officer, Awang Lai.
Petty theft started in the Dalat Bazaar and extra guards have been put on at night. One Chinese is on remand at Oya at present for house-breaking by night.
Court. -In the Oya Courts there were no cases worthy of mention, but a Dalat two cases of assault were heard in which the defendants were all found guilty and fined.
Prison. -The prison gang averaging 18.24 were employed in the general upkeep of the station and work on Day’s Road. The health of the jail has not been at all good, stomach troubles and festered wounds keeping two or three men from work regularly. The dresser came over from Mukah and inspected the jail, sending over the necessary medicines on his return.

Fourth Division News.
February, 1931.
Extracts from the Fourth Divisional Reports for February, 1931, by Mr. H. D. Aplin, resident: -
Court work was not very heavy and there were no serious cases. At Baram the new Arrack Farmer for 1931 took proceedings against the outgoing Farmer and an upriver trader for selling excess arrack in December and retailing it without a licence.
The case was adjourned for the opinion of the Controller of Government Monopolies.
Owing to traders attempting to collect old outstanding debts through the Courts, I have found it necessary to inform them that the old Order that passbooks must be given to their creditors will be enforced as from 1st April of this year.
I visited Baram on the 11th and returned again on the 15th visiting Bakong on the way.
The Foochows petitioned that owing to bad times they might be let off their quit rent for this year, or that this rent might be carried forward to another year. The Superintendent of Lands was consulted and replied that he could not see his way to do this for the whole community but that each case might be considered separately on its merits.
The native throughout the Division have been busy on their padi which is reported from most districts to be good but not quite up to expectations owing to ravages by pests.
The Foochows at Bintulu have had a poor crop, but this is accounted for by starting to plant too late. It is hoped this year to find them a piece of land and get them started early.
The engkabang is falling but unfortunately the price is poor, and the people are so busy harvesting that they are not bothering to collect the nuts.
The Sarawak Oilfields, Limited have reduced their water rate from 10 cents to 7 cents a ton. As a result, I have been able to reduce the rate to consumers by meter from 60 cents to 45 cents a 1,000 galloon and half the present amount paid by these using standpipes.
I proceeded to Bintulu by the Auby on the 27th and was still there at the end of the months.
The Chinese and Malays petitioned that their water rates might be reduced. The matter has been referred to the Chief Secretary.

BINTULU.
The Acting District Officer, Mr. A. Macpherson, reports: -
Court. -Fines amounting to $435 were imposed during the month.
P.W.D. -The pipe line had one burst, otherwise it is giving satisfaction. Mandor Assim and gang are still erecting bridges and supports for pipe line.
The carpenters were employed on the wharf and bridges.
Native Affairs. -The kampong people are feeling the pinch as the price of engkabang has not come up to expectation.
One hears that Bintulu Dyaks are not doing much collecting, but are concentrating on the padi harvest which is fairly good.
Shipping-(Kedurong). -Kedurong was visited on 8th and lighthouse found in good order. The grounds seem to be going to seed.
Sebauh. -I visited Sebauh on 10th, spending the night. The Foochow Concession Road was inspected. It is nearly finished as far as clearing and ditching is concerned There is no surface to the road yet.
The headman was called up and promised to do his best to get it finished by the end of March. The Wesleyan Mission building is practically completed.
The B.C. School was inspected, and appears to be doing well.

MIRI.
The District Officer, Mr. F. G. Carpenter, reports: -
Court. -188 writs were issued, not including judgment summonses. Of these 36 were in the Criminal and 152 in the Civil Courts. 113 suits were disposed of which 32 were criminal and 81 civil. In the Criminal Courts 28 convictions were obtained.
The principal cases were those in which two Chinese were imprisoned for three years each for receiving and a Hylam was sentenced to four months’ imprisonment for forgery.
Claim involved in Civil actions amounted to $10,057. Fees in al matters to $376 and fines to $240. $2,424 was received into Court Deposits and $2,335 paid out.
Health. -Considerable trouble was experienced in clearing a small drain in Kampong Dagang, where stagnant water had been lying for some months and mosquitoes were breeding. Owing to the water-logged state of this drain it is suggested that invert concrete drains be laid down instead of the present earthwork.
Medical. -One hundred and seventy-four patients were treated in the Government Dispensary, and those with repetition made 410 attendances for treatment.
Outstations. -I visited Niah, Suai and Sibuti between the 4th and 10th.
After a long search the Cave Register at Niah was eventually found in an old Court book in the Niah godown. Orders were given to have this rewritten and kept in the office.
All bridges at Niah are in a very dilapidated state and must be mostly renewed as soon as possible.
Most of the cases heard during this outstation visit concerned forest offences and all were of a trivial nature.
Public Works. -Good progress was made in all works, and the residential compound at Tanjong Lobang continues to improve gradually.
All footbridges between Miri and Sibuti were repaired and in some instances renewed. 
Preparation was made for the electric power-house at Tanjong Lobang and a site was cleared. The foundations for the engine and dynamo had already been laid down before the end of the month.
The District Officer’s bungalow on the Peninsula was handed over to Messrs. Sarawak Oilfields, Limited.

Fifth Division News.
February, 1931.
Extracts from the Fifth Divisional Reports for February, 1931. by Mr. F. H Kortright, Resident: -
Court. -There were an unusual number of cases before the Court, the most important being that of Ukor Agong, a Tagal, who was tried for the murder of one Sawat Basai and sentenced to death. The conviction and sentence were duly confirmed by the Supreme Court, and the execution was carried out at Lawas.
There were two charges of house-breaking and theft for which the offenders were sentenced to imprisonment for terms of one year and six months respectively.
General. -Penghulu Punluyob and a number of Kalabits from Long Seridan, a tributary of the Tutoh, came down to sell their produce, etc. It took them eight days only, whereas to go to Marudi would have taken at least fifteen days.
P. W.D. and Prisons. -Prisoners working with the lorry were engaged in raising the surface of the Brunei Road.
Owing to the continued drought the main reservoir gave out, but a very good supply is being kept up from the reserve at Sungei Poyan.
Prisoners averaged 18.04.
Agriculture. -All the hill padi has now been harvested, but there are immense crops of swamp padi still to be reaped. The long spell of dry weather experienced is greatly helping this
I inspected all the pepper gardens which are being financed by the Agricultural Department, and found them all looking very healthy and well kept.
The rainfall amounted to 2’98 inches only.
Medical and Health. -The dresser-in-charge reports the health of the district was good.
The Medical Officer of Brunei paid his monthly visit of inspection.

LAWAS.
February, 1931.
The Acting Assistant District Officer, Mr. J. R. Combe, reports: -
Court. -Court work was light during the month, which may be accounted for by everybody being away harvesting padi.
Ukor Agong, a Tagal, was sentenced to death for murder and executed on the 27th instant.
General. -The conversion of the old Forest Bungalow into a hospital behind the fort was sanctioned, and contractor Wong Kiaw has been busy doing the necessary alterations. The dresser arrived from Kuching by the Auby on the 25th instant, and has now settled into his new quarters.
The Resident paid a visit on the 6th, returning to Limbang on the 9th. Mr. Corson, Deputy Assistant Conservator of Forests, Miri and Mr. Mansel of the Treasury also visited the station, the latter explaining the new system of filing which is being brought into use. Mr. Cook after an absence of some 10 months in Kuching returned to Tagai in the Auby. Mrs. Colina and her two children have come out from home with the result that the European population of Tagai now number five.
Sundar was visited from the I2th to 18th in order to settle two previous Court cases which had been adjourned. Several disputes arose at Sundar regarding the opening up of gardens to buffalo land. This has been left over for the next visit of the Resident at the beginning of next month.
Abang Suhaimi, Native Officer at Sundar, left in the Margaret on the 16th for transfer to Mukah. His relief, Native Officer Hamdan, of Mukah up to the time of writing has not yet arrived.

CORRESPONDENCE.
[The Editor it not responsible for the opinions of Correspondents.]

New Names for Mountain Ranges.
The Editor,
The Sarawak Gazette.	
Kuching.
PONTIANAK,	
15th February. 1931.
DEAR SIR,
Before leaving Borneo where I have worked and explored for about six years, and before closing a period in my life that I think has been the heat of all my 25 years out in the East. I would like to mention to other scientific travellers in this Island. Government Officers, surveyors, geologists and geographists that I have christened the mountain range along the border between Gunong Lasan Tojan and Gunong Batu Tiban the “Nienwenhuis Mountains” because Prof. Dr. Nienwenhuis was the first European to reach the top of Lasan Tojan. (See Nieuwenhuis-Quer duren Borneo. Vol. II). The Nieuwenhuis Mountains part the headwaters of the Balleh river from those of the Mahakkam.
The long range between the Balleh and the Baloi (or Rejang) has been named the “Hose Range,” thus honouring the world-famous ethnologist who has to his credit the ablest pioneer work in Borneo. I hope that there will no no objections to those names, and that in future they will appear on all maps of Sarawak and Dutch Borneo.
Yours faithfully,
L. H. Knot,
We are authorized to state that His Highness the Rajah has no objection to these names, which will, in consequence. appear on all future maps of Sarawak. Incidentally, it is interesting to note that Professor Krol’s recent fixation shows the watershed between Sarawak and Dutch Borneo some twenty miles to the Eastward of the position shown on previous maps, thus giving Sarawak-on paper more territory. -Ed.

Education for Natives.
The Editor.	
The Sarawak Gazette.	
Kuching.
ST. AUGUSTINE’S MISSION.
BETONG,
SARIBAS,
8th March, 1931.
SIR,
I have just been reading the leading article of this month’s Gazette, entitled “Education for Natives.”
There is no doubt much truth in what the writer says, but I fear that if your readers depend only upon that article for their information about mission schools amongst the Dyaks, they will get an entirely false idea of the ideals, methods and results of a great number of mission schools, and so I beg a space in your paper in which if possible to clear up some of the misunderstanding under which the writer of your article seems to be labouring.
I can say nothing of methods or results of education amongst Malays. This is and always has been in the hands of the Government. But I can speak with knowledge of the mission schools amongst the Dyaks of the Second Division, and very much of what your writer rightly deplores in the educational policy of the past and its bad effects upon character, does not apply to them.
First with regard to the teaching of English rather than of Malay. I fail to see how a knowledge of Malay would be of more use to a Dyak than a knowledge of English. The writer seems to imply that all our scholars have only an “imperfect” knowledge of English. Of course, it is imperfect. So in a sense is the knowledge of English of a seventh form boy from a Kuching school, but however imperfect it is there are some boys from outstation schools holding quite good posts under Government. There is one boy from the school at Betong working under Government who has passed others of seventh standard grade from Kuching schools, and I know of many old boys from Sabu school whose English would be called anything but “imperfect,” But apart from that, I should like to know, how would a knowledge of Malay be so useful to a Dyak? I hope your writer will inform me. Malay is not the lingua franca of this part of the country. I doubt whether a Malay from Kuching would understand many of the words used in the Malay kampongs up and down the river. The writer is apparently against the Dyaks moving away from their own part of the country. How then will a knowledge of Malay help him? It does not open any field of literature to him. It does not help to improve his methods of life. As far as I can see a working knowledge of English, enabling him to read simple books and papers, would be of far greater use and benefit to him.
Secondly: I always thought that the aim of true education was the foundation of character. At all events it is the aim of the four boys’ and one girls’ school under my charge. How would “a few days spent in a school garden be of infinitely greater benefit” than a few years spent in a mission school, in forming the characters of the scholars? Frankly I do not agree about this.
Thirdly: the writer speaks of “trouble” when the scholar leaves school and seek employment and fails to get it. What exactly is this trouble? Perhaps he will explain and give us some concrete examples. Does it really exist or is it only an assumption in the mind of the writer? We know nothing of it here. Of the many boys who have passed through mission schools many are well employed and well-spoken of by their employers but I believe the number who go back to their homes and take up their life of farming and gardening is far greater. I know of many who are quite happy and certainly are not too proud to work. A detailed list of the present occupation of old boys of our mission schools would be a revelation to the writer of your article.
Fourthly: Your writer seems to imply that only English is taught in our mission schools. This is very far from being the case. As I said before, our aim is character training and especially trying to supply what is lacking in the natural character of the Dyak-initiative, team-work, perseverance, attention to detail, the power of thinking for himself and shouldering responsibility. Our time-table includes far more than the teaching of English. In my schools there is not even a rule that English shall be spoken between the scholars. Here in our schools, there are daily two and a half hours of manual work which includes such things as tidying the compound, cleaning, leveling, draining, road making, dealing with sewage, repairs to buildings, painting, rough carpentry, building, fetching and chopping firewood and other kinds of work which will be of use to Dyaks in their homes. Malay is taught as a subject in the school in the higher forms. Writing and reading Dyak is taught from the lowest standards. Also, there are classes for simple mensuration and the calculation of timber for houses. The girls are taught weaving, sewing and laundry. Hygiene is not taught as a subject but the school rules and the explanation of them involves the teaching of hygiene by precept, and the elder boys are taught to dress wounds and sores and to give medicine in cases of sickness and are taught the care of the sick and how to render first-aid. The children are taught the benefit of regular habits of cleanliness of body and teeth and the use of light and air.
Each scholar has some piece of work for which he is responsible, and the elder boys are prefects each with his duty so that they all learn to shoulder responsibility.
It is quite true there is no school garden. What could we grow in it if we had it? I have tried vegetables. The land is not suitable. What else is there to plant? Perhaps your writer will explain and will give a subscription towards the initial expense of starting such a venture if it is really so beneficial. But is it? I doubt it.
Your writer may have had in his mind schools other than those of the Second Division, but he made such a sweeping statement, liable to mislead your reader, with regard to the policy and methods of education adopted by the mission schools of this district, that I felt bound to reply to him.
I hope that you will find room in your paper for my letter, which is of necessity rather lengthy.
I am, Sir,
Yours faithfully,
WILFRID LINTON,
Priest in charge of the
Saribas and Krian.
[We publish this letter without comment and we invite further correspondence from others interested in this all-important subject. Next month, we will publish a reply to the Rev. W. Linton’s letter. -Ed.]

Slips of the Pen.
The Editor,
Sarawak Gazette,
Kuching.
SIR,
Does not the Editor know that the proper way of speaking of a Bishop is “Right Reverend” not Reverend, i.e., The Right Reverend E. L. Danson not The Reverend Lugie Danson.
SURPTISED.
[Does not the writer know that the proper way of spelling “Surprised” is not “Surptised”? -All the same, we must humbly apologise for our abysmal ignorance of the niceties of Church etiquette. -Ed.]

Air Mails.
KARACHI-LONDON AIR MAIL SERVICE.
Notification has been received that the weekly air mail leaving Karachi each Wednesday and hitherto due in London on the following Wednesday, will now not reach London until the following Thursday. Air mails to connect with this service will continue to be despatched weekly from Penang as at present, but delivery in London will not be due until 20 or 21 days after dispatch from Penang.
























