VOL. LXI.
No. 934.
The Sarawak Gazette.
Price
KUCHING, Wednesday, July 1st, 1931.
20 CENTS.
The Sarawak Gazette.		 			
WEDNESDAY, JULY 1st, 1931.
Contents.

Births.
BLAGG. -On 29th May, to Mr. and Mrs. F. O. Blagg, a son.
EDWARDS. -On 19th June, to Mr. and Mrs. R. E. Edwards, a son.

Marriage.
On the morning of 30th May at 8 o’clock, at St. Thomas’ Cathedral. Mr. Eng Yaw Soon, youngest son of Mr. and Mrs. Eng Mong Yong of Kuching, to Miss Unice Voon Khiuk Hiong, youngest daughter of Mr. and Mrs. Voon Kon Siong of Paku, Upper Sarawak.

Engagement.
The engagement is announced of Mr. A. Heng Yeo Khoon of Simanggang, to Miss Anna Law, second daughter of the late Mr. Law Loong Quee and Mrs. Law Loong Quee, of Sadong.

Death.
June, 19th. -At Miri, Arthur Carey Jelf, of the staff of Messrs., the Sarawak Oilfields, Limited.

Local and Personal.
June.
The new Government offices in Rock Road and the new Police Station at the corner of Khoo Hun Yeang Street are making rapid progress. Both buildings should be ready for occupation in October.

We read in a home paper that Her Highness the Ranee was among those invited to attend Their Majesties’ first Court of the season, which was held on May 19th.

S.S. Vyner Brooke returned to the Kuching-Singapore run on June 2nd. The Kuching has been laid up at Tanjong Rhu, Singapore.

We hear from the Medical Department that over 600 cases of influenza were treated in Kuching during May, all these cases being Government employees or school children.
It therefore appears that the influenza epidemic was more serious than was commonly supposed.

On June 3rd the three Southampton Flying boats under the command of Squadron leader Livock returned to Kuching from Kudat, via Miri and Bintulu.
These flying boats, which passed through Kuching on their way North last April, left for Singapore on June 5th. We understand that this will be their last visit to Borneo, since they are soon to be replaced with a more modern type of craft.

Squadron-Leader Livock goes home on leave early in July, and does not expect to return to the Far East, at any rate for the present.
Apart from four months in Europe and a few short visits to neighbouring countries, Squadron-Leader Livock has spent the last five years in Singapore. His connection with this part of the world, however, dates from 1924, when he first came down here from Hong Kong.

It is interesting to read in the Saribas monthly report that a Dyak in the Rimbas has undertaken the manufacture of various sorts of rubber goods. These include water-proof coats, inflatable cushions, gun covers, knee-boots and similar articles; Mr. Daubeny, the Acting District Officer, was much impressed by the quality of these goods and states that the general standard and finish is excellent.
We trust that this enterprising Dyak will find a market for his products.

Not long ago consternation was caused in the Government offices in Kuching by the discovery on the Treasury steps of a Giant African Snail. The fact that this, beast, in spite of the war recently declared on all its species, should have the brass nerve actually to invade Government premises may be taken as a good indication of its truculence and aggressiveness.
In spite of a frantic hunt, the Treasury staff were unable to find a copy of the Agricultural Department’s circular setting forth the correct procedure to be adopted in fighting the mollusk. After a short war council had been called it was decided that since instruction, were lacking no offensive measures could be taken, and the snail was left where it was. Perhaps it is there still.

The Straits Steamship Company, have now made arrangements to drop Sarawak mail at Goebilt or Pending every Monday morning. With only one vessel on the Kuching-Singapore run, this regular mail service is very welcome.
First class passengers can also travel to Goebilt by the Straits boats, the local company providing a launch to bring them to Kuching. This arrangement should go far to obviate those annoying delays in Singapore sometimes experienced by people returning from leave.

Flood Tide, the Sibu magazine, has at last made its appearance. The cover design by Mrs. Le Gros Clark is excellent.

We hear that a recent attempt to introduce a form of pool played with eggs instead of the usual balls met with little encouragement from the Committee of the Gymkhana Club, Miri,
Club committees are apt to err on the const-native side, and it seems a pity that such an innovation should have been frowned on. Were the game to become popular, it would provide an excellent market for those coloured eggs which are produced by the thousand every Easter-time. We hear that eggs-dyers are feeling the present economic crisis acutely, and the position of the industry will hardly be improved by this obstinate refusal to stimulate the demand for British goods.

The name of the new Malay College in Kuching has been changed from “Rajah Sir James Brooke Malay College” to “Maderasah Melayu Sarawak.”
The college was opened on June 4th with an attendance of 280 boys, but it is expected that the number of students will shortly increase.

Mr. G. R. H. Arundell visited Kuching during the month in connection with Dyak affairs in the Kanowit district. He brought with him Penghulus Bunya and Grinang.

We hear that efforts are being made to codify the customs and fines at present in use among Land Dyaks. The task appears to be one of considerable difficulty, since every village seems to have its own particular customs-often extremely complicated-and the fines imposed vary accordingly. In many cases there seem to be no definite customs at all, and as often as not these are invented to suit particular cases.	.
It is hoped eventually to produce a definite table of fines which will be used by all Land Dyaks throughout the First Division.

At present very little is known about Land Dvak customs in comparison with those of other races. The Land Dyaks inhabit a restricted area, speak a difficult language, and unlike Sea Dyaks and similar tribes, they are naturally of a retiring disposition. They are a peaceful race, and even in the bad old days they were head-hunters only to a very slight degree, and then more by com-pulsion than by preference.

The Naval Appointment List states that Lieut.-Commander E. V. B. Baker. R.N. and Lieut. H. J. C. Stokes. R.N., late of H.M.S. Herald, have both been appointed to H.M.S, Fitzroy.
H.M.S. Fitzroy is a survey vessel employed in home waters.

The arrival of H.M.S. Bridgewater on June on the 16th provided a welcome excuse for Kuching to indulge in a little gaiety, -most refreshing in these anxious times. For nearly a week tiffin-parties, dinner-parties and dances were the order of the day.
An account of the visit of these two ships appears in another column.

On June 16th H.M.S. Herald landed a party of officers and men at Santubong to proceed with the hydrographic survey of the river from Sungei Siol to the Santubong mouth.
The party is under the command of Lieutenants K. St. B. Collins and C. S. E. Lansdown, R.N.

During the month His Highness the Rajah visited Sadong and Simanggang. We hear that an unprecedented number of Dyaks came down to see His Highness at Simanggang, but they had nothing of any special importance to bring forward.

Mr. J. B. Archer, Resident, Second Division. returned to Kuching with His Highness. Mr. Archer has now nearly recovered from the effect of the unfortunate accident he sustained last March.

Visitors to Kuching during the month included Mr. F. S. Gibson, a director of the Straits Steamship Co., Ltd., Mr. G. C. Parsons of Messrs. Paterson, Simons & Co., Ltd., and Mr. H. L. Houghton, from Singapore; Mr. G. H. Daly and Dr. A. D. Hutchison from Sibu; and Mr. W. V. Hanson, from Miri.
Mr. Hanson travelled down from Miri in H.M.S. Bridgewater.

We hear that the Min Teck School, Kuching, is busy preparing a concert consisting of Chinese, English and Malay items. Their view is to provide entertainment which, we think, will be of general appeal to the public. The concert will be given in the Globe Picture Theatre sometime during July.
We are informed by Messrs., the Chartered Bank Ltd., that out of a total of 30,872 chances applied for by the Bank in the Calcutta Sweepstake, only one horse was drawn.
This was “Burak,” which was drawn by Mr. G. W. Marshall, of Giridih.

His Highness the Rajah has been pleased to appoint Pengarah James of Kampong Sekrak to be Ketu’an Orang Kaya, a post which gives Pengarah James authority over all Land Dyak chiefs in the Sentah district.

His Highness the Rajah’s Departure.
We understand that His Highness the Rajah proposes to leave for Europe, by s. s.  Antenor which is due to leave Singapore on 12th August.
His Highness the Tuan Muda is expected to arrive in Singapore by the Cathay about August 8th.

His Highness the Rajah Visits Sadong and Simanggang.
On 10th June. His Highness the Rajah left in H.H M Y. Maimuna for a visit to Sadong and Simanggang. His Highness was accompanied by Mr. J. C. Swavne, Resident, First Division, and Mr. N. A. Middlemas, Superintendent of Surveys.
His Highness left Simanggang early on 15th June, arriving at Kuching the same evening. With His Highness travelled Mr. J. B. Archer, Resident, Second Division.

Obituary.
It is with the deepest regret that we have to record the death at Miri on 19th June, of Arthur Carey Jelf of the staff of Messrs. The Sarawak Oilfields, Limited. Mr. Jelf succumbed to an attack of influenza, and his death at the early age of 33 came as a great shock to all communities in Miri and to his many friends elsewhere in Sarawak.
Mr. Jelf who retired from the Royal Navy with the rank of Lieutenant-Commander, had served with Messrs. The Sarawak Oilfields. Limited, for some seven years. He filled with conspicuous success the post of Labour Superintendent, a position calling for high qualities of tact and patience, and in him the Sarawak Oilfields lose a loyal officer of exceptional ability.
Mr. Jelf was deservedly popular in Miri, and it is safe to say that everyone who had ever met him felt a deep sense of sorrow at the news of his death. The duties of his office brought him into close contact with the Administration at Miri, and the Company’s loss is equally Sarawak’s; his services were of great value to the Government, and his unfailing courtesy and helpfulness will long be remembered by those who had the very real pleasure of working with him.
Mr. Jelf was accorded a semi-military funeral which was most impressive, the route to the cemetery being lined with men of the Sarawak Rangers, whose band played the “Dead March” as the funeral cortege passed on its way to the grave. The service was conducted by the Right Reverend the Bishop of Labuan and Sarawak assisted by the Reverend F. W. Synnott, and floral tributes were received from every section of the community.
Mr. Jelf leaves a widow and child to whom we extend our deepest sympathy in their great loss.

Rajah Brooke’s Prophecy.
A reader of the Morning Post has sent the Editor a prophecy of 1850 by the find Rajah Brooke, when his efforts to extend British influence in the East were being called in question by the “little Englanders” of those days.
The prophecy was contained in a letter in which-after reference to “the silly and unworthy clamour” of certain politicians-the Rajah says: “The time will come in our country when no gentleman will serve the public, and your blackguards and your imbeciles will have a monopoly of appointments, though I believe there is not a cosy demagogue amongst the pack who would lead the life I lead for double the money I receive. It would not suit any of these ranting losers of peace and popularity, either in its exposure to danger, or climate, or monotony.”
The Rajah’s language, comments the Morning Post, is sweeping, but it would be rash to say that it will never be justified. The correspondent continues: “It is pleasant to know that, in spite of all the opposition in early days, the State of Sarawak, which has been governed so successfully for nearly a century on the lines laid down by its first English Rajah, has only recently presented 100,000 to the present British Government at a time when so many parts of the British Empire, unlike Sarawak, are dependent on Downing Street and hard put to it to find revenue.” -China Express and Telegraph.

TERIMA KASIH.
Kami sekalian orang orang Melayu Poetra Bumi Sarawak dengan hati yang penoh kesuka’an dan keria’an yang diserta’ie dengan hormat yang tiada berkeputusan menguchap sa-tinggi-tinggi terima kasih kepada kerja’an Sarawak yang Maha murah yang telah mampar kenan-kan perminta’an kami ya’itu pada menjadikan Hari Raya Haji itu satu hari Kelapasan bagi orang orang Islam di-tahun ini, pada tahun yang akan datang telah di-siarkan oleh kerja’an Sarawak yang Maha murah itu di-dalam rawangan Sarawak Government Gazettes yang batarih 16 hari bulan April, 1931, akan di-jadi satu hari kelepasan bagai ramai.
Maka atas kemurahan-nya itu sangat sangat-lah kami junjung tinggi dan engatkan selagi ada paridaran bulan dan mantahari.
ALLAH SELAMATKAN RAJAH KAMI
ALLAH SELAMATKAN NEGRI KAMI. 

The War on Books.
A LITERARY MAN’S TROUBLES IN THE TROPICS.
The Bookman in the tropics labours under difficulties undreamed of by his European brother. In England, treasures may be left on the shelves, or even on the table with perfect safety. Not so in the tropics.
In parts of tropical Africa the air is so dry at certain periods of the year, that the cover of a book left on the table overnight will be found curled almost back on itself by the morning. It is next to impossible to restore such a book to its original state. Pressure is almost certain to break the covers.
If the region is a damp one, troubles multiply to an extent that is heart-breaking. The moist heat of the atmosphere softens the glue and absolute disintegration may ensue. The ravages of insects, too, are disastrous. Cockroaches, for instance, are gourmands of the worst type, and their tastes are catholic to a degree.

GOLD PREFERRED.
If they have any weakness, it is for the gilt lettering on the backs of your choicest books. When that is finished, however, they will turn their attention cheerfully to the cloth itself; and if they show any discrimination in the matter of colour, it is for red. A very short time will suffice for the disappearance of a large patch, and the cloth itself will be frayed up as though it had been lightly filed.
Another pest specializes in boring, and it is particularly deadly in the case of books that have been undisturbed for a long period. The result of its operations Is a round hole frequently extending through the entire thickness of the book. It may even penetrate two or more volumes, in bad cases, while if the insect has taken a direction parallel to the leaves their state is better imagined than described.

HOW TO PREVENT IT.
The truth is that he who would enjoy books in the tropics must sacrifice time and trouble to their care. A well-made bookcase with glazed doors, preferably fitted with leaded glass, is the first desideratum. But insects will find access, however well your bookcase be made, and the most efficient method of protecting your books is to varnish them.
The Chinese in the Far East make a special varnish for this purpose, but though it is effective, one would hesitate to apply it to a book of value. A sprinkling of bicarbonate of soda on the shelves of the bookcase will deal with cockroaches fairly efficiently; but whatever measures are taken, books must be “aired.”
Stand them upon, on their edges, for a few hours on a dry day, but be careful to get them back into their places before evening falls. And, above all things, never leave the bookcase open. -C.S.G. -With acknowledgements to “John o’ London’s Weekly.”

The Blessings of Education.
CAMBRIDGE RESULTS.
The extraordinary extent to which the Cambridge Local Examinations, which add so greatly to the trials and excitements of adolescence in Malaya, are influencing school curricula in the English world are shown by the full lists of results of the December examinations. The Junior Local examination is taken by schools in Aden, the Bahamas, Buenos Aires, the Cape Coast, Fiji, the Gold Coast, British India and the Native States, Kenya, Malaya, Ceylon, Mauritius, Sarawak, Shanghai, St. Kitts, Sierra Leone and half a dozen other territories. No wonder the Malayan Education Department hesitates to break away from such a system! But is it not an appalling thought that the faults of that system, which are so clearly demonstrated in Malaya, are being perpetuated at the expense of malleable youth over half the world? Not only in Malaya but in numerous other countries unfortunate children are being asked to take an enthusiastic interest in the details of the “Tudor Period” or some other period of the history of a remote 
and unreal country which they have never seen and are never likely to see. Large numbers of children in this country during the current year are supposed to be absorbing with delighted attention the history of British colonial expansion, a subject which -apart from its local phase-has about as much appeal and reality for, let us say, a Chinese schoolgirl in Singapore as the Einstein theories have for the average adult. Another remarkable fact which shows the low comparative standard which is reached by Malayan schools is that out of roughly 750 boys who took the Junior Cambridge last December only 14 obtained honours. Any reasonably good school in Great Britain expects to pass at least ninety per cent of its entrants and third-class honours are regarded as a very minor distinction. Results were rather better among the senior boys in Malaya, however, 33 gaining honours out of about 450 entered for the Special Certificate examination. Out of about 140 girls entered for the Junior Cambridge three gained honours, and four out of 120 in the Special Certificate examination. These figures are staggering evidence of the difficulties which face the English schools in this country. Or are they evidence of the failure of the educational profession in Malaya to understand and adapt itself to its environment? -Straits Times.

One more Periodical in Borneo.
PROPOSALS FOR YET ANOTHER LOCAL MAGAZINE.
DEAR SIR,
A small European community has of late established itself at a spot (Marked with a blot on the attached map) some 40 miles from Kuching. As is customary where two or three are gathered together in Sarawak the idea of publishing a local ‘rag’ has been conceived and it is with a view to obtaining your advice and assistance in the compilation of such a ‘rag’ that I am addressing this letter to you.
So far I have not succeeded in approaching anyone who is at all enthusiastic about the idea, so I have unanimously decided upon myself as the prospective editor. I shall, of course, endeavour to keep my identity secret as I have positively no taste for laurels, flowers, eggs or other missiles maliciously directed towards my person, nor do I wish to achieve notoriety in any Libel Action which might conceivably follow the publication of the first issue.
Magazines come and magazines go. Some appear once and then are heard of no more whilst others like our own Sarawak Gazette (Referred to in some circles as “S.G.”) flourish with the years. It must be indeed disheartening to hear a purchaser of a copy of one’s No. 1 of vol. 1 murmur words to the effect chat he has been stung for a couple of dollars this time, but will not be caught again, and one of my principal difficulties, I fear, will be to ensure my publication against complaints of this nature.
By the way, speaking of two dollars, I am afraid this is the minimum price we shall have to charge per copy as I do not propose giving printers in Kuching, Miri or Sibu the opportunity of doing the printing cheaply. I propose to hire a rickshaw coolie, (third class) and have him taught English in one of our schools, after which I shall employ him to write out all the copy I have extracted, with or without the aid of gas, painlessly or painfully, from willing or unwilling contributors. The number of copies I shall have written will, of course, depend upon the space of years my coolie is capable of keeping body and soul together.
I feel that in adopting such a scheme I shall achieve a three-fold object conducive to the popularity of the magazine if and when it should appear, viz (1) I shall establish at least one argument in support of the teaching of English in our schools. (2) I shall be relieving the traffic congestion which rickshaws cause in our streets. (3) I shall not be calling for the two dollars (or more) for some time to come.
I am not clear in my own mind on one or two points, and I propose to tabulate below a few questions in the solution of which your esteemed advice and assistance would be most acceptable: -
1. In order to be a successful editor, is it really necessary to possess the qualifications of a dental surgeon?
2. Will anyone really object if I am libellous about him or her without any pretense at being humorous?
3. Having no Club and no really dangerous ditches by the wayside, how can I produce anything in the way of social ‘Tit-bits’?
4. Will the popularity of the publication be enhanced by my slanging such places as Kuching, Miri and Sibu?
5. Is my literary style such as might suggest possibilities as an editor?
6. Is a magazine really necessary or advisable with such a small community?
Awaiting the favour of an early reply.
I am,
Yours truly,
(Sgd.) ILLEGIBLE.
P.S.-Pleased address your reply if any to me, c/o The Post Office, Kuching. Mark on the outside of the envelope “Irish Hospitals Derby Sweep Tickets. Please forward.” The Postmaster General will then attend to the letter for me.

Who would be an Editor?
We print below sample of the kind of application which is becoming more and more common these days. When one has to cope with letters such as this in the middle of compiling a ‘personal’ column, editing monthly reports, preparing balm for hurt feelings, extracting ‘copy’ from unwilling contributors, answering letters from schoolboys in Vancouver who want to know whether Sarawak is an Island, checking proofs, -well, words just fail one. Laying aside the restive pen and dashing the old friendly briar on the floor, we consign the applicant most heartily to a place where blue smoke clouds are not generated by tobacco. Who, who, WHO would be an Editor?


The Editor,	
The Sarawak Gazette,	
Sarawak.
Club House Hotel,
M--
New South Wales,
AUSTRALIA,	
15th May, 1931.
DEAR SIR,
I seek a position abroad for the urge stirs irresistibly.
Mr. Editor. please spare a moment to lay aside that restive pen and to light up the old friendly briar while I let my tale, for you are a man in whom I repose my hope; and the busiest of editors surely must pause when a man so keen to serve happens along.
Enclosed are random clippings, testimonials and a photograph and the writer wisher them to do the main speaking on his behalf. But as the blue smoke-clouds waft away he would like you to ponder the following:
Well-cultured in the classroom and later in the harder school of experience, he is senior reporter on the “---Daily,” one of the four Associated Northern Dailies of New South Wales; and is 24 years of age. A trained newspaperman with a nose for news and a love for work, he is, furthermore, a speedy shorthand and a fast typist possessing his own machine.
Office duties embrace reporting, subbing, press dictaphoning and, at times, leader-writing; and his employers esteemed his work sufficiently to invite him to rejoin the staff after he had left to garner experience in another part of Australia. Having gained that experience he accepted the invitation.
Though thus having changed his quarters twice within twelve months, he is not a butterfly journalist. having changed merely because the opportunity for extended experience presented itself and he now seeks a position with you because the urge for foreign experience persists.
A minor reason is the overcrowding of the Aus-tralian journalistic labor market owing to paper failures and staff retrenchments. The position in British North Borneo probably has been affected to, but certainly not, so far as the newspaper world is concerned, to the extent it has been in this country.
Local atmosphere may have to be absorbed before the writer would be able to produce his best work; but he submits that a susceptibility to surroundings, the versatility of the journalist, and a measure of native intelligence will permit him to fit readily into that position you have in mind.
Salary is not an insuperable barrier. Though not disrespectful to its importance in this commercial world, his chief objective is to get the job. He is willing to pay his fare, though, of course, part redemption after a year’s service would not be disdained. If it be wished moreover, he will enter into an agreement that, conditionally upon proving himself to your satisfaction, he will remain in your employ a set period.
Being in a steady position, he will wait some months if you wish, while he is in easy touch by cable or radiogram if needed urgently.
Though fallible, like fellow human, he can honestly assure that you will find him eager able and sober-his work is his hobby and his ambition.
From Sunny Australia, and not unhopefully. (Sgd.)

This Modern World.
FLYING AT 156.
The aged Turk, Zaro Agha, who lays claim to 156 years, had his first flight at Brooklands on Monday. Now the Turk, having had the controls of a school aeroplane in his hands and at his feet, has demanded that he shall be registered as a pupil. He says that flying is the biggest thrill since Napoleon.
He spent about 20 minutes in the air. When he was brought gently back to earth, he was enthusiastic about flying. He scoffed at the suggestion that it was dangerous and declared it to involve less risk than marriage, of which he claims to have had 11 separate experiences:
The day was a good one for flying and in the steady air the ancient tried the controls, with an instructor behind him to correct any incipient rashness. But the instructor’s report was good. The old man had a delicate touch and was surprised to discover how easily a light aeroplane is handled. His first trip in the sunshine was too short. He asked for another date and, lamenting the years behind him. said he wished that he could have taken up aviation when he first took to matrimony, 130 years ago. -The Times.

HOT COMMENT.
When “Big Bill” Thomson shook from his feet the dust of the mayoralty of Chicago he did not receive many bouquets, and newspaper comment in particular was not conspicuous for the display of any tenderness about hurting the feelings of their late civic head-possibly because he has none to hurt. Should he possess feelings however they should come as near to being mortally wounded as they could ever be by the following editorial comment in the Chicago Tribune:
“It is an unpleasant business to catch a skunk, but one does it. But for Chicago Thompson has meant filth, corruption, obscenity, idiocy, and bankruptcy. He has given the city an international reputation for moronic buffoonery, barbaric crime, triumphant hoodlumism, unchecked graft, and dejected citizenship. He has nearly ruined property, and completely destroyed the pride of the city. He has made Chicago a by-word for the collapse of American civilization
That does not leave room for much more to be said! -Straits Times.

“Make the life of a prisoner a dignified one” is the slogan of Senorita Kent the picturesque Director of Prisons who is an enthusiast in the matter of prison reform and is now making a tour of inspection of prisons in Andalusia. She says she wishes to introduce radical reforms in the present system. The sex problem which has baffled so many reformers has no terrors for her and she proposes that married prisoners be permitted to entertain spouses privately in rooms replete with every comfort while even celibate prisoners will be able to receive visits from lady friends. Finally, every six months prisoners will be allowed out on parole for a few days merely under unobtrusive surveillance. “Correction should aim at making every prisoner a useful member of society” is the senorita’s motto. -Press News.

Prohibition in America having induced a certain amount of border crossing to get a drink, the following rhyme is now recorded as being current in Canada:
Four-and-twenty Yankees, feeling rather dry.
Went across the border to get a little rye;
When the rye was opened, the Yanks began to sing 
“Who the hell is Hoover? -God save the King!” -S.F.P.

MURDER.
In Budapest, Rudolph Steinherz. wine-merchant, got young Lajos Naghazy to murder him in a railway carriage. Object: that the Steinherz family might collect a large insurance policy. Honorarium to Lajos Naghazy: a gold watch and $5. -Time.

Another Code.
A LITTLE while ago I was writing about Bentley’s Code for those in danger of telegraphy at sea, and was endeavouring to wrest from its strictly commercial pages a lover’s requirements. I have now seen another Code, rich in what might be called the raw material of romance. The A.B.C. Code I should describe as more adventurous than Bentley. Whoever compiled it must either have read a great many novels of the sea or have been on some odd voyages; and whoever is contemplating following in the footsteps of CLARK RUSSELL, HERMAN MELVILLE, CONRAD and TOM-LINSON will find that its entries press a thousand buttons.
The A.B.C. offers some disappointments. There is no word for maroon (although I find marmalade: GIDOA), and none for doubloons, pieces of eight or treasure, although there are plenty of references to gold, and the Captain is able to flash home the glad tidings that he has been ENIMP or “captured by pirates.”
The pages allotted to the word Captain in all its branches are almost a story of the deep without further trimmings, the telegrapher here being of course, not the skipper himself, but the agents. In fact it is really the agents’ vade mecum; the Captain is a secondary figure For example: EMSYO. Captain fell overboard and rescued ENBJY, Captain lost overboard, ENBAO. Captain is drunk ENBET. Captain is insane, ENBFU, Captain is unwell and remains on shore, ENCIZ, Captain refuses to go to sea. ENCSI, Captain replaced by Chief Officer ENDLE, Captain under restraint ENGFE. Send another Captain immediately. AEYBZ. Must be a total abstainer. AYGJU. Has run aground, expect will become a total wreck-you can see the agents hands there, although one or two of the messages might have proceeded from the Mate.
The Captain, however, can get his own back. Thus: AWIKP, Agent cannot be depended upon. AWIWB, Agent in fault, AWJHO, Agent is bankrupt AWJXE. Agent knows nothing. AWPEY, Do not know any agent who can be recommended. AWUZB, Lloyd’s Agent is dead, NINAC, Is habitually drunk. ARKTE, The person is an adventurer, be on your guard. ARKUF, IS an adventurer, have nothing to do with him.
But agents are not a captain’s only adversaries. OAIGU. Chief engineer is unwell and remains on shore, OAIKY. Chief engineer not on board, OAILZ, Chief engineer not to be found, TRAZF, Mate is dead, TREAO, Mate lost overboard, TREET, Mate not to be found, TREKZ, Please send fresh mate.
IDEFZ, Can do nothing with the crew, IDEJD, Crew are all drunk, IDEWP. Crew have been before the Consul and some of them are sent to prison, shall engage others to take their places. IDFCY, Crew have deserted, IDFMI, Crew have mutinied, IDIGI. Crew quite exhausted not having had any food for some days, IDKCI, Fate of the crew unknown, IDMEO, Most of the crew down with scurvy, UWRNI. Natives becoming beyond control UWRUO, Natives rebelling and very excited, UWRYT. Natives settling down quietly.
Under Owners I find nothing that the Captain would want to say, but it is probably they who would instruct the agents to tell him either BEIJV or BEIHT: Please announce the birth of a son, Please announce the birth of a daughter. Twins are not contemplated. -E.V.L. -With acknowledgements to “Punch.”

Visit to Kuching of H.M.S. “Bridgewater.”
On 12th June, H.M.S. Bridgewater, a sloop from the China Station commanded by Commander G. W. Hoare-Smith. R.N., arrived at Tanjong Po. H. M. S. Bridgewater was met by Captain A. W. Gibson who piloted her to Kuching; she moored at the Man-Of-War anchorage, but on the following day, owing to lack of swinging room, she left for Pending, where she remained for the rest of her stay.
Owing to the absence from Kuching of His Highness the Rajah, there were no formalities in connection with H.M.S. Bridgewater’s arrival.
On Saturday, 13th June, the ship’s football team played the Kuching Football Club, which won by six goals to two. H.M.S. Bridgewater has a strong side since she holds the China Station championship cup for small ships; although luck was dead against the ship, the Kuching Football Club played a sparkling game, and thoroughly deserved their victory.
We hear that H.M.S. Bridgewater’s team defeated the Miri Europeans and drew with the Miri mixed team.
On Saturday evening a dance was given at the Sarawak Club for the officers of the Bridgewater, the music being provided by the ship’s dance band. This band, composed entirely of amateurs, plays remarkably well, and was much appreciated.

RETURN OF H.M.S. Herald.
On 16th June. H.M.S. Herald arrived at Pending in order to carry out hydrographic survey operations in the Santubong River. A landing party under the command of Lieutenants K. St. B. Collins and C. S. E. Landsown. R.N., was left at Santubong.
H.M.S. Herald is commanded by Lieutenant-Commander N. A. C. Hardy, R.N. Of last season’s officers, only Lieutenant CoIlins and Surgeon Lieutenant F. C. M. Bamford remain.

A NAVAL OCCASION.
On June 17th, at the instance of His Highness the Rajah, the ship’s company of H.M.S. Bridgewater was entertained to tiffin at the Sarawak Club.
On the same evening Kuching was able to witness a football match between the Herald and the Bridgewater, the latter winning by two goals to nil after an exciting game.

DANCE AT ASTANA.
On the eve of the Bridgewater’s departure His Highness the Rajah gave a dance at Astana for the officers of H.M.S. Bridgewater and Herald. The Bridgewater’s band was again kind enough to supply the music, and the dance, like all Astana parties, was a great success. On the conclusion of the entertainment His Highness presented the Captain of the Bridgewater with a beautifully carved kenyallang, (Dyak omen bird) in the hone, that the figure would bring luck to the ship.
H.M.S. Bridgewater sailed for Labuan at 4 p.m. on 18th June. We hope that she may soon revisit Sarawak waters.

A Trip through the Murut Country.
ULU TRUSAN AND BAH KELALAN.
When one Dyak wishes to be rude to another he will as likely as not call him “Murut. Signifying something generally untidy and unclean, something that has not cut its hair or had a wash since it paid its head-tax last year. Such is the usual, conception of these people, and though it contains a good deal of truth, Muruts have their points; though one would not wax enthusiastic over them as a race at the best of times.
There are many down-country Muruts in the Lawas district and some in the Limbang, but the real up-country people live in the Trusan river. This river is impassable for boats a day or so beyond the Fort, and one has to walk some eight or nine days parallel to the stream, but of course some way inland; one crosses tributary after tributary, ascending the watersheds between them and doing one’s 3,000 feet daily or oftener, the whole not a difficult but rather a narrow-minded sort of walk. During this time I suppose one of the outstanding features is the lack of fruit and game in contrast with other parts of the country, while the uselessness of the rivers for boating and the steep hilly nature of the country has produced a type of native whose walking powers, sober or not, are perhaps unsurpassed; the people must have once been more numerous, and, judging by the amount of secondary jungle, much more hard working for except on steep hill sides one encounters comparatively little old jungle, and hill tops even at a height of two and three thousand feet, are covered in temuda, very old it is true. Even now the size of the clearings for rice planting is very large for the sparse population encountered, perhaps indicating that the Murut is a good deal more hard-working than he makes himself out to be when Europeans are about.
This preponderance of secondary jungle and conspicuous lack of fruit trees may be a natural result of the local thriftlessness in cutting down trees indiscriminately, or may have followed on the wars in these parts, when it was fair to cut down any fruit trees to be found: at any rate, fruit is scarce and game is rarely encountered, though the Murut in his adversity is no mean huntsman and often possesses dogs that are magnificent for this type of country.

BAH KELALAN.
At the end of a week’s walk parallel with the Trusan river one meets it again (or its familiar, the Pa Ruap) as a mild and gentle stream abounding, as do its tributaries, in numerous and quite large fishes the inhabitants do not bother much about them, but there is perhaps better fishing in these parts than most places in Sarawak. Finally about a day’s walk from the rivers source the valley opens out into a fairly wide, flat, level plain, the well-known Bah country, over part of which the inhabitants truly irrigate their rice somewhat after the fashion of Java, Siam and elsewhere. One walks for haIf a-day or more through wet rice fields, the whole at an altitude of about 3,000 feet or as high as the top of Matang mountain; on each side of the valley and across its far end sleep hills rise to about 4,000 feet or more, and their numerous streams debouch into the plain to form miniature deltas or recesses at their entrance; it is in these telok that the padi flourishes. Often the valley is anything from a 
quarter to as much as half a mile wide, and there is an extensive sea of padi stretching almost continuously up the valley in a series of bulges first on one side and then on the other, the whole area amounting at a guess to about a thousand acres, though any degree of accuracy is impossible.
The whole valley is not under cultivation at one and the same time, many parts lying fallow and churned up into muddy wallows by numerous fat and hairy buffaloes; elsewhere hill padi had long been harvested, but these people had not sowed theirs very long ago. and none of it was fruiting yet. The planting appeared to have been rather uneven, and fields were seen in various stages of growth, a point of much importance in the liability to destruction of the rice by various pests. Many area had suffered badly from rats, the green shoots being damaged beyond further use and it was significant to note that one’s passage through the fields stirred up numerous specimens of the white moth Scirpophaga innotata, whose caterpillars are the Rice Stem Borers piercing the stalk at the branching off of the leaves and tunnelling down into the root so that the whole plant either dies or fails to fruit. Weeds were bad in many places, but the Murut women-and even men-were most industrious in pulling them up. There appears to be a reduction in the number of houses in the valley, those at its bottom end complaining of the silting up of the planting area by sand to such an extent that they have moved out and planted hill padi elsewhere.

PADI PLANTING.
MURUT METHODS OF IRRIGATION.
It is strange that these Muruts really have the idea of irrigating their rice fields with the aid of terraces and bamboo sluices; one must not expect them to be as expert as the Javanese or Siamese, for apart from the fall from the head to the foot of the valley, from first to last there is not more than a fall of say ten to twenty feet from the side to the centre of the valley under cultivation, and the sections as a rule are comparatively extensive.

However it is something that they have utilized this much, and if they only knew how there is perhaps no reason why the Murut should not lead off water from the side streams into terraces along the lower slopes of the foot hills.
The actual terraces are mud banks on which they have thrown weeds and vegetable matter, letting in bamboo stakes here and there for strengthening purposes; the apertures in these terraces are just large hollow bamboos through which water trickles, and one sees not a few bamboo panchou bringing water to the houses or conveying it across streams from one field to another. The terraces are naturally most numerous on the edges near the foothills, but there is no regular method in conveying the water from field to field, and whilst one field may supply it’s more lowly neighbour, the next field may perhaps be actually higher than either and supplied from quite a different source; in fact, I once saw water running away from one field whilst beside it, separated only by a mud bank, was water running in the opposite direction, after which I was almost prepared to find it going uphill! There was no serial system running through their irrigation, and they appeared to do it just as the problem demanded.
A days walk over the watershed and through a similar but wider and more populous valley brings one to the Dutch post at Long Bawan; passing through an area of wet padi perhaps some five times as extensive as that in Sarawak, one traverses an open sort of common coveted at first in coarse grass and branches, finally in low shrubs and trees. Beside the well-kept path stands the remains of a “buried city.” the usual upright rectangular stone post (or batu lawi with a large flat slab at its foot, exactly as recorded from the Baram district; in addition was a peculiar hollow rectangular stone about 3 1/2 feet high, the inside about 1 1/2 feet deep and the whole suggestive of a padi mortar made in soft sandstone. The thing was not too heavy to move about, but could not be lifted, perhaps in more senses than one. as it lay within Dutch territory.
From the Bah country it is necessary to return down the Trusan for a couple of days before crossing over the l’a Ruap and continuing much the same sort of switchback walk for three or four days into the Adang, a tributary of the Limbang river. In the course of this walk one meets but few people and houses, but one again passes through much old secondary jungle indicating a former extensive population now passed on or out. The country gets wilder after a time and one sees large jungle-clad hills which are stilt the haunt of the Rhinoceros. Finally, one leaves the Murut and meets the Kalabit. gentry ethnologically no doubt closely allied, but psychologically much more pleasing: these people are still unused to boats and one sees broad stretches of the Adang river just made for prahus. but as with this and the Limbang river for l’a Brunei, rapids and rocks are so numerous and that the Kalabit has substituted length of hind leg for skill in boatmanship and prefers to walk; both Muruts and Kalabits prefer to put 
heir houses miles from any decent water away up on a hill top where they can enjoy the view. The Limbang river (as the Pa Brunei) being so far unnavigable it is necessary to shin over the redoubtable Batu Setak, spending perhaps three or four nights in the jungle on the way, mostly from two to three thousand feet up; the path follows the top of a knife-edged ridge so that one can often look down several hundred feet on either side and must shoot one’s pig with care if one ever wants to see it again, for it is sure to drop a few hundred feet before pulling up.

BATU LAWI.
From Batu Setah, itself some 3,400 feet high, one can see Batu Lawi, a famous pinnacle of rock rising a couple of thousand feet sheer above the neighbouring hills, themselves quite as high as  Batu Setah. Batu Lawi can be seen from several places in the interior and never fails to excite comment; from Batu Setah it bore about S.E., with Mount Murud on its right and plainly therefore to its South, and not, as Mjoberg would have it, with Batu Lawi to the S.W. of Mt. Murud. A descent, -apparently down the steepest bit of Batu Setak to be found, and a few more switch-backs up and down bring one to the Kalabit house Of Tama Kuling in the Ulu Madihit, and there. if one is met by the right people, small boats will convey one down river until larger ones can be used; a day or so later one graduates into the usual long boat and finally into a launch.
Muruts, Kalabits and Bisayahs are generally lumped together and they certainly have their points of resemblance, though whether due to imitation or real affinity is an open question Muruts and Kalabits have one thing in common, all rice is pounded not in the living house but in a special place not far away; there the girls go off in the mornings and do their stuff, the house is not shaken up-it would not stand it. as a rule-and there is no necessity for a tanju or outside platform for drying the padi. Bisayah houses are so often broken up that padi pounding may be done at home or occasionally in a similar special place. A feature common to Bisiyah, Murut and Adang Kalabit (but not the Ulu Baram ones) was a slit running the length of the outside walls of the houses at such a height that anyone sitting on the floor has only to turn his head to look at the view outside: the slit is 6-8 inches wide, just a plank left out and except in the case of Kalabit houses this slit constitutes the only window. Most of thesehouses have raisable portions of the roof after the manner of the Iban houses, but the average Murut dare not mess about with his roof lest the the whole lot fall in; and anyway windows are superfluous for rain, wind, sun and anything else that chooses may enter freely. Muruts as a rule build a new house every year or two and do not trouble to build them very firmly, either from shiftlessness or shortage of good timber. Like the Kalabit the Murut feels the cold at three thousand feet so at night he shuts up his house, lights all his fires, take a long drink and does achieve a certain amount of warmth, not to say “fug,” a state which could be more easily reached with the aid of respectable blankets if he could be persuaded to use such a garment.
Murut, Bisayah and Kalabit houses have the usual passage way and pantar of the Dyak house, but not a few Muruts build rooms out on this part to save lengthening the house; not all Murut houses are bad in Sarawak, but it must be admitted that the Dutch custom of not allowing pigs to be kept under the house is most acceptable; the houses are quite low, rice can be dried on the ground within the stout bamboo fence that keeps the pigs out and the most battered of noses will be appreciative of the general lack of aroma.
Muruts are a curious looking people, for both men and women shave their heads bare when husband or wife dies, giving some of them a most Chinese appearance, for their colour is more of a yellow than a nut-brown. Perhaps their most remarkable feature is the proportion of the parts of their legs: when a Dyak squats, nis hams rest against the back of his thighs, but so long are the Murut shanks and thighs that his “sit-upon” hits the ground first when he tries to squat, and one seldom see them naturally in this position.

MURUT WEAPONS.
Murut swords are a puzzle: most people know the Parapat, a long, thin, uniform, curved blade with pointed tip, the hilt of brass, the wooden handle turned over to make a grip and tipped with two pinnacles which to me most nearly recall the heads of the Bishops or Queens used in chess. A less well-known knife is the Klewang, used by the Kadayans, and I believe in the F.M.S.; the blade is something like the Parapat but shorter, less curved and with a very pronounced notch on the underside near the hilt: the hilt is of wood, turned over in the ordinary way to make a grip and the top part more or less well notched. At first sight Parapat and Klewang have not much in common, but it is possible among Muruts and others to see complete intergradation between the two in length of blade, extent of notch, and particularly in the division of hilt from a mere split all the way up to the complicated divisions of a Murut weapon. The two races themselves have little or nothing in common and their typical weapons are quite 
dissimilar, yet one or other people must have done some copying in its time.

BISAYAHS.
A people who have been passed over are the Bisayahs, inhabiting roughly that part of the Limbang river navigable by launch and numbering no doubt many thousands. Some look like becoming Christians, many are Mohammedans not too distinct from Brunei Malays, but not a few are still Pagans, wear chawats and live in more or less long houses. Their language is not well understood but may be akin to Murut and Kalabit, which two, by the way are far from being sufficiently alike to be interchangeable; Bisayahs shew little enterprise in the jungle but are not to be despised as workers, planting much padi, owning a good deal of sago and living largely by taking in each others buffaloes, of which there, are a great many. Keen as fishermen, they possess numerous thorn-lined fish traps, and from a local point of view are extremely well off, possessing an assortment of old brass gongs, kettles, trays, sireh boxes and articles of vertu far in excess of anyone yet encountered.
Muruts, as I have indicated, have the reputation of being unclean, covered with sores and skin disease, mostly childless and generally drunk. admitting that I visited them in a good year when food was plentiful and illness absent, they did not appear to me as bad as they had been painted, not a few being quite worthy fellows. Neither sex is much to look at, the men lanky but often well formed, the young girls little more ugly than the average Bornean maiden and the old people certainly rather decrepit, children were not as numerous as they might be but were not particularly scarce. Skin disease was very common but the awful sores one is liable to see were not much in evidence, perhaps because they were kept in the background; everyone liked medicine indiscriminately, and a man on admitting he hadn’t paid tax for a year or two would cheerfully require calomel to remove the accumulation of a like period.

MURUT CAROUSALS.
Much here and elsewhere, has been written about Murut drink, but not as much as has been drunk; though we skirted one or two rampant corpses near houses, we fortunately missed the ceremony attendant on a death or burial, and whilst no house failed to produce its bowl of Tuak on arrival and subsequently to make merry, on only one occasion did drunkenness become excessive. Certainly they drink well and truly, but definitely not up to the reputation acquired; Murut burak is undoubtedly nasty, for as they see you coming from afar (may be that is why their houses are on hill tops), they pour a few bamboos full of water into a large one containing rice, stir it up with their hands-they really don’t wash for weeks, by the look of it-and ladle out a thin, insipid whitish brew. There is no bad beer and not much bad burat, but that little is all Murut, for apart from its potency Al Capone himself never peddled such poison, and to drink much of it is to ensure a most unenviable head, liver, stomach and narrow-mindedness on awakening. The Muruts, trouble is not so much the quantity they drink as the quality of their sour unmatured burak, scarcely drinkable to one accustomed to the sweeter, cleaner, well-kept brews.
The Murut is unprepossessing, not beautiful in appearance or habits, dirty, given to a certain amount of drunkenness by custom; and he makes boat houses and does not by any means shine in the presence of more virile tribes. Many of his faults are a result of the high altitude he lives at where the more virile people are only visitors. His dirtiness, drunkenness and poor house may be due to a dislike to extra cold water, a desire for warmth at night and the frequent necessity of changing his dwelling, so soon rendered too filthy even for him by the smoke of the fires necessary for warmth. With all his faults he is when young probably unequalled as a walker, indifferent to hardship, a hard worker in the padi fields, and I was surprised to find him no mean hunter; his spears (and gun, if he has one) are often most primitive, but he possesses unusually fine dogs and may be seen at his best when he actually likes an interest in affairs. He unusually hides his knowledge of animals but actually knows even the 
obscure ones by name: it is not easy to get him out shooting, but once out and near to game his indifference vanishes and one could not surpass him anywhere in the country as a shrewd and keen stalker -in fact the Murut has got good points, though I do not envy anyone the task of scraping away the years accumulation of grime to get at them.

RHINOCEROS.
Murut hunting brings one finally to the subject of the Rhinoceros -Inquiry in the various Divisions concerned shows that rather more than fifty are killed yearly and elicits the rather surprising information that Rhinoceros are not really rare, though difficult to obtain I do not know how long it is before they breed – several if not many years-and infant mortality in such an animal has proved to be fairly high: Rhinoceros therefore still numerous but reproduce very slowly, whilst destruction proceeds apace. To preserve rare animals because of their rarity is perhaps a charitable act but one not appreciated by the native; it is. however, far more to the point to conserve these animals so that future generations of Muruts (if there are any) may enjoy the profit and fun entailed in hunting them, for such a strenuous form of the chase fosters to a certain extent a good type of native. Further, at present Muruts in particular and also certain other people wander far afield quite uncontrolled in search of these 
animals, and the issue of a limited number of licences or permits every year at a good round sum of say $20 would control the irresponsible movements of these people as well as preserving a stock of Rhinoceros for future generations: always provided that a sufficiently heavy penalty can be enforced for the killing or hunting of Rhinoceros without the necessary licence. -E.B.

Mainly About Nothing.
A new cocktail, which has been christened “the Police Whistle,” is becoming very popular in Kuching. To make this drink quite a lot of brandy is shaken up with some Yorkshire pudding, a few pan-headed rivets and a garden gate. The mixture is then fired out of a cannon onto a flower bed, and is reputed to make all the butterflies tipsy for miles around. It is also said to have the property of keeping away burglars.

A rumour seems to be current that the Government Workshop is prepared to undertake orders for galling guns, cannon, demi-cannon, culverins, arquebuses, carrounades, howitzers, mangonels, cross-bows, trench-mortars and other pieces of ordinance. This is quite incorrect, but we hear that the Workshop is open to private orders for musical instruments such as piccolos, flageolets, hautboys, flutes, penny-whistles and boatswains’ pipes.

The Daily Mirror prints an account of a curiously designed chair, now in a museum, which jerks its occupant off if he grasps the arms. The suggestion that replicas of this extraordinary piece of furniture be supplied for the use of Heads of Departments in their offices has so far met with little encouragement. Though the introduction of these chairs would no doubt bring a certain welcome liveliness into the monotony of ordinary office routine, it is feared that the innovation might prove a trifle dangerous. After all some departmental chiefs are not as young as they were.

We hear on good authority that evening dress is now de rigueur in Sibu for evening parties. Yes, incredible though it may sound, the denizens of this mud-flat at the junction of the Rejang and Igan Rivers actually put on boiled shirts and hard collars for the pleasure of being polite to each other over pahits and makan kechil.
The English race is generally regarded by other nations as a race of madmen; and it is phenomena such as this, -the deliberate mortification of the flesh in a tropical land, for no apparent reason -which makes it seem as though the foreigners are right. Though we are assured by the Principal Medical Officer that the action of putting on a boiled shirt in this climate is not, per se, sufficient grounds for the issue of a mental certificate, yet the Europeans in Sibu would do well to be careful; this news follows closely on the issue of the first number of Flood Tide and the two facts taken together might conceivably influence even the most lenient and broad-minded of medical boards. The border line between sanity and insanity always notoriously difficult to draw, becomes even more so in the tropics, and psychologists assure us that cases of mass hysteria in small communities are by no means uncommon.

We hear that Herr Otto Von Worms. of Willem-strasse 61, Berlin, will shortly visit Kuching. Those who desire to avail themselves of Herr Von Worms’ professional services would be well advised to fix an appointment by telephone, since it is probable that his time will be fully occupied.

On the night of 8th June, a certain Eurasian gentleman, having dined extremely well, felt compelled to break into song in Carpenter Street. His vocal efforts, however, were not appreciated by the policeman on beat, who curtly ordered him to shut up. “Very well.” exclaimed the singer, “if you don't like my Voice, we’ll see how it appeals to the rest of the Force.” Whereupon he headed for the Police-Station, and entering the charge-room, he astonished the assembled constables with a burst of music.
This was all right so far as it went. But so mellow did the gentleman feel that he was not content with a solo performance, and insisted on the policemen joining him in a rollicking chorus. This, however, they felt disinclined to do.
“Come on,” urged the vocalist. "Sing us a song! -or if you can't sing a song . . .” We draw the veil of Editorial modesty over the alternative. Suffice to say that it consisted of a threat, which, since the police steadfastly refused to sing, was duly carried out, and which resulted in the singer being hustled away to the cells by a bunch of scandalized Sikhs. Next morning the gentleman concerned found that his frolic cost him five dollars in the Magistrate’s Court.

OLD SARAWAK.
From the Sarawak Gazette 60 Years Ago.
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE
No. 20.] SATURDAY, 1st JULY, 1871. [Price 5 Cts.
SATURDAY 3RD JUNE, 1871.

The anniversary to the birth-day of H.H. the Rajah was observed as a public holiday. A salute of twenty-one guns was fired from the Fort at 10 a.m., and a large party of Malay ladies of the upper class were entertained at dinner by the Ranee in the evening. They retired after hearing some music about 10 p.m. Ample materials for a feast in the shape of a fine ox were also provided for the dwellers in the kampong to make merry with.

Two large coconuts have been sent to the Editor of a Ceylon Newspaper as curiosities. One measures 20 inches round without the husk; the other, with the husk 29 inches. Coconuts apparently are destined to serve instead of the traditional gooseberry at seasons of literary dullness.

Labour is becoming dearer than ever in Sarawak. A rise in wages has been granted during the last month to men engaged on public works, but even this fails to produce the numbers of hands required. Road making is being rather extensively carried on and the new Government buildings will soon offer employment for a good many carpenters and masons. We shall have to trust as usual to importation for them.

We learn from the last English paper received that Miss Burdett Coutts has been raised to the Peerage by the title of Baroness Burdett Coutts.

REUTERS’S TELEGRAMS.
London, 24th May, 1871. -Result of Derby, Favonius first-Albert Victor and King of Forest dead heat for second place.
The Army Regulation Bill abolishing Purchase has been adopted.
The Tuileries and Louvre have been partly burnt. The termination of hostilities is daily expected.
May 26th-Oaks-Hannah first, Noblesse second, Compromise third.
Versailles, 26th May-The Government troops have captured Mazas and the stations of the Lyons Orleans Railways besides the Barriers Italie, making 6,000 prisoners.
The Archbishop of Paris has escaped.
General Dombrowski and other Chiefs of the Insurrection have been shot.
The Insurgents shot several postages.
London, 2nd June-Paris has been divided into four Military districts, and the powers of the Police have been transferred to the Military authorities. Summary executions have ceased.

Sarawak Library.
His Highness the Rajab has kindly presented the following books: -

First Division News.
May, 1931.
Extracts from the First Divisional Reports for May. 1931, by Mr. J. C. Swayne. Resident. First Division: -
In the Resident’s Court four men were sentenced to seven years each for breaking into the house of a Japanese by night on the 3rd mile from the 10th mile Police Station, Rock Road. A trial of members of a Secret Society was concluded on the 30th when Teng Fong was found guilty and sentenced to two years imprisonment.
The 25th Proclamation Day was observed as a general holiday and the offices closed.

DISTRICT OFFICE.
May, 1931.
The Acting District Officer. Mr. W. S. B. Buck, reports: -
District Court. -Twenty-nine cases were heard, three of which were criminal and twenty-six civil.
Magistrate’s Court. -Eighty-four cases were heard, ten of which were criminal and seventy-four civil.
Police Court. -Thirty-four summary cases were brought before the Court. Thirty-three convictions and one acquittal were adjudged.
A total amount of $112 was paid in fines.
In addition eighty-six Judgment Summons cases were dealt with during the month.
Judicial. -There was no criminal case of importance this month with the exception of a conviction for concealment of property in a bankruptcy which has just come to light after two years. There was an interesting case of defamation against the Sin Min Jih Pao. This is, I believe, the first case on record in Sarawak of a newspaper being prosecuted under the code. The Court allowed the parties to compound.
General. -Batu Kawa was visited twice during the month and appeared to be in a satisfactory state. A suggestion that the bazaar should again come under the control of the Municipal Department has been put forward and is still under consideration.

LAND OFFICE.
May, 1931.
The Land Officer, Mr. T. M. Griffiths, reports: -
Kampong Lots. -An investigation has been commenced of the old Grants covering land situated in the Kampong Patingan Lots, the boundaries of which do not coincide with the new Lot boundaries. Amicable arrangements between the Grantees and this Office are being made for them to accept an alteration in the boundaries of their Grants, in order that Grant boundaries conform to the Kampong lot Lay-out.
An exchange of small areas of land in the near vicinity is being made and new Grants of approximately the same area will be issued replacing the old ones.
An inspection of an area of land South of Sekama Road has been commenced with the intention of extending the Padungan Malay Kampong. All available land will be demarcated into Kampong Lots.
Gold Prospecting. -Many Prospecting Licences have been issued this year covering areas in the near vicinity to the Simanggang Road
Two Licensees have now made applications for Mining Leases, to cover area of land situated approximately one mile and a half due North from Sungei Bukar Bridge, 27th mile Simanggang Road.

UPPER SARAWAK, BAU.
May, 1931.
The Assistant District Officer, Mr. E. M. Woodward, reports: -General. -On the 18th instant I took over the affairs of this district from Mr. P. Murray-Scott who proceeded to Kuching the next day in order to take over the command of the Sarawak Rangers from Mr. Pegler.
Arrangements have been made to elect a new Orang Kaya for Stinggang in place of Orang Kaya Korgar who is pensioned. In this connection each Stinggang man who pays tax has been ordered to record his vote within the next two months.
A new prahu has been purchased for use at Tundong for $25.
The Proclamation Day public holiday was observed on the 25th instant and the Government offices were closed on that day.
Mr. Davis of the Chartered Bank, Kuching, visited Bau on the 20th instant in connection with the land in this district owned by Then En Fook of Chop Shin Ted.
Health. -An outbreak of influenza occurred about the middle of the month which chiefly infected the prisoners.
Monopolies. -A number of the new tubes of opium were found on receipt to be in a leaking condition.
Opium smokers are reluctant to accept these leaking tubes which are therefore being returned to Kuching on the instructions of the Assistant Controller of Government Monopolies.
Land. -The Singghai Dyak land dispute has been finally settled.
Gold Mining. -389.94 ounces of actual gold were obtained by the Bidi Gold Mining Company during the month of April. 1931.
Rainfall. -Highest recorded in 24 hours '79 of an inch: daily average ‘13 of an inch: total for month 4’30 inches.

LUNDU.
May, 1931.
The Assistant District Officer, Mr. E. M. Woodward. reports: -
General. -Thirty-two crocodiles were caught and destroyed during the month by the professional crocodile catcher, Drahman.
An attempt to arrest Then Pui who is wanted by the Secretary for Chinese Affairs in connection with a secret society proved unsuccessful, chiefly owing, it is understood, to the dilatoriness of P.C. Epin and Detective Ong Cheng San who were sent from Kuching to arrest him. It is believed that Then Pui was actually in Lundu Bazaar when P. C. Epin and Detective Ong Cheng San arrived at Lundu on the 2nd instant but that owing to their dilatoriness and to the ostentatious manner with which their arrival and that of the relieving force of police from Kuching was announced, it ls hardly surprising if Then Pui succeeded in escaping to Dutch Territory where it is believed he now is.

SADONG.
May, 1931.
The Officer-in-Charge. Mr. J. J. Hill, reports: -
Court. -Court work during the month was below the average and only the following cases call for mention. Sin Kim for attempting to commit suicide was sentenced to six months’ imprisonment and Ateng Dyak was fined $10 and costs for adulteration of jelutong.
P.W.D. -The Government Carpenter was employed on the new bazaar road and in making a new filing cabinet.
The Government pipe-fitter was employed on general upkeep of pipe line.
No other works were started during the month.
Medical. -At the General Hospital one patient was admitted none were discharged leaving one remaining at end of the month.
At the Dispensary eighty-six patients made one hundred and twenty-six visits for treatment.
Twenty-four N.A.B. injections were given during the month of which one were for Crab Yaws, eighteen for Primary Yaws, and five for Tertiary Yaws.
The accounts show revenue $104.85 and expenditure including salaries and rations $137.45.
Land. -On the 26th Lim Teck Dec, Chief Clerk of the Land Office who has been doing temporary duty in Sadong return to Kuching. The books of this Department are now all up-to-date and no further difficulties should be experienced in this work.
Agriculture. -Mr. G. St. F. Dare Coconut Field Officer visited the Station from the 17th until the 19th instant. On the 18th I accompanied him to the Bugis padi farm where their crop of padi was measured. A very fair yield have been obtained 182 gantangs to the acre.
Prison. -The health of the prisoners was good. The prison gang averaging 13.1 was employed on the general upkeep of the Station.
General. -On the 9th Mr. A. L. MacLaine, Government Auditor left for Kuching by m.l. Peng Ann.
The 25th being Proclamation Day the offices were closed.
On the 28th Mr. J. K. Beasley arrived by s.s. L’ Aubaine from Kuching.
Trade and Customs. -Comparative trade returns are as follows: -
During the month eighteen vessels entered and eighteen cleared the Port.

Native Affairs.
May, 1931.
Extracts from the Report of the Secretary for Native Affairs, Mr. P. M. Adams, for May, 1931: -
The estate of the late Datu Emam Haji Halil was reported for probate, and all jewellery and papers were detained pending a division of the property amongst the heirs.
A contract was drawn up by the P.W.D. to repair the Malay Mosque and the work has commenced. A plan far Native Officer’s bouse at Samarahan was submitted and approved. When completed, certain Assistant Sub-Inspectors of Police who are destined become Native Officers will be sent there for training under Abang Haji Zulaihi.

The Datu-Datu called a meeting of Tua-Tua Kampong on the 22nd and suggested various reforms, such as reducing funeral and marriage expenses. They further suggested that a central registration of marriages and divorces should be prepared by the recognized officials of either the Malay or Indian Mosques and not by Tua Kampong.
It was also suggested that women should be prohibited from singing at Malay main.
None of these suggestions appear to have been well received.
At the suggestion of the Health Department the buildings at Sekama isolation Camp were offered as dwelling-houses for any Malaya who were homeless, but no applications have been received.
His Highness the Rajah visited the Land Dyaks at Sekrak. The chiefs asked that one of them should be given authority over the others and settle cases which they were unable to.
The news from Sibu concerning the Julau Sea Dyaks has lately been more reassuring and it looks as though the trouble is subsiding.
Mr. Ditmas made a tour of all local kampongs and reports that people are not so badly off as they might be.
One appeal case was heard in the Datus’ Court and was dismissed.

Sadong Collieries Report.
May, 1931.
Extracts from the Sadong Collieries Report for May, 1931. by Mr. J. W. Evans, Manager: -
The output, export, local consumption, and coal stock figures for the month were as follows: -
The fault struck in the lower workings of the upper seam during April has further extended to the dip and rise, and the lower level, which was the first working place to strike the denudation, has been stopped.
The output from the other mines in the lower seam was satisfactory, but storage space at the wharf has become so minted that a part of the output produced during June will have to be stored on the mine area.
Mr. David Evans, accompanied by Mrs. Evans, left for Europe on furlough by the s.s. L’ Aubaine on the 1st Instant, at the expiration of which he is permitted to resign his appointment in the service under the gradual closing down scheme.
The rainfall for the month was 7’48 inches.

SARAWAK TURF CLUB.
PROVISIONAL, PROGRAMME FOR THE SUMMER MEETING, 1931.
FIRST DAY. SATURDAY, 1ST AUGUST, 1931.

THE TUAN MUDA’S CUP.
Value $150. A piece of plate of the value of $100 presented by His Highness the Tuan Muda with $50 added. Second to receive $75. Third $25.
A handicap for Division 1 ponies. Distance 6 furlongs. Entrance Fee $10.

THE SATOK STAKES.
Value $150. Second to receive $75. Third $25.
A handicap for Division II ponies. Distance 5 furlongs. Entrance Fee $10.

THE B.C.L. STAKES.
Value $150. $100 presented by The Borneo Company. Limited, with $50 added. Second to receive $75. Third $25.
A handicap for Division III ponies Distance 6 furlongs. Entrance Fee $10.

SIMPANG TIGA STAKES.
Value $150. Second to receive $75. Third $25.
A handicap for Division I ponies. Distance 3 furlongs. Entrance Fee $10.

THE MATANG STAKES.
Value $150. Second to receive $75. Third $25.
A handicap for Division 11 ponies. Distance 4 furlongs. Entrance Fee $10.

THE PENDING STAKES.
Value $150. Second to receive $75. Third $25.
A handicap for Division III ponies. Distance 3 furlongs. Entrance Fee $10.

THE RANEE’S CUP.
Value $150. A piece of plate of the value of $100 presented by Her Highness the Ranee with $50 added. Second to receive $75. Third $25.
A handicap for ponies of any Division. Distance 1 mile. Entrance Fee $10.

SECOND DAY, MONDAY, 3RD AUGUST, 1931.
THE SLUMP STAKES.
Value $150. Second to receive $73. Third $25.
A handicap for Division I ponies. Distance 5 furlongs. Entrance Fee $10.

THE COUNTRY CUP.
A cup value $100 presented by The Turf Club with $50 added. Second to receive $75. Third $25.
A handicap for Division II ponies. Distance 6 furlongs. Entrance Fee $10.

THE SARAWAK STAKES.
Value $150 Second to receive $75. Third $25.
A handicap for Division 111 ponies. Distance 5 furlongs. Entrance Fee $10.

THE TURF CLUB STAKES.
Value $160. Second to receive $75. Third $25.
A handicap for Division I ponies. Distance 4 furlongs. Entrance Fee $10.

THE STATE SPRINT.
Value $150. Second to receive $75. Third $25.
A handicap for Division II ponies. Distance 3 furlongs. Entrance Fee $10.

THE TOWN STAKES.
Value $150. Second to receive $75. Third $25.
A handicap for Division III ponies. Distance 4 furlongs. Entrance Fee $10.

THE RAJAH’S CUP.
Value $200. A piece of plate value $150 presented by His Highness the Rajah with $50 added. Second to receive $80. Third $35.
A handicap for ponies of any Division. Distance Race-course (about 1.1/3 Miles.) Entrance Fee $10. $5 refunded to non-acceptors. Handicap published on the Course. Post Entries allowed at $20 but no refund.

REGULATIONS.
Penalties. -Winners of any race at this Meeting after publication of weights shall carry a penalty of 7 lbs. for each race with a maximum of 11 stone 7 lbs.
Allowance. -Professional Jockeys who are Sarawak subjects and have never ridden more than two winners at any Meeting under Sarawak Turf Club Rules, may claim an allowance of 5 lbs.
Entries. -All nominations accompanied by Entrance Fees, description of ponies and declaration of colours to be made to the Honorary Secretary not later than noon 7th July, 1931.
Scratchings. -Owners scratching ponies before 5 p.m. on 31st July for first day and 5 p.m. on 2nd August for 2nd day, will receive back half their entrance fees.
Handicaps for the 1st Day will be posted on the Notice Board at the Sarawak Club at noon on 17th July and for the 2nd day at noon on 2nd August.
Course will be open for training on 13th June, at 5.30 a.m.
Ponies must run on the 1st Day to be eligible for entry in Races for 2nd Day.
Owners are requested to see that their syces and jockeys obtain necessary badge for entrance to Paddock.
Totalizators and Cash Sweeps as usual.
Prizes 20% reduction if under 5 entries.
Communications to be made to
P. M. ADAMS.
Honorary Secretary, 
Sarawak Turf Club.

Cricket.
KUCHING FOOTBALL CLUB
Vs.
H.M.S. “BRIDGEWATER.”
Advantage was taken of the presence of H.M.S. Bridgewater in Sarawak waters to arrange a game of cricket between that ship and the Kuching Football Club and it was played on Sunday 14th June on the Club ground.
Unfortunately, the ship was unable to turn out her best side and the game was rather uneven.
Bridgewater won the toss and put the Club in. Mainly thanks to MacLaine (58) and Moir (27), K.F.C. put together the respectable score of 129, but the ship felt keenly the absence of her two best bowlers and the Club should certainly have scored more.
The Bridgewaters were all out for 58 on the stroke of time and the Club thus won by 71. For the losers, Hoare-Smith played well for 25, and Bower, who had gone in fourth wicket down and was last out, was unfortunate not to carry his bat for a very careful and valuable 13. Scores: -

Second Division News.
May, 1931.
Extracts from the Second Divisional Reports for May 1931, by Mr. J. B. Archer, Resident: -
There were two cases in the Resident’s Court, both of them petitions for divorce. During the month sites were prepared for the new bungalow and new Government school, both in Simanggang.
The Simanggang wireless station broke down during the month and was repaired by mechanics from Kuching.
I left for the Saribas and Kalaka district on the 6th to inquire into the matter of war spears sent to various parts of this Division by the 3rd Division rebel, Asoon. After having made the necessary arrangements I returned to Simanggang on the 12th.
Haji Bol Hassan arrived from Kuching to inspect the
Malay Schools in this Division. As usual, he reports the difficulty of persuading parents to see their children attend school regularly.
Dr. G. ter. Brugger of the Netherland Indies Geological Survey Department paid a short visit, to Simanggang.
There has been, and still is, considerable trouble in Engkilili between the traders and the pepper gardeners. I have received petitions and deputations from both sides, but in spite of all attempts to come to a reasonable understanding, the two parties cannot agree and matters are more or less at a deadlock. It to me that as long as the Chinese continue to employ the present system for financing pepper gardeners, so long then will the parties disagree, unless pepper reaches such a price that the matter of 50% to 100% interest on retail goods is a detail not worth considering
I visited Engkilili for two days. The bazaar seemed flourishing.
Mr. Summers left on local leave, being relieved in the Land Office by Mr. K. E. Parker.
Messrs. Barcroft, Summers and Parker spent part of the month at various times in the coast village of Maludam trying to settle a farming land dispute between Malays and Dyaks.
Mr. G. M. Goodall visited Simanggang several times during the month.
The Government Offices at Simanggang are fast nearing completion.
Owing to the trouble caused by Asoon (as mentioned above), there has been some unrest amongst the Dyaks, and it is feared that many credulous and restless men from the Krian and Layar have been visiting the Third Division. If any of these Dyaks become entangled with rebels it will be their own fault, as all the Penghulus except two have refused to have anything to do with Asoon or any of his following.
Whilst I was in Betong there was a deputation from the Chinese hawkers over the everlasting differences between the bazaar traders and themselves.
Mr. G. M. Goodall, Agricultural Field Officer, pro-ceeded to Kuching on 23rd for temporary duty in the Third Division.

SIMANGGANG DISTRICT.
Extracts from the report of the Acting Assistant District Officer, Mr. D. C. Hudden: -
There were three criminal charges in the District Court and civil claims amounted to $658.13.
In the Magistrates’ Court there was one criminal charge, civil claims amounting to $273.20.
On the 7th I went up to Engkilili to hear a couple of District Court cases.
The same day Dr. Brugger, a Dutch geologist, paid a short visit to this station, leaving again on the 17th. He was accompanied from Engkilili by the Officer-in-Charge, who remained here until the 20th, returning on that date together with the Resident when the later visited Engkilili.
On the 26th Mr. J. C. H. Barcroft went down-river to visit Lingga, Sebuyow and Sungei Ludam, and attend to outstanding matters in those stations. He was still away at the end of the month.
Mr. Oseki, Director of Messrs. Nissha Shokai, Ltd., Kobe arrived with three other Japanese on the 10th and they proceeded to Silantek early on the morning of the 11th for coal prospecting. They were still away at Silantek at the end of the month.

ENGKILILI DISTRICT.
Extracts from the report of the Officer-in-Charge, Mr. S. G. Bansom: -
On the 4th instant. I walked to Spenggal for the purpose of inspecting the alleged Chinese School there, which I found to be in existence without any School or Teacher’s certificate.
On the 11th instant, I started up river for Lubok Antu by boat at 7 a.m., arriving at 2 p.m. on the 12th instant. The journey was very slow owing to the high state of flood of the river. I attempted to walk the last part of the journey but found the paths to be flooded
to a depth of about five feet and a wide detour inland was necessary. On arrival at Lubok Antu I found that Mr. G. ter Brugger, a Geologist of the Netherlands East Indies Service, had preceded me by about one hour, having brought three clerks and twenty-five Dyak coolies with him.
On the 13th instant I heard one case in Court and checked the books and cash at Lubok Antu.
On the 14th instant, I started for Engkilili at 7 a.m. accompanied by Dr. Brugger and his retinue, arriving at Engkilili about 1 p.m.
On the 15th instant I walked to Marup to speak to the Gold Workers there. Dr. Brugger accompanied me and made an examination of the rock strata of the mountain.
The Gold Workers at Marup state that they cannot make any headway until they are able to blast with dynamite and have applied for a certificate to purchase this explosive.

SARIBAS DISTRICT.
Extracts from the report of the Acting District Officer. Mr. R. L. Daubeoy.
Court work has been light during the month.
During the month the old Fort Wharf at Betong was pulled down and a new one erected of belian.
The substations were visited from 21st to 24th when various outstanding matters were settled. Driftwood in the Rimbas was very bad near Kampong Dit and towards Debak, the journey from Pusa taking 43 hours as compared with the usual 2 3/4 hours.
An enterprising Dyak from Upper Rimbas has started manufacturing various kinds of rubber goods and he showed me. during my visit to Debak, some examples including, raincoat, Malay hats, Homburg hats, gun covers, inflatable pillows, bags, knee hoots, etc. They are amazingly well done considering that the maker is entirely on his own and is using homemade materials. I understand that this same man has constructed a mill wheel at his house for milling padi which is run from the river.
The Resident Second Division, and Datu Dulrashid, accompanied by several police, arrived from Simanggang on evening of 5th instant to deal with the question of spears reported to have been sent by Asoon to Penghulu Unji’s house, Ulu Spak, and through to the Skrang. Datu Dulrashid, Abang Omar and Abang Bunsu were sent up the Spak, Skrang and Layar rivers in order to investigate and they returned on 14th instant reporting everything quiet. The Resident left for Saratok on 8th instant and Datu Dulrashid returned to Simanggang on 16th instant.
The m.v. Kedurong was taken off the run on her last trip on 1st instant and the only communication now between here and Kuching is by the m.v. Han Soon Ann.
On 11th it was reported that a Dyak woman by name of Nin (f.) of Rumah Elam Nanga Buai, Padeh had committed suicide on Friday 8th by drinking tuba. This was confirmed by Penghulu Jabieng who arrived down the next day. Inquiries were made and it was deduced that the woman was overcome with grief on account of her newly adopted son refusing to acknowledge her as his mother, and while temporarily deranged committed suicide.
Five motor vessels entered and cleared during the month.

KALAKA DISTRICT.
Extracts from the report of the Acting Assistant District Officer. Mr. L. K. Morse: -
Mr. J. B. Archer, Resident, Second Division visited the district from the 8th to the 11th.
There was some trouble between the Agricultural Inspector and the local Chinese during the month. The Chinese appear to be making his job as difficult as they can.
News having been received from the Resident that a war spear was out in the Layar district, originating from Asoon of Entabai, inquiries were at once set on foot in this district. Early reports from the Krian seem to indicate that a spear had been received in the Kabo and Budu and that numerous Dyaks from these rivers had joined Asoon. Abang Mohamad Zin, Native Officer was sent up to investigate. It appears from his report that the people who were reported to have joined Asson had nearly all returned, and that they had not, in the first place gone in answer to the war spear, but in case of the Budu people, in answer to a messager from Asoon asking them to meet him at Rumah Libang, Julau, to discuss matters regarding the new customs, while the Kabo people appear to have gone over there on account of rumours from Nyambar’s house in the Wak river, Julau. This man Nyambar is reported to have fortified his house in preparation of an attack from Asoon.
It is reported from Kabong that fifty families of Kabong Malays have already planted their padi seeds on the coast from Sungei Naga to Lubok Alit. At Kaba a start has also been made while at Saratok the Malays have begun to clear the land.
The road in Kampong Ulu, Saratok was under repair during the month, while the construction of a new road from Sungei Melango Bridge through Kampong Hilir was begun. This road will connect with the old road which will be repaired.
The conversion of the Saratok fort quarters into offices was practically finished at the end of the month; at a later date I propose to turn the old fort kitchen into a benzine store.

Third Division News.
May, 1931.
Extracts from the Third Divisional Reports for May. 1931, by Mr. W. F. Dick, Acting Resident: -
Courts. -Five civil cases were dealt with including two appeals, the total of claims dealt with amounted to $9,311. Only one criminal case came before the Court when three Chinese were charged with robbery under section 390 and acquitted.
General. -Bishop Biermans of the Roman Catholic Mission arrived on 1st instant on a visit to the various Mission Stations in the divisions and left again on the 14th instant. H.H.M.Y. Maimuna arrived on the 14th with passengers Mr. P. M. Adams. Secretary for Native Affairs, Mr. and Mrs. Somerville and Mr. McTier of the Straits Steamship Co. They left again at 2 p.m. the same day.
Various efforts were made to get into direct communication with the rebel Asoon who was reported to have collected a bala of some two hundred men at his house in the Entabai, and numbers of houses in the Julau were reported to be in sympathy with him. While on his way up the Julau on 21st the travelling District Officer, Mr. R. H. Arundell  had to turn back owing to reports of danger at Nuri’s house; it subsequently transpired that the cause of the danger to his party was Pengarah Nglambong who is cordially hated by Asoon’s adherents. On 29th Mr. Arundell left for Bunya’s house in the Kanowit to meet Asoon on his, Asoon’s, invitation and was still away at the end of the month.
I left on 17th for Mukah together with the Registrar, Mr. H. B. Crocker and returned here on the 22nd. The Registrar remained at Mukah and later left for Balingian with the District Officer, Mukah and Oya, Mr. E. O. Bruce.
The natives on the coast are just as badly off as the natives in the interior owing to the low price of sago and all jungle produce; taxes are coming in very slowly in consequence.
There has been an epidemic of influenza during the month; many Government servants caught it as well as the people in the bazaar, kampongs and Schools. There were still a number of cases in hospital at the end of the month.

SIBU.
The District Officer. Mr. E. V. Andreini, reports: -
Adminstration. -Mr. Arundell went to Kanowit on the 8th with the intention of proceeding up the Julau but on arriving at Pala Dian he received a message from Ex-Penghulu Asoon that he and his party would be in danger if they proceeded to Nuri’s house. He there upon returned to Kanowit. He went up again on 25th and received a message that Asoon would meet him in Bunya’s house where he proceeded and was still away at the end of the month.
Abang Abu Bakar, Native Officer, visited the Ngemah and Poi and reported all quiet in these rivers. 
Some 50 Dyaks under Bundan left Mapai for ulu Mukah and Balingian overland without passes with the intention of trying to go to Johore, having previously been told here that there was no work for them there. Some of them have been apprehended by District Officer, Mukah and will be sent back here.
Agriculture. -Mr. Goodall arrived and visited the Dyaks at Bawang Assan; these progressive people are anxious to make a start with proper methods of planting padi and agree to buy buffaloes or tractors if Government will show them how to carry on. Mr. Goodall walked across from Bawang Assan to the Igan and them left Igan for the Coast.
Coroner’s Inquest. -was held on the body of Haji Osman found drowned near Tanjong Pitu and verdict of accidental death recorded.

MATU AND DARO.
The Officer-in-Charge, Mr. F. L. Crossley, reports: -
Court. -Work was very light during the month, there being very few cases, and none worthy of mention. Fines amounted to $57 and fees to $25.
Public Works Department. -The bridge from the Fort to the Chinese village in now completed, and the bridge to kampong Ska’an has been strengthened and repaired. Prisoners have been engaged in raining the roads round the Government Offices and bazaar.
Travelling. -On the 10th I walked to kampong Bruan to investigate the practicability of constructing a road direct from Bruan to Matu. This would open up a tract of very good land. On the 16th I visited Bruit and Tanjong Sirik in connection with the scheme for introducing Chinese to open up the padi land which is now lying idle. A Land Inspector is expected shortly to measure up this land. On the 20th I proceeded to Daro on my monthly visit. returning on the 30th. The Whitsun holiday 1 spent in Sibu.
General. -Exemption tax has been coming in very well towards the end of the month. Summonses are now being issued against those defaulters who have made no attempt to pay. New system of filing has now been introduced and is working well.
Cattle. -The Government herd at Kuala Matu have now been counted and accurately classified. A prisoner now lives at the Kuala, to help the Tua Kampong in looking after the cattle. The cattle ground was thoroughly cleared by prison labour at the beginning of the month.

KAPIT.
The Acting Assistant District Officer. Mr. R. G. Aikman, reports: -
Court. -Inggong, a Dyak, who escaped from Fort Vyner, Nanga Gat in 1927, was arrested in the ulu Anap by the Tatau Police and on arrival here received the usual punishment. Mambang, Dyak, was imprisoned for one month for non-payment of fine.
Song. -Song was visited on the 6th. Native Officer Abang Aboi visited the Katibas from the 7th to 15th, and Native Officer Abang Sleh the Tekalit from the 7th to the 15th.
General. -Accompanied by Native Officer Abang Aboi I visited the Mujong and Melinau rivers from the 21st to the 26th inclusive. The standard of living among the Mujong Dyaks seems to be rather higher than that of their neighbours in the Balleh and Gat. and many fine houses were observed.
Penghulu Ugak has set his followers a good example by building an outsize in Dyak houses, the main pillars bear comparison with those found in the best Kayan and Kenyah dwellings.
Apart from a few small domestic cases and an interesting property dispute there were no questions of any importance raised.
Rainfall. -Rainfall for the month was 17’17 inches. The river has been in flood for several consecutive days during the month.

SARIKEI, BINATANG AND REJANG.
The Acting Assistant District Officer, Mr. J. O. Gilbert, reports: -
Judicial. -Court work was very slack during the month though there were a few theft cases.
Two Civil District Court and eleven Magistrate Court cases were settled, claims amounting to $629.58.
General. -At the beginning of the month the Land Officer, Mr. Parker and myself returned from Sibu where we had arrived after the Pakan and Wak trip. While at Sibu a meeting was held about the construction of roads in this district to have relieve the unemployed; the meeting came to nothing, as the Chinese said that the amount of relief work to be given for road making was so small that they wanted help in form of money for padi planting. No decision was given on this at the time.
On the 7th accompanied by Native Officer Tuanu Mohamet and the Penghulu I went up the ulu Sarikei and held a meeting at Rumah Quin, where we were told that the Sarikei Dyaks were too busy farming to worry about the Asoon business. This I think is probably true, but believe that the feeling in the Nyelong is stronger towards Asoon, while that in the Ulu Binatang is definitely for Asoon.
On 19th Native Officer Abang Indih and Tua Kampong Haji Mohamat Belian of Binatang proceeded up Ulu Binatang to Indet’s house, to arrest one Bantan, on a Saratok warrant (this man had previously resisted arrest in Ulu Nyelong) on arrival at Indet’s house, they found it crowded and all Indet’s people in war paint; these three had to sit in the house with guns and spears pointed at them while they talked, Indet refused to release Bantan and Native Officer and Tua Kampong had to returned empty-handed.
On 14th Mr. L. D. Kennedy, Supt. of Customs, visited Sarikei and Rejang having made a round of all the coast lights in the district.
As from the 22nd there had been an extra guard on the wireless at Binatang, a precaution against any interference from mischievous Dyaks; the wildest has also been opened at periods throughout the night.
Pepper. -The Agriculture Department have taken steps as regards the bug that has been eating the pepper shoots, in form of a concentrated solution of nicotine; a pepper inspector is trying it on some of the gardens now, but the results are not yet knows. It is probably too late to do much good this year, but if the Chinese can get faith in it, it should do a lot of good, as this solution works out seven times cheaper than buying the tobacco and obtaining the nicotine in the old fashioned way.
The fall in price of pepper has not caused the number of gardens to decrease very much, the Land Department have figures of over one hundred new gardens applied or since the beginning of the year.
The Towkays are trying to get a system enforced by Government so that no stolen pepper can be sold in the bazaar, and so that each gardener must sell to the Towkay who has advanced him cash.

Fifth Division News.
LIMBANG.
May, 1931.
Extracts from the Fifth Divisional Reports for May, 1931, by Mr. F. H. Kortright, Resident: -
Court. -There were an unusual number of cases before the Courts, but there were none of any special interest.
General. -A party of Kelabits from Tama Kuling’s house in the Medibit came down, -chiefly to buy gunpowder and obtain permission to hunt rhinoceros in the Ulu Limbang.
The Acting Assistant District Officer, Lawas, Mr. J. R. Combe, and the Curator of the Museum, Mr. E. Banks returned from their visit to the Bah Country via the Medihit and on their way down river visited the Medalam and Tanah Merah. It is regretted that they report the Muruts in the Bah are becoming scarce and more degenerate than ever, and it is with greatest difficulty that payment of tax can be enforced.
A crocodile measuring 18’ 2’’ was captured by the professional catchers and the usual reward paid.
P.W.D. -Prisoners averaging 19.03 were engaged in raising the level of the Brunei Road, and also in clearing and making the butt for a rifle range of 200 yards below Bukil Bunot for the purpose of training the police to use a rifle.
A contract was let and work commenced on the first three miles of the Brunei Road, extension.

LAWAS.
May, 1931.
The Acting Assistant District Officer. Mr. J. R. Combe, reports: -
General. -I returned from a visit to the Bah Country accompanied by Mr. Banks, Curator of the Sarawak Museum, on the 28th, having been absent for some five weeks.
Mr. Sinclair, Assistant Superintendent of Customs Fourth and Fifth Divisions paid a visit to the District, visiting all Substations returning to Limbang on the 24th instant.
Agriculture. -The Lawas (Sarawak) Rubber Estates. Ltd., exported 32,828 lbs. of dry rubber during the month.

Report on a Visit to Kelalan Bah,  By Mr. J. R. COMBE, Acting Assistant District Officer, Lawas and Trusan.
On April 20th 1931, I left Lawas accompanied by Mr. E. Banks, Curator of the Sarawak Museum, with the object of paying a visit to the Kelalang Bah, and returning by the Ulu Fa, Adang, Medihit and Limbang. Mr. E. Banks undertook the trip with a view to collecting specimens of birds animals and fishes, also with the hope of finding traces of hidden cities, with the former he met with certain success, the latter unfortunately proving disappointing with the exception of the remains of some stone construction which was found in Dutch Borneo, near Long Bawan, these were in all probabilities the results of some Native carousal in by-gone days.
Complaints had been handed to me by the shop-keepers at Trusan, deploring the lack of trade and putting it down to the fact that the up-country Muruts during the last three or four years had failed to bring down the jungle produce as in former days.
It was also brought to my notice that the order instigated by His Highness the Tuan Muda, that no traders should proceed up river beyond Sungei Briwan, was being ignored and that traders were journeying as far as Kuala Tengoah and even farther with their goods. If this is true, which I have every reason to believe is so, in my opinion traders should not be permitted beyond Sungei Suang, otherwise the little trade which is being carried on in Trusan will be completely throttled, as there is no inducement for the up country Murut to purchase his wants in the Bazaar, if he obtain all that he requires some two days from Trusan. The other alternative is to have a small Government Station, say in the Luping, consisting of two policemen, who could keep some check on the movements of traders and also be a reminder to the Muruts that there is a Government in this country and that the orders and laws made by the Government are to be respected, and not ignored as the Murut is very apt to do. An example of this is the 
disregard given to head tax, and nearly every house in the Ulu Trusan has failed to pay tax for the last two or three years, and in some cases some six or seven have elapsed. It was pointed out to all heads of houses that they alone were responsible for the collecting of this tax. and incidentally they would be the sufferers if in future this tax was not paid regularly annually. Nearly every house hold proclaimed that they were just about to go down to Trusan with Salang, and to insure that Government got first opportunity of obtaining arrears of taxes before the proceeds of the sales were spent in the bazaar, I gave every Tua Rumah a letter to be delivered to the Court Writer immediately on arrival at Trusan, and instructing the latter to see that police attended the sale of Salang and deducted that due to Government. This appears to have worked with some success as already the Court-write, has reported the receipt of some $200.
Owing to previous reports I was led to believe that there were innumerable unlicensed guns used by the up-country Muruts; either this is entirely false, or else they are too well hidden, as careful search was made in every house and no traces of firearms were found, however, it is not very difficult for guns to be hidden in places where the most diligent search would fail to find them.
The Bah Country itself which stands 3,000 feet above sea level, consists of approximately 1,000 acres of grown padi, which is harvested twice a year, the ground being terraced and irrigated as in Java and Siam. Since my last visit the population has decreased considerably leaving only six Murut houses, where as in former days there were some twelve or thirteen long houses. This has naturally led to the curtailing of the padi crop and a great many acres have been allowed to run to seed. Sakai Libat who holds the position of head man is old and sick, and has apparently never considered that it is his duty to collect tax from the local inhabitants and bring it down to Trusan, again I impressed upon him that he alone was answerable to Government in the future and I think that all the locals will proceed to Trusan in the near future. I also pointed out the disgraceful condition of the path from Rumah Almar to the Bah, where it necessitates crawling on one’s hands and knees through a tunnel of Lalang; a surat was 
given to him stating that the inhabitants of the Bah were responsible for the track down to Pengiran Ballang’s house on the Bulo. He seemed quite agreeable to this provided that the track all the way down to Trusan was cleared by other “Tua Rumah” and this has been arranged for, and if everybody does their fair share of work, I see no reason why quite decent track should not be maintained from Trusan to the Bah. Incidentally this would be another point in favour of a Government Station on the Luping. Nothing of note occurred during the descent from the Bah to Tama Kallang’s house in the Medihit. This is not to be wondered at as the Country is extremely sparsely populated, there being only two houses left in the Ulu Adang, those of Labo Ballang and Rugus Sar, the latter being the head-man of the vicinity; he was unfortunately away and with the exception of women folk his house was empty. I should like to suggest the possibility of maintaining two or three Government Prahus at Rugus Sar’s house, which is only a
stone’s throw from the Adang River. In favourable water, Limbang could be reached in four and a-half-days from here, as against some eight or nine by going overland, not to mention that in flood water it is impossible to proceed overland owing to the Rivers Adang and Limbang being impassable.
As arranged, we met Mr. Pollard. D.O., Baram, at Tama Kallang’s house with a view to discussing the question of where the Kelabits on Bukit Boyoh should pay their tax. Limbang or Baram? There are only two houses here and both obviously well inside the Limbang Boundary, so the question produced no difficulty. From Tama Kallang’s house we obtained perhaus, Mr. Pollard proceeding to Limbang direct, whilst Mr. Banks and myself paid a visit to the house of Impinit a Dyak in the Ulu Medalam, and from there to Limbang stopping a night at Sandom’s house, at Tanah Merah, the Mission at Sungei Prangga, one night at Danau and from there a day’s journey to Limbang.
Nothing of importance occurred in the Ulu Limbang, which again may be put down to the sparse population. Mr. Banks and myself both agreed that some check should be put on permits for Rhinoceros hunting and this question has already been discussed with the Resident, Fifth Division. A payment to Government of $20 per horn appears to be the most satisfactory solution.
During my last trip to the Bah, in 1929, the health of the Muruts were extremely bad; fever and disease being rife in nearly every house. However, during this visit I am glad to say the health conditions showed a great improvement, very little of the above being experienced.

CORRESPONDENCE.
[The Editor is not responsible for the opinions of Correspondents.]

SARAWAK ATHLETES.
The Editor.
Sarawak Gazette,	
Kuching.
KUCHING,	
21th June, 1931.
SIR,
Will you kindly allow me space in your columns to make a comment or two on a letter written by S.L.S. under the above caption in your issue of 1st June? I should like to say that the promise of support offered by the Sarawak Association of Singapore is most appreciated and should give every encouragement to our young lads.
Presumably, the two Sarawakians who went on their own accord to compete in the last Malaya Chinese Sports Meet were not the best Chinese Athletes Sarawak can boast of. Surely, our Chinese Community here would not recognize them as representatives of Sarawak when they were not properly selected by a responsible body.
I think the organizing Committee of the local Chinese Sports Meet would be able to deal with the selection by picking up the winners of Sarawak Chinese Sports Meet to qualify for Malaya one and I will bring up this important matters before their next meeting.
After all, Sarawak is not too far backward in Sports. Our first Chinese Sports Meet was held on the October 11th last year. Although the announcement of this Meet was given in a very short notice, competitors had insufficient time for thorough training, but the results obtained both track and field events were very gratifying.
Yours faithfully, T.K.C.

Shipping News.
THE STRAITS STEAMSHIP Co., LTD., and THE SARAWAK STEAMSHIP Co, LTD, Combined Service KUCHING TO SINGAPORE and vice versa.
SCHEDULE.
This schedule is provisional only and is liable to alteration of dates or vessels without notification.






















