Vol. LXXIII.
No. 1071.
Sarawak Gazette
PRICE
KUCHING, Monday, June 2nd, 1947.
20 CENTS.
Contents.
The Sarawak Gazette.
MONDAY, JUNE 2nd, 1947.
Birth.
Richards.—On May 28th. 1947, in Kuching, to Daphne, wife of A. J. N. Richards, a. daughter—Anne Bridget Elisabeth.
Acknowledgement.
Mr. Chen Heng Fan and his son, Mr. Chen Fook Hin, and family wish to thank all relatives, friends and business acquaintances for the many kind letters of condolence, scrolls and wreaths sent to the funeral of Mr. Chen Heng Fan's father, the late Mr. Chen Wai, Capitan China. Sarikei, who died at his home in Sarikei on the 25th March, 1947, age. 72.
SARAWAK WITANAGEMOTS.
The recent meeting of the Council Negri has once more brought to the fore the question of the devolution of political res- ponsibility in Sarawak. This subject is at the moment particularly topical in view of the creation of Divisional Advisory Councils,
District Advisory Councils, Agricultural Advisory Boards, Chinese Advisory Boards, and so on. Indeed committees and boards are now multiplying with such rapidity that it is pertinent to consider their functions and their future.
“Democracy” is a ubiquitous word with a chequered career. The prototypes of many of those who laud its name to-day were using it as a term of abuse less than a century ago, and only people who never heard of it before 1939 really believe that it represents an absolute and unambiguous philosophy of government. It is a word which facilitates and encourages a mere scratching at the surface of political thought, and the simple substitution of. “Yah! you're not a demo- crat,” for the early nineteenth century, “Yah! you’re a democrat.” does not get us very far. It is believed by many Americans that republicanism is an indispensable element in a democracy ; by many English- men that a real democracy involves a non- elective upper House; and by most Russians that political and economic democracy are quite inseparable. Out of this sort of welter two truths appear to emerge. In the first place whether or not a country is politically “democratic” is surely a question of degree and not a question of kind. In all societies freedom of expression has to be curtailed and controlled to a certain extent, and that extent is largely dependent on the circumstances and conditions of the period, a fact which is clearly evident in time of war. Again every society must act polit- ically through delegates or representatives. It is obviously impossible to decide all questions in modern countries by referen- dum, and it is pedantic to distinguish between democracies by the frequency of elections. It has been argued that “pro- portional representation” is more democratic than the British system of awarding seats to individual top-of-the-poll candidates so that a strong but invariably unsuccessful mino- rity party can be excluded from the legislature altogether. But this merely reveals an exaggerated concern for the mechanics of politics and thrusts into the background the important point of principle, which is whether in practice the organisation of the community in question enables effect to be given to the will of the majority of the
people. And just as ‘‘democracy” is a comparative and not an absolute term so may the exigencies of a society require that more or less “democracy” should be permitted from time to time. We have already mentioned the effect of war on democratic institutions, and if. for the purposes of the argument, we accept the Marxist thesis, that there is an irreconcileable conflict between “capitalism” and “socialism.” as correct, it must follow that the change-over from one form of society to another involves some restriction on political liberty, because no community can don a new economic system once every five years like a man putting on a new suit of clothes. The question of the number of “ parties" really does not enter into the discussion. It is no more reasonable for X to say to Y : "We have two parties but you have only one and therefore we are a demo- cracy and you are not :" than it would be for Z to say to X . "We have seven parties and you have only two:" and then to proceed to draw the same conclusion there- from. The only tests are whether the machinery permits the will of the people to be expressed, whether a minority is pro- tected, and whether facilities are available to enable the people to arrive at an opinion. Further, "party" has a different meaning in different countries. There is, for instance, no such clear division of opinion between the Republicans and Democrats in America as there is between the Socialists and Con- servatives in Britain.
The second truth that can be discerned in the confused jumble of sincere liberalism, legalistic quibbling, chauvinistic propa- ganda. and bare-faced opportunism, which passes for a political philosophy in this aftermath of war, is that to confine the conception of “democracy” to the strictly political field is to take a very narrow and limited view. There are opportunities for the application of "democratic principles" in all branches of life, and it is little use transferring the control of the political institutions of a community to the represent atives of the people if. whenever the people turn away from politics, they find oligarchy still triumphant elsewhere. It is in the social chib or trade union, on the staff of a newspaper or the committee of a library, as a member of a co-operative society or a shareholder in a company, that a man can best learn the practical utilisation of “‘democracy" before he turns his attention to a larger field. Even a pupil in school should have some elementary training in this sphere. This suggestion may be strongly contested, but a master who, for example, continually runs his "house" on the principle of backing up his prefects can have no reasonable complaint when he appears in court on a motoring charge and finds the bench doing exactly the same thing with regard to the police. In fact we have heard a housemaster defend a stipendiary
magistrate's decision on precisely these grounds, thus putting himself completely in line with the fascist theory of the state.
It is against this background that it is meet to consider recent political develop- ments in Sarawak, a background in which, in various parts of the world, the word "democracy" is being twisted and turned to fit into any place provided for it, in which liberal principles are daily invoked to justify skulduggery of all descriptions, and in which the most vociferous exponents of this political doctrine are those who, until recently, either mocked any manifestation of it or prided themselves on a complete lack of interest in “political" affairs. Sarawak is still a long way from possessing the status of a fully-fledged parliamentary democracy, principally because of the lack of education and political and administrative experience which is general throughout the Colony. The gradual progress from an official to an unofficial majority on the legislative council, from nomination to election on a popular franchise, from government by a Civil Service to Government by the representatives of the majority, is the road on which the Colony is setting out. It may be that in the end it will be found that the British system is not wholly suitable to local conditions, and. for instance, that some form of indirect election would be preferable, but no final conclusion can be reached on such a subject at this juncture.
The new reforms, which are at present administrative only, go some way towards rectifying the fundamental mistake of the 1941 “constitution” by starting at the bottom instead of the top. The best training that a politician can get is by legislating for. and administering, the affairs of his parish. Local government is the school of the statesman because it enables him to try his infant teeth in a familiar environment and on familiar matters. It has already been noticed that the advisory councils are a good deal more articulate than is the Council Negri. The purpose of these councils is to keep the local representatives in close contact with public affairs; to acquaint them with the reasons for measures being taken by Government : and to enable them to have a voice in the formulation and administration of development schemes and kindred matters. At present they are purely advisory and have no legislative or executive power; but the quicker the members show themselves proficient in this primary school the quicker no doubt that power will come.
It appears that the devolution of respon- sibility to local authorities is likely in the immediate future to be more in the direction of increasing the powers of the Municipal Boards and in constituting political institutions on a tribal basis. Strong as is the tradition of racial co-operation and
friendliness in Sarawak yet the races are still sufficiently distinct and diversified to make the tribal unit the most promising ground on which to found the first experi- ment. A man must get his own house into order before he begins collaborating with his neighbours in the repair of the public street. The various leaders will meet and exchange ideas on the Divisional and District Advisory Councils, but, except possibly in a few places, where the dis- tinction between the races is less than normally acute, the representative local authorities, outside the municipal areas, which exercise powers and bear respon- sibility, will probably have to lie racially homogeneous.
That is, briefly, the substance of the project as it has been propounded to the public throughout the Colony. Speculation as to details would be fruitless and unwarranted, and it will be interesting to await the unfolding of Government’s plans. Considerable discussion has, however, already taken place concerning one of the most important elements in the scheme, namely the formation of local treasuries. The handling of money is, of course, one of the earliest lessons that must be learnt in the art of government. One of the principal objections to a benevolent despotism is that it encourages its subjects to look to a sup- posedly inexhaustible fund at the centre for the satisfaction of their needs and the improvement of their amenities. The Government becomes a kind but not over- indulgent fairy godmother, while the status of a citizen seldom advances beyond that of a cross between a child at Christmas and a beggar in the streets, and his natural qualities of independence and self-reliance are stultified and discouraged. It is good for him. and good for the community, that he should learn that education and medical services, the protection of his home and the security of his property, the administration of the courts of justice and the inculcation of agricultural lore, all have to be paid for, and in the end it is he who pays for it. It is not intended to suggest that the first objective of the constitution of local authorities should be to develop a rate- payers’ association mentality. It is much to be hoped that, when it is understood that social services are provided at the tax- payer’s expense, members of the boards and councils will be sufficiently civilised to insist on improved amenities and to make pro- vision, or to render concrete suggestions as to how provision should be made, for the cost thereof. It is essential to establish in the mind of the ordinary citizen the fact that public income and expenditure have to be budgeted for and balanced in the same way as private income and expenditure. When he has learnt that; when he has learnt that social services can only in the long run be improved by means of increased taxation,
though the short run may be provided for in a small way and to a certain extent by charitable tax-payers in England: and when he has learnt to demand that, nevertheless, social services can and must be improved and the money raised to finance this expenditure, though not yet a statesman he will at any rate have passed the elementary examination in public service and be ready to advance on to heavier responsibilities and to a wider sphere.
A modified control of finance, however, though undoubtedly the most important function of a local authority, is by no means its only function. No doubt it will be given power in an increasing degree to make by- laws and issue directions. It will have to learn how to rule in conformity with the general will, how to tolerate and protect a minority, and how to distinguish between the narrow interests of a race or area and the interests of the Colony as a whole. Perhaps the most difficult lesson to digest will be the endurance of criticism. In this respect a local authority may be better off than the central government in a British colony, which is in a most peculiar position in that it receives the same sort of shafts and arrows as are directed against a government for the time being at home with- out having the same freedom of hitting back. Being civil servants the officers of a colonial government must maintain the same air of taciturnity and aloofness as is imposed on their counterparts in Britain, although they are much more vulnerable to attack. Critics of the administration in the mother country are usually at pains to point out that they are merely concerned with the shortcomings of the politicians and are not insinuating that anything is wrong with the permanent civil servants, which is just as well as they know that to a large degree they will have to rely on those inoffensive civil servants when their turn for power comes. But this is by no means the case in a Colony. Although the Secretary of State valiantly defends his overseas subordinates against attacks in Parliament, he can hardly perform the same services in a country where those subordinates live and work and he does not. Consequently the full brunt is borne by the officials, and if at any time they are goaded into striking back it is con- sidered that they are behaving in an ungentlemanly fashion. Fortunately they are far too well-trained and brought up to fall into the trap, so that the argument is all on one side. Many a Colonial civil servant must have murmured to himself: "Oh for a political chief to tell this blighter what I think." Perhaps the local autho- rities, that are to be, will not be bound by the same inhibitions and conventions. None the less, responsibility lies like a weight upon the tongue. Criticism will have to be taken, examined, and, if valuable, utilised.
This is a lesson which those new to power find it particularly difficult to learn.
All men of goodwill in Sarawak must wish the new venture well and watch its progress with interest and hope. An enormous task lies before the officers who will be responsible for the development. They must not only keep a paternal eye on the youthful organs of Government, but at the same time infuse into the local tribunes the zeal and enthusiasm to make the experiment a success. "Public life,” said Edmund Burke, “is a situation of power and energy : he trespasses against his duty who sleeps upon his watch, as well as he that goes over to the enemy.” Whether the new powers can be prevented from sleeping upon their watch will largely depend on those advising them. It is easy to pour scorn on these callow assemblies: it is easy to hint cynically and smugly that they are bound to fail and in five years' time we will be back at the start again. It is equally easy, and probably a good deal more dangerous, to take an over-optimistic view and to see in these first tentative beginnings the dawn of a new era. “Democracy” has not suddenly des- cended on Sarawak; the Colony is not governed by popular election the in- novations referred to in this article are no more than the raising of the curtain before the play begins. But the road now stretches before us and it is better to fix our eyes on the goal than to worry about the distance which must be covered. The war is finished; the occupation is over; the Japanese have gone; the future is in our hands. In 1863 America, at that time, alas, the youngest and newest and most advanced democracy, was in the throes of civil war. It would of course be absurd to claim any analogy, but, if the ideals and inspiration which lay behind the famous words of Abraham Lin- coln, when he dedicated the National Cemetery at Gettysburg on November 19th of that year, could be inscribed in the hearts of every member of our new authorities, it would be certain that, not only had a new experiment begun, but that it would continue until the end :
Council Negri.
“The world will little note nor long remember, what we say here, but it can never forget what they did here. It is for us, the living, rather, to be dedicated here to the unfinished work which they who fought here so nobly advanced. It is rather for us to be here dedicated to the great task remaining before us; that from these honoured dead we take increased devotion to that cause for which they gave the last full measure of devotion ; that we here highly resolve that these dead shall not have died in vain; that this nation, under God, shall have a new birth of freedom; and that government of the people, by the people, and for the people, shall not perish from the earth.”
Council Negri.
The Council Negri met on May 19th and 20th. His Excellency the Governor addressed the Council as follows: —
"Mr. President, Members of the Council :
I have great pleasure in welcoming you here to-day.
The Bills which you will be considering at this session are comparatively few but they are important, particularly those relating to the revision of the laws, the prevention of disease and the holding of a census. Owing to circumstances beyond our control delays have occurred in the preparation of the Trade Unions legislation which I informed you at your last session would be laid before you. I am anxious that members should have ample time to consider the provisions of what in this country is a novel piece of legislation and the introduction of the Trade Unions Bill has accordingly been deferred to the December session.
I regard it as important that Council should be kept informed of the progress made in the rehabili- tation of the country and in the preparation of plans for its future development. I do not propose to recount in detail all the measures that are being taken hut I would like to bring to your notice some of the more salient and significant facts.
The supply position is steadily improving. One year ago the sole agency for the supply of essential commodities was the Government. The strenuous efforts made by the Supply Department combined with the initiative and resource of the trading com- munity have done much to restore trade to its normal channels. To-day. with the exception of imported rice, flour, sugar and some cloth, all imports are dealt with by business firms and traders. We are still short of many commodities of which we stand in need, particularly guns and textiles, but a glance round any of our towns and villages shows what success has been achieved and that the shops are filled with all manner of goods which could rarely be seen ten or even five months ago. It has been possible to procure a large consignment of cloth, over a million yards, from Japan, which is expected to arrive shortly, and thanks to the good offices of the British Govern- ment we are getting preferential treatment in the supply of guns and ammunition, which are urgently needed for the protection of crops and gardens. As the rubber export figures show, the shortage of coagulant, which was at one time acute, has been largely overcome.
The increase in the volume of imports and exports has exceeded expectation. For the first four months of this year the average monthly export of lubber exceeded that of last year by nearly 700 tons a month while the average monthly export of sago had more than doubled. On the other hand the export of illipe-nuts will be only about half of what was expected, while two commodities which figured largely in our pre-war list of exports, pepper and copra, have not yet made their re-appearance. A part of the increase in the exports of rubber and sago is due to the fact that during 1946 shipping was short and stocks accumulated. Most of this accumulation has now been cleared by additional shipping which has recently been provided. The present high monthly average rate of export must be regarded as a peak figure and is not likely to be maintained throughout the year. Nevertheless it
is anticipated that the revenue to be derived from import and export duties in 1947 is likely to be appreciably in excess of the estimates which this Council approved at its last session.
To assist recovery, Government is now granting loans to primary producers and to shopkeepers for the rebuilding of business premises damaged or destroyed during the war. In this connection I would mention that a War Claims Commission is being set up and will tour the country to consider claims for damage to property due to war con- ditions. A public announcement will be made in due course setting out the terms of reference of the Commission and the procedure that will be adopted.
Many saw-mills are back in production and the extraction of logs and lumber from the forests is increasing. Arrangements are in train for the export of a trial shipment to Australia.
The Miri oilfields, completely devastated during the war, is being brought back into production. In order to explore the further possibilities of this field the Oil Company proposes to undertake deep boring as soon as the necessary equipment can be obtained. It also proposes to carry out a seismic survey of the Baram River basin. It is carrying out in co-operation with Government large scale anti- malarial measures. Negotiations are proceeding with a view, among other things, to obtaining an increase in the present low rate of royalty paid by the Company and to expediting the replanning and reconstruction of the Miri municipal area.
The cutch factory at Selalang, badly damaged by bombing, is being restored to working order and the Island Trailing Co., which provides employ- ment for many living in the Rejang delta area, expects to resume operations as soon as certain essential equipment is received.
The position regarding food is easier. The efforts of producers, stimulated and aided by the Agricultural Department, to grow more food, allow us to face the immediate future with more con- fidence. The acreage of land planted with padi is more extensive than ever before and the harvest, though some damage was caused by the vagaries of the weather and by pests, is regarded as generally satisfactory. In an effort further to stimulate production Government has guaranteed a minimum price for the purchase of padi over the next two years. Although the position is at the moment easier as a result of our local padi harvest I must add a serious word of warning. Difficulties regarding the import of rice still remain. Rice, the staple food of nearly all the people, will still be in short supply and there are lean months ahead before the next harvest. Every effort is still needed and will continue to be needed for a long time to come to produce all the foodstuffs we possibly can.
The Public Works Department has been sorely handicapped by the shortage of staff and materials in carrying out the programme of rehabilitation and new works set out in the estimates. There has been much preliminary work to be done in the preparation of plans and calling for tenders and it is too early yet to say whether the full programme of work for the year can be carried through. Roads rendered almost impassable by heavy war traffic and five years of neglect are gradually being put in order. New quarters have been built and old ones repaired. Water supplies have been maintained and improved. The new Sibu supply, though not
yet in full working order owing to unavoidable delay in the delivery of essential parts, has improved conditions there.
In the field of public health I am glad to be able to report that drugs and equipment have been coming forward in greater quantities. A plentiful supply of N.A.B. is enabling the staff of the Medical Department to cope more effectively with yaws, the incidence of which greatly increased during the Japanese occupation. Further large supplies of drugs have been ordered. In addition hospitals have been reconditioned and re-equipped and measures are being taken in many areas to deal with the menace of malaria.
1 have been greatly impressed by the universal and clamant demand for more and better education which has greeted me on all my tours throughout the country . The number of pupils attending all existing schools has increased greatly. Sixteen schools for non-Malay native races have been opened since Civil Government was resumed. Further progress is hampered by the lack of trained teachers. Night classes for adults have been started at Kuching and elsewhere and are being well attended.
The need to improve salaries and other conditions of service of Government Officers and employees has been under constant review by myself and my advisers. It has recently been decided that the Commission, which has been appointed by the Secretary of State with wide terms of reference under the chairmanship of Sir Harry Trusted to deal with these and cognate matters in the Malayan Union and Singapore, should also visit the three Borneo territories. A Commission of this calibre is necessary because there are important questions to be considered which are of common concern to all the Colonies in the Far East and on which local knowledge must be supplemented by expert advice. It will be some time before this Commission can complete its work and final decisions can be reached. In the meantime it is necessary, in mv opinion, that some measure of relief should be afforded to all Government servants and non- establishment employees whose salaries, though supplemented by cost of living allowances, do not enable them to maintain a reasonable standard of living during the present period of inflated prices. Proposals to provide some immediate relief are under urgent consideration and I hope to be in a position to make an announcement on this subject shortly. I should like to take this opportunity of expressing my appreciation and thanks for the loyalty and devotion to duty which has been dis- played in such high degree by both the Senior and the Junior Services during a difficult period.
While I am dealing with service matters I would mention that an application has been made for a Nuffield Foundation Scholarship to enable a member of the Junior Service to study for a degree and qualify for a senior appointment. I am not yet in a position to announce the result.
I turn now to future development. Our first task is to draw up a comprehensive plan related to Sarawak’s needs and potentialities, which will cover all objectives of development and welfare expenditure considered to be necessary and desir- able over a period of ten years. The scope of this plan would not be limited by the exact amount of the resources which we estimate to be available. The proposals of the plan would be graded in accord- ance with their relative priority so that the money
ultimately found to be available from all sources (that is, from revenue and from loans as well as from the Colonial Development and Welfare Fund) can be devoted to those developments which are agreed to he of the highest and immediate import- ance. In order to produce a plan such as this one must have an adequate staff and a certain modicum of basic information about the population and resources of the Colony. At the moment Sarawak has neither. Nevertheless it is of the first import- ance that an early start should be made with development and welfare work. To meet this situation a preliminary short term plan has been drawn up. which will enable us to make use of the money immediately available from the Colonial Development and Welfare Fund and from our own revenues in order, firstly, to provide the basic information required before long-term planning can begin and. secondly, to meet the most urgent of the Colony’s needs in a manner which can be expected to fit in with the long-term comprehensive plan that will be framed subsequently.
Every possible effort is being made to obtain trained and experienced technical staff adequate for our needs but there is a serious shortage of such men and it will. I fear, be some time before we have obtained the doctors, the engineers, the surveyors, the agricultural, forestry and education officers that this country requires. Information about the country’s potentialities is extraordinarily deficient. No proper census has ever been held. Information is lacking regarding the agricultural possibilities of this country and about its forest and mineral resources. There has never been a complete topographical, or a geological or a socio-economic survey of the country . Steps are being taken to remedv these deficiencies.
You will be considering at this session the Bill relating to the holding of a Census this year. Without reliable information about the number and distribution of the people it is difficult to decide such questions as how many new schools or dispensaries are needed and where they can be sited to the best advantage.
Arrangements are being made for a comprehen- sive socio-economic survey.
An aerial topographical survey of certain areas has already started. These areas include the parts of Sarawak where coal measures are known to exist and where the most promising swamp padi lands are believed to be situated. We are also trying to arrange for a team of mining engineers and geologists to explore and test the known coal measures in order to find out whether they are worth developing and. if so. how this can best be done.
I have already described what is being done by the Sarawak Oilfields Limited to explore the oil resources of the country .
A scheme is being framed to enable an immediate investigation to be made of the extent and location of the land best suited to the cultivation of swamp padi.
It is proposed to obtain the services of a qualified Fisheries Officer whose first task it will be to make a complete survey of the present methods adopted few the catching, drying and marketing of fish and to prepare a plan for the improvement and develop- ment of the fishing industry. There are good fishing grounds near us but we are not making the best use of them. There is no reason why the output of the Sarawak fishermen, given better
equipment and proper training in the handling of it. should not be increased to a much higher level.
These are all schemes designed to provide the information required for the preparation of a com- prehensive long-term development plan, and as they are beyond our own resources it is proposed that they should be financed from the Colonial Development and Welfare Fund.
Sarawak is mainly dependent on its agriculture. We not only need to improve the quality and increase the production of the food and other crops which we know are suited to the country but we must, discover by trial and experiment new crops which it will pay our cultivators to grow.
As soon as we have determined the location and extent of the areas best suited to the cultivation of wet padi, schemes will be prepared for land drainage and possibly for irrigation and for village settlement in order that our people can take full advantage of them.
Our two main exports now, as before the war, are rubber and sago. Now that restrictions on the planting and production of rubber have been with- drawn there has been a spate of applications for land on which to grow more rubber. A great improvement can be effected in the rubber industry if our small holders can be provided with suitable clones for planting and can be taught more efficient methods of producing and processing natural rubber. With better planting materials and better methods, I am advised, our producers can double or treble their production per acre. A scheme to improve the industry on these lines is being prepared and will be brought into effect as soon as possible.
The methods of producing sago, our second most important export, are inefficient and wasteful. The equipment used for the manufacture of sago flour is in general primitive. Much can be done to help our local producers and give them a better return for their labour and a scheme to this end will be prepared.
I referred previously to the disappearance of pepper from the list of our exports. Sarawak pepper had a good reputation in the world market and fetched a good price. Owing to disease that had attacked the vines the industry was declining before the war. During the Japanese occupation the gardens were completely neglected and most of the vines died. Consequently hardly any pepper is being produced in Sarawak to-day. The Agricul- tural Department has already started experimental work with a view to re-establishing pepper as a product for export.
The successful introduction of improved methods of animal and field husbandry require experiment, education and demonstration. For this purpose a number of agricultural stations and farm schools are required and it is proposed to prepare a scheme to provide them. The work that would be under- taken at these agricultural stations will include selection and breeding work in padi and other important crops; trials of selected strains and of crops new to Sarawak; multiplication of seed and planting material; trials of improved methods of pepper cultivation: manorial trials and so on. The farm schools, which will usually be attached to or near the agricultural stations, will provide short courses of instruction of an essentially practical nature for selected persons from the local agricul- tural communities.
On these and other schemes connected with the improvement of agriculture in the Colony, it is proposed to devote $1 1/2 million out of the $5 million allocated to us.
The development of the agricultural resources of the Colony will call for better credit and marketing facilities and it is considered these can best be pro- vided through the agency of Co-operative Societies. It is proposed to establish a Co-operative Depart- ment in Sarawak as soon as practicable, which will be paid for from our own revenues. Co-operation is a technical subject and requires the services of a fully trained staff. Our first task is to select suitable men and get. them trained and this we are now doing.
It is also proposed to devote a considerable pro- portion of the development funds available to us to the improvement of communications. The rivers are our main traffic arteries and it is necessary to enlist the services of an expert to investigate the possibilities of improving our water-ways and the channels through the river bars. It is important that we should maintain an air link with the out- side world and with our neighbours. After the present temporary R.A.F. sendee is discontinued, this will probably entail the reconditioning of the airfield at Kuching. The funds immediately avail- able are not sufficient for any large scale develop- ment of roads nor would it be wise to attempt to plan a trunk road system until it is known what areas are best suited to development and need to be opened up. It will however be possible to build tracks and secondary roads in order to meet some of our more urgent local needs.
I have dealt so far with the development of the economic resources of the country and have left the development of our social services, medical, health and education, to the end. Our need for more schools and more dispensaries is urgent but schools and dispensaries are expensive to maintain. In determining the amount to be devoted to the development of these services, very careful con- sideration has had to be given to the increase in annual costs of maintenance that will thereby be incurrred and these costs balanced against the increased revenue that may reasonably be expected as a result of the development of the country’s economic resources. It is considered that, as an interim measure, we can spend $1,800,000 on the social services to meet our most urgent needs, pending the formulation of a long-term plan, with- out committing the Colony to expenditure that it cannot meet in the future.
It is proposed to concentrate the development funds available for the medical and health services on a single scheme to provide mobile and static dispen- saries, particularly in those areas where at present no form of medical service exists. In this way the money will be spent to the greatest benefit of the greatest number. To man these dispensaries trained dressers are needed and none is available. It takes three years to train a dresser. Under the scheme proposed the necessary number of dressers will be trained. Before their period of training is ended, the buildings will be erected and the boats, engines and equipment required for the mobile dispensaries obtained so that all will be in readiness for die dispensaries to start operation as soon as the shortage of staff, which is the great impediment to speedy progress in so many of our schemes, has been overcome.
I have already referred to the universal demand for more schools. There is an equally urgent demand that English should be taught in these schools. Schools are not a mere matter of build- ings but of teachers. A good school is one with a good teacher and no school is often better than one with a bad teacher. Again we are up against the difficulty of shortage of trained staff. There are not sufficient trained teachers available and our first task is to produce them, if we are to establish the schools which the people want. The Malay Teacher Training Centre at Kuching is quite inadequate to meet our present needs and will have to be supplemented.
There is another serious deficiency in our educational system. There is no central secondary or high school to which the most promising pupils from the primary schools can be sent. If the native peoples of Sarawak are to play their full part in the development and progress of their country it is essential to provide them with education beyond the elementary stage. A central secondary school is a very urgent need and I have had a number of requests, particularly from the Malay communities, that one should be established. Owing to the deficiencies of our existing primary schools and the disastrous effects of the Japanese occupation, when many schools ceased to function, it is probable that during the first few years of its life the proposed secondary school will have to be used to give intensive general education to boys of Standard IV and V, and to give special courses in English in order to provide a supply of candidates with an adequate educational back-ground and knowledge of English to staff the administrative, education, agricultural and other Departments of Government. After this short initial phase the school will gradually assume its proper function of a secondary school, taking pupils from Standard VII up to matriculation.
We are in no position to undertake the expense or to sutler the delays inseparable from the establishment of a large teacher training centre and a secondary school on a permanent basis. It is proposed, therefore, to provide them under a single scheme which can be initiated as soon as approval is received, which will make use of exist- ing temporary buildings at comparatively small cost and yet last for a reasonable period, and which will allow for replacement in due course by permanent establishments on a larger or smaller scale as the needs and financial resources of the Colony may require. The proposal is to make use of the buildings at Batu Lintang Camp with all necessary renovations and additions and establish a teacher training centre with accommodation for one hundred student teachers and a secondary school capable of taking two hundred pupils. By this means it will be possible to provide with the least possible delay a supply of trained teachers to take charge of the many new primary schools which it is desired to establish and give the most pro- mising pupils from our primary schools the means of continuing their education up to a higher standard to their own and their country's benefit.
The educational welfare of the up-river peoples of the interior has in the past been completely neglected and it is important that their special needs should be met as soon as possible. A scheme has been devised to establish, as an experiment, a long-house school or training centre at Kanowit, where 30 young married Iban-speaking couples can
undergo a two-year course of training. They will be given practical training in modern agricultural methods and in the growing of suitable cash crops. They will be instructed in elementary hygiene and in the measures to be taken against the more pre- valent diseases and the women given a sound knowledge of child welfare. They will be taught to read and write their own vernacular and learn simple arithmetic. At the end of their course they will return to live and work as ordinary members of their own communities but possessed of sufficient knowledge and ability to help their own people by example and precept to make bettor use of their resources and pursue bettor ways of living. Mr. Bewsher, assisted by Mrs. Bewsher, will be in charge of this scheme. As I have said, the scheme is regarded as an experiment which, if successful, can be later extended to other up-river areas.
In the constitutional sphere there is one recent development, in which most members of this Council have an important part to play. District and Divisional Advisory Councils have been or are in course of being established on as representative a basis as possible in order to provide a recognised and ready means of consulting the people and enabling them through their representatives to express their views on all matters affecting their welfare and progress. As their name implies, the function of these councils is purely advisory but their establishment constitutes a first stop towards associating the people of Sarawak more closely with their Government and giving them a greater say in the management of their own and their country’s affairs. One or two of these Advisory Councils have had their first meetings, attended by some members of this Council, and have discussed some of the Bills, which you are to consider at this session. Their views will doubtless be reflected, in the debates which take place in this chamber.
Mr. President, Members of Council, I have endeavoured to give you an outline of the progress that is being made towards recovery from the after- effects of the war and of the more urgent schemes that it is hoped to initiate as soon as possible with the aid of the Colonial Development and Welfare Fund. We have had much valuable assistance in the consideration of our problems and in the preparation of these schemes from expert advisers from the staffs of the Colonial Office, the Governor- General and the Special Commissioner. These schemes do not pretend to be all-embracing or com- prehensive and they are subject to alteration and amendment. But they do. in my opinion, con- stitute an efficient and speedy method of meeting some of our most urgent needs, of making a start on sound lines with development and welfare work and of obtaining the information required for the preparation of a long-term comprehensive plan for the future development of this Colony’s resources and the betterment and welfare of its people. They provide good grounds for hope and confidence in the future of this country but no grounds for any relaxation of effort on the part either of Govern- ment or the people. If prosperity is to be achieved, we must all work hard and all work together.”
The Council then proceeded to business. It had a comparatively light agenda before it, which, it is understood, is not by any means likely to be the case next December. On the first day of the Meeting seven bills were read for the first time and the "Revised Edition of the Laws (Repeal of
Obsolete Enactments) Bill, having been reported on by a Select Committee, passed through its remain- ing stages. This Ordinance sweeps away most of the ancient and familiar "Green Book Orders.” For this reason it was subjected to very careful scrutiny. Before being introduced at all it is said that all Residents were consulted on its provisions and that a Committee consisting of two Malay Datus and one European, appointed by the Supreme Council, sifted and amended it. The Select Committee of the Council Negri, consisting of two Europeana, one Malay, one Sea Dayak and one Chinese, inserted four minor amendments. Both committees were unanimous in their recom- mendations with the result that a great deal of obsolete legislation, very useful in its time, has been removed from the statute book. A large part of the "Green Book," however, still lives, but it is understood that the sundry provisions, which remain part of the law, will shortly appear in the revised edition in other guise, so that the famous "Green Book” itself will become an interesting ancient monument of unlegal days.
On Tuesday, May 20th, the seven new bills were passed. The consequences of this legislation may be briefly summarised as follows. The law relating to notifiable diseases has been amended and clarified and powers have been given to the Governor in Council to introduce health rules bit by bit as the various parts of the Colony appear to be ripe for them; the law relating to the protection of birds and animals has been set on a firmer but not sub- stantially different footing; various Ordinances have been amended in minor particulars to facilitate the preparation of the revised edition of the laws; tuba fishing is now allowed subject to a permit being obtained from the Resident; additional powers have been given to the Governor in Council and the Director of Forestry with respect to the amendment and administration of the forest laws; provision has been made for the exercise of stringent control over the mining and export of minerals ("bijeh atom bomb." as the Clerk obligingly translated) which can be used for the development of atomic energy: and finally a new law was passed, fuller and slightly different from its predecessor, to enable a census to be carried out.
No debates took place on the second readings but proceedings in Committee were livelier than was the case last December. The Tuba Fishing Bill was amended, on a division, by increasing the maximum fine from one hundred dollars to two hundred and fifty dollars. On the adjournment Mr. Khoo Peng Loong raised the question of grants to Chinese Schools, and received an assurance from the President that the matter was under active consideration. It was a little disappointing that not more matters were brought up on the adjourn- ment and that unofficial members are generally slow to take advantage of the rights conferred on them by Standing Orders. It is to be hoped that the formation of Divisional and District Advisory- Councils will, by enabling and encouraging dis- cussion of Government projects, pave the way for more active debate in the Council Negri. It is important, however, that unofficial should not in any way feel thwarted by the consideration of a pending Bill in the local Councils or consider that their voice is stifled by reason of the fact that the Resident of their Division has been placed in a position to announce that the majority of the popular representatives he has consulted are in favour of the measure.
Arms of Sarawak.
The following announcement has been issued by the Secretariat:—
"His Majesty the King has been graciously pleased, by Warrant addressed to the Earl Marshal and recorded in the College of Arms, to ratify con- firm and assign unto the Colony of Sarawak the following Armorial Bearings :— "Or on a Cross per pale Sable and Gules an antique Crown of the field."
This is the language used in heraldry and means that the arms of the Colony are a golden shield bearing a half black and half red cross divided perpendicularly with the red half on the right, with an antique crown superimposed in the middle of the cross."
Notes and Comments.
His Excellency the Governor-General arrived in Kuching on May 28th. His Excellency the Governor of North Borneo and the Residents of the West Coast (North Borneo) and Brunei arrived on May 29th and left on May 30th.
The relevant supplement to the London Gazette having now come to hand the Sarawak Gazette congratulates the following most warmly on their decorations :
Major Harrisson, d.s.o.
Major Sochon, D.s.o.
Captain Edmeades, m.c.
Messrs. Combe, Carter, and the late "Charles" Chester, of North Borneo, were also decorated together with many others who participated in the epic of S.R.D.
The Council Negri brought the usual flock of outstation officials and unofficials to Kuching and the capital had a lively week, or possibly, owing to the current transport difficulties, it would be truer to say a lively fortnight. Although the Council Negri only sat for two days it is the present practice to take advantage of the presence of the Residents to hold a conference under the presidency of His Excellency the Governor to discuss various important matters affecting the Colony.
The second Agricultural Show since the liberation was held in Kuching on May 24th and 25th. Having listened to His Excellency the Governor opening the Show, and extricated ourselves from a seething sea of blue tickets (meaning the rosettes sported by the very energetic and efficient officials and not the prize certificates on the second-class vegetables) we wended our way round yet another excellent, interesting, and stimulating exhibition. Nevertheless it undoubtedly produces a sob in the heart. Why, if others do this sort of thing, cannot we? On returning home we slaughtered our domestic fowls, handed our jagong ceremoniously to the cat, and buried our changkol in the canna bed. An account of the Show appears elsewhere in this issue.
Monthly reports have recently revealed a number of industrial accidents. In the majority of these no "common law" remedy is available because
"negligence," or other factor involving liability, cannot he proved against any person. The question is bound to he asked whether the time is not ripe for some form of "workmen's compensation " legislation. This, however, like compulsory "third party" insurance of motor-vehicles, is a very tricky subject and it may well be argued that there are not sufficient facilities in Sarawak for dealing with the many difficult points involved.
An interesting sight in Kuching during the month was the collection of wild animals, birds and reptiles housed in the Museum grounds. They had been purchased by Mr. W. J. C. Frost who is accredited to the Natural History Museum, Kensington. London, and to the London and Edinburgh Zoos. The specimens included several young orang utan and wak-wak, snakes of various colours and sixes, a large and beautiful python being worthy of particular mention, a crocodile, and an otter, as well as much else which we omit for fear of appending the wrong names. Mr. Frost told us that they all came from the Sadong District. It had taken a month, he said, to stir the local inhabitants into action but once they began there was no stopping them. Further items were still arriving. The natural reaction of a naive Westerner to this kind of exhibition is: “Oh, this is the sort of thing one sees in a zoo.” It is difficult to realise that one is living, if not actually amongst such a wide variety of wild life, at any rate in close proximity to it. Opinions differ on the merits of reducing these beasts to captivity, and it is easy to be “sentimental,” when thinking of the long deprivation of liberty ahead of them and imagining that they are. thinking about it too. However most people believe that one half of the world’s fauna is entitled to see what the other half is, and we wish Mr. Frost and his chargee a safe journey and a long and happy future.
The Junior Service Association gave a garden party at "Zaida" on Whit-Monday. Many of the guests were re-visiting for the first time the “internment camp” in which they spent four mouths after the early police-station days. “Zaida” looks very different now. The house has been repaired and renovated, and turned into a comfort- able and well-equipped club. The executive com- mittee of the Association are to be congratulated on having done a really first-rate job.
Ex-internees will regret to hear that "Horry" Lack, that most efficient of quartermasters, died on March 15th.
During the month there was an epidemic of bicycle thefts in Kuching. It is difficult to under- stand the report, published in the Sarawak Tribune, that a police notice, containing a perfectly reason- able warning to the public to take particular care of their machines, gave some people the impression that the authorities were abdicating from their responsibilities and consequently encouraged the thieves. The police are, of course, prosecuting their inquiries with their customary efficiency and. in connection with the notice, it is salutary to remember that their duty to prevent crime is as important as their duty to detect and secure the. punishment of the offenders. It will be regrettable if special legislation proves necessary to deal with the outbreak, but the impudence of the thieves is astonishing. In one case within our knowledge a
bicycle belonging to a Government clerk, recently purchased with money advanced by Government, was seen outside the office, securely locked with padlock and chain, at 11.55 a.m. Unfortunately the zeal and industry of the gentleman in question tied him to his chair until 12.15, by which time his property had disappeared.
One of the strangest phenomena of modern times is said to be the number of Dayaks turning up at the General Hospital. Kuching, and requiring their ear-lobes to be sewn anew to the upper-works. It appears that, on reaching the capital, they are shocked to find that they are not wearing their ears in accordance with the prevailing fashion. It is understood that they are particularly insistent that the repairs should be executed with sufficient skill to qualify as "invisible mending."
In this number the series entitled "Sidelights On Internment" comes to an end. It is intended to replace this feature with a series entitled "Stories of Old Sarawak” and the assistance and co-opera tion of our readers is urgently requested. At a time when "Old Sarawak is passing away into the shades it is particularly, meet that glimpses of the past should be caught and preserved for the coming generations. The stories must concern events prior to the date of the Japanese invasion. They must not be invented by the contributor but they need not necessarily he strictly true. It must be remembered that the Sarawak Gazette is read outside the boundaries of the Colony and also that it is to a certain extent a historical chronicle handed down to posterity. For these reasons the fact that the stories are "chestnuts” cannot be considered an objection, and indeed we have every intention of publishing the one about the policeman and prisoners on the Mukah-Oya beach in due course. We would lie most grateful if our readers would search their memories and help in making this series a success.
Heroism in the Limbang.
The following is the substance of the report of Major Dyce. of the British Reward Mission, relating to his investigations in the Limbang River ;
"About the end of January or in early February, J945, (not September, 1941, as first reported» a U.S. Liberator (marked "US Navy PB45 - 1-38840”i made a crash belly-landing about a mile from Kampong Telahak on the Sungei Limbang in Sarawak. Nine of- the crew survived the crash. One was dead.
Twenty-seven of the Telahak people, under the direction of the Tua Kampong, Mohamed bin Haji polamit. succoured the airmen. The kampong |>eople led the Americans out of die sodden padi held on which they had landed into the village; washed them, fed them, helped them bury their dead comrade, equipped them with parangs, and planned their escape. A team of villagers guided them on the first stages of a trek to safety which T.K. Mohamed worked out. His plan was- to guide the Americans by paths which avoided Jap- occupied localities to a wise and influential old Penghulu—Masing of Kampong Manoa some 16-20 mile« to the S.E. on the Pandaruan river—who
could be depended on to plan their further move- ment. The airmen said they wanted to get across "to the Dutch side.”
The Telahak people accordingly conducted the American crew about 10 miles S.E. to the Sungei Lubai, where three people of Perdayan and three of Pundut "took over." They and two other river people conducted the nine airmen up-river to Kampong Bukit Impas and Batu Riau. Three men from there helped guide the party eastward over the hills via Kampong Bakol where four more helpers joined to the Pandaruan at Kubong. Passing through Berawan on the way, two men from there also gave a hand to carry the escapers' gear. From Kybong Tua Rumah Abot and six of his men led them on to Manoa and placed them in the care of Penghulu Masing.
Penghulu Masing organised a move across- country eastward from his river to Ulu Temburon at Sibut, an Iban long-house of several "doors." Penghulu Anggon of Sibut fell in with the plan to continue conducting the nine escapers by relay stages generally eastward to the Sungei Trusan. from which they might hope to reach Dutch territory; "relay stages" because this prevents members of any one group going right through the country of another people. The practice is, in an operation of this kind, to hand on the "passengers" from long-house to long-house and kampong to kampong. Anggon and some of his people accordingly fed the airmen and canoed them down- stream to Amo. handing them over to Penghulu Belasan. The Amo people also fed the white men. Loused them for the night, and dried and mended their clothes. Next day after a good meal five men of Kampong Amo took them further downstream to Kampong Mersak, where Ketua Sugan the head- man received them. The Americans wanted to press on, so a Mersak party led them across the hills eastward, then north to Sungei Batu Apoi at Kampong Kutob, and handed them over to Peng hulu Abul. The object of this move was to give a wide herth to Kampong Bengar on the Temburon. where the Japs were in some strength. Penghulu Abul and his people again housed, fed, and dried out the nine airmen. Abul and two others set out next day with them on foot and guided them 10-12 miles up-stream and then across the hills north eastward to the Trusan in the vicinity of Kampong Long Tuan. They were now across the eastern boundary of Brunei and again in Sarawak territory. Ketua Kading Telau. Sia Lupong, and Palong Apad of Tang Lipi, and Ketua Lasong Ngilo of Long Tuan, after some discussion, undertook to have the escapers conducted to Dutch Borneo—to an area known as the Matang.
Lasong Ngilo and five helpers fed the nine air- men, harboured them for the night, and sent them off next morning with food for their next day’s journey. Lasong Ngilo and four guides went with them and helped with their gear. The party went off up the Sungei Briwan on the track to Pa Tengoa. At Tang Lapadan (about 5 miles) Balong Lasong received them and called in two more men to help. These three contributed more food and harboured the Americans for the night in Balong Lasong's house. It so happened that Awak Pengiran of Pa Tengoa was at Tang Lapadan at the time, and he led the whole party next day to Pa Tengoa. Here the Americans stayed two days, while the Penghulu—Pengiran Sakai—arranged for further movement. He secured six men willing to guide and carry for the party. They went on up
into the Ulu Tengoa, spending several nights in the jungle, over a 5,000 ft. plateau into Pa Sia, and on into Ulu Matang.
Somewhere in Ulu Matang the nine Americans separated into two parties, one of five, the other of four. The first party (five men) succeeded in moving through Pakamalu (in Ulu Matang) to the Bawang in Dutch Borneo. They joined up with Major Harisson's SRD party. After some time Major Harrisson cleared a landing strip, had an Auster flown in and the five Americans lifted out to safety. The other party (four men) headed north (probably) into Tagua country where, Tagaus killed them.
Unfortunately the Americans left here and there unmistakable signs of their passing and their identity; scraps of wrappers from “gum” and cigarettes, and boot-prints. These signs, plus of course word from the informers, enabled the Japs to trace where the party had been, and the people who had aided them. Very few of the latter escaped arrest and imprisonment. The Japs rounded them up, not all at once it seems, but in dribs and drabs. (The fact that this happened at harvest time increased the suffering in con- sequence). Some were lucky enough to be released after a week or two. Most were taken to Brunei gaol and subjected to neglect and several shocking forms of torture. The principle pleasantry was to lay a man out on his back, pour water into his mouth and nostrils till he was distended, then jump on his stomach to expel the water. Sixteen died in gaol as a result of this kind of treatment.
Bombed out of Brunei gaol, the Japs took their captives back to Limbang gaol. Here, a couple of months later, during further bombing, the prisoners broke out of gaol and all but three got away to their villages. The three were constrained as guides to lead some Japs across to Lawas, where they were freed.
The story of the episode and its aftermath is still alive in the kampongs and long-houses, but most of the helpers concerned looked for no material reward. All the bitterness of their recollections was directed at the Japs, at whose hands they had suffered physically and materially. However, the local Administration had heard of the matter, investigated, established most of the facts, and begun measures for recognition of the services rendered. But shortage of staff and overwork at an awkward period precluded proper and continu- ous attention. The advent of the Reward Mission was a welcome development in a matter that the Administration would have found difficult to follow through.
Kuching Annual Agricultural Show, 1947.
The show was opened at 4.00 p.m. on Saturday, May 24th, by His Excellency the Governor who made a short speech in the Flower Section before declaring the show open. He emphasized that the necessity for growing our own foodstuffs is still great, and pointed out that the policy of the Agricultural Department is to help and encourage by every means in its power the small-holder working on his own land on a system of mixed farming.
His suggestion that individual property owners in Kuching could do much to beautify Kuching should be much appreciated among the Chinese, who are well-known lovers of natural beauty, and among a number of people in the Malay Kampongs who work hard to keep their plots clean, neat and bright with flowers. It is to be hoped that before the next show large numbers of flowering trees and bushes will be planted in Kuching. Main Bazaar and the other shopping centres of Kuching could easily be enriched by an array of window boxes full of flowers and ornamental leaves.
The weather was kind on the first day, fine but not too hot, and the attendance was estimated at well over 3,000, of which some 70% paid for entrance, and the remainder either pushed by the ticket sellers or came through the back. The gentleman who boasted that he had been in six times without paying has nothing to be proud of.
The Produce Section had even more exhibits this year and the quality in general was far higher. It is to be hoped that a lot of the superb tomatoes grown in Kuching will not "get away" for next year's show. An enormous stalk of sugar cane, approaching 20 feet in length, received special mention from the judges.
An exhibit of vegetables was received from Simbo School, 16th Mile, Penrissen Road. This is encouraging to the Show Committee who sincerely hope that other schools and native houses at a distance from Kuching will participate next year. Local industries were well represented this year by a large number of exhibits of soap, tobacco, coconut oil and sago flour. Mrs. Lucy Lim again demon- strated her prowess in making cakes.
There was keen competition in the home produce classes with several exhibits of jams and pickles. This is encouraging in that it reveals wider interest in the show, an opinion which is confirmed by the fact that several professional market gardeners exhibited. The keenness of the competition in the Produce Section is demonstrated by the fact that the winner of the Special Trophy was only two points ahead of the next and that four exhibitors tied for second place.
The poultry classes of the Livestock Section were exhibited on the lawn inside the building, a great improvement. Here the exhibits were much more numerous than last year. While the difficulties of obtaining good new stock are appreciated, it is thought that better support could be given in the cattle and pig classes. An increase in both quantity and quality of meat and draught animals is most desirable.
The Arts and Crafts Section again produced a beautiful display. This year the majority of exhibits were pictures, drawings and needlework, though mention must be made of a colourful exhibit of Melanau basket work from Sibu, characteristically neat and of excellent workman- ship. Many persons must have been surprised at the excellence of the exhibits in the Flower Section. Lovely orchids and enormous but beautiful dahlias took the eye, but many other flowers including petunias and ornamental foliage plants were well represented. In the middle of the lawn was a brilliant display of bougainvillia, including a beautiful pink hybrid as yet unnamed.
Music outside the building was provided by the Department of Education’s public address system handled by Mr. Harding and members of his staff, whose services are much appreciated. Inside the
building Mr. H. G. Gray provided music in the tea room from a varied array of radio receivers. In the evening the Scouts’ Band gave selections in the Flower Section, and many thanks are due to them.
Rain in the afternoon and evening sadly reduced attendance on the second night. Many of the Flower Exhibits were damaged by the heavy rain. By kind permission of Mr. Frost, two gibbons and a maias were on show on Sunday afternoon. At eight o'clock the exhibits of the Produce Section were put up for auction by Messrs. Sim Ah Say and John Lim. Despite the poor attendance a lively auction ensued, though what a certain gentle- man from Sibu will do with all the coconut oil he bought could not be discovered.
There was a brief but sharp struggle for the rubber sheets. It seems that the object of the bidders was to acquire the sheet from Dahan Estate, so that they could show their own managers and employees what a sheet of smoked rubber ought to look like. There is no doubt that, if Sarawak rubber is to compete in a market in which before long supply will exceed demand, the quality of its smoked rubber sheet must be vastly improved. It is wrong to think that Sarawak cannot reach the quality standards of her more advanced or developed neighbours. Sarawak could and did produce the best pepper in the world. Given proper attention to seed selection, proper cultivation and greater care in manufacture and smoking of the sheet, there is no reason why Sarawak rubber should not be as good as anyone else’s. On the other hand, there can be little doubt that present production of smoked sheet is in general of very low quality.
The show was generously supported both by the advertisements and the exhibits of various firms in the Trade Exhibits. After the printing of the programme, it was decided to give an extra certificate to be competed for by local industries, which in a last minute effort, put up a very good show.
It is too early yet to know what was the financial success of the show, but preliminary estimates had certainly given the Organising Committee cause for concern, not eased by the poor attendance due to the weather on the second day . It is emphasised that these Agricultural Shows are organised for the public benefit, instruction and enjoyment, by a group of private individuals who give up a portion of their spare time for the purpose. Their only reward is the success of the show . The show is not a Government enterprise, nor does the Govern- ment control it in any way . This year the show received no financial assistance from the Govern- ment whatsoever, though the physical aid of all members of the Agricultural Department in publicising the show and encouraging producers to exhibit cannot be too much appreciated.
The sincere thanks of the Show Committees are tendered to those persons who subscribed to the funds before the show and also to Dahan Estates, I/imited, through their agents Messrs. Sime. Darby & Co., Limited, and to Messrs. Hiap Soon Hin (the Hon'ble Mr. Ong Tiang Swee. c.s.s.) who very kindly donated the prize money, which they won by their exhibits, to the funds of the show.
It is hoped before long to make the shows financially self-supporting, but for the next year or two that may not be possible, and reliance must be placed on public support for at least a portion of the expenditure necessary. Judging from the keenness of the competition, and by the good
attendance on the first night, the Committees feel confident that the desired support will be forth- coming.—(Contributed.)
London Letter.
7th May, 1947. Dear Editor,
I hope this will be the last letter that I shall write you. as to-day the Colonial Office doctors passed me fit and I hope to be leaving not far behind this letter. Actually, it is not quite so pleasant to leave now .—for at last the weather is warmer and the trees green.
I have just spent a fortnight in North Devon, along the edges of Exmoor and the Bristol Channel, mild warming sun every day. and two eggs for breakfast each morning—the ultimate luxury in Britain now. Goodness knows why anyone voluntarily lives in London nowadays; I have only just realised what a fool I have been all these months to sit here. In fact, the whole family have now got worked up to buy a house in the country where there is very much more to eat and nothing to queue about, and generally something in the pubs, even if it is only rough cider. But now, with Double Summer Time, and no more bitter cold, oven London is quite pleasant. You can go into the West End and get out again without groping your way through the still rigid blackout. How- ever, this advantage is somewhat offset by the imposition of the new fuel ban by which we cannot use gas or electricity for home heating. As coal is strictly rationed, and firewood almost unobtainable. this is pretty good hell. Again, all the advantage to the country-dweller who can get wood.
For the adventurer into the West End—and with all these gang wars it seems quite adventurous— far and away the best bet now is a new musical, "Oklahoma," which has come on at. Drury Lane. But if you want to see it when you come home on leave, start booking now; it's playing to ultra- capacity. It really has something fresh, a musical built as one exciting whole, not just bits and pieces strung together anyhow. It comes just as we were beginning to feel that America was getting stale on entertainment—for most Hollywood films have lately been lousy. I must make an exception, though, of the new “The Beginning or the End” with Brian Donlevy and other good actors, telling the story of the Atom Bomb and its awful implications for the future. Although, as usual, it claims that America did practically the whole job itself, (much to the fury of British and Australian scientists,) it is much less vulgar than average Hollywood, and there are only two or three bits of slush towards the end. The tension is terrific, and my elder son complained afterwards that his hands were "sweating the whole time." There is a fine new British film in superb technicolour, "Black Narcissus,” based on Roma Gooden's story of nuns in the Himalayas; it is a bit slow for me, but drawing immense crowds at the Odeon, Leicester Square. It is a pity the Kelabits can’t come down and see Black Narcissus when it appears in Kuching. It is very much their cup of borak!
Other recent films recommended are "The Late George Apley.” from John Marquand’s excellent novel; and for Durbin’s fans (I am afraid she has outgrown me) her latest "I Will Be Yours." There is a hopelessly exaggerated
Edward G. Robinson, "The Red House": a dreary Loretta Young called "The Farmer's Daughter"; and a wild amount of technicolour fun and foolery in "Song of Scheherazade."
But the movie event of the month is the special series of Czechoslovak films showing at the New Gallery. These are as high in standard, entertain- ment and visual perfection as the French films which are attracting an ever-larger audience in Britain. Perhaps Norman Mace will extend his interests on from better music to taking steps to introduce Continental pictures to Sarawak. Other- wise, I am afraid Kuching is in for some rather dull weeks when the present lot of new pictures wander out East of Suez.
No; by and large the best entertainment in Britain to-day is itself in the spring. Kew Gardens is almost as lovely as ever, though there are naturally gaps among the plants St. James’s Park is exquisite, and after the cold spell there were more interesting birds (feathered ones) there than ever, including a very rare visitor, the lovely long-tailed duck. Richmond Park is perfect, and the deer have been unusually tame after a hungry winter. And everywhere, in fields and lanes, that unique, intimate beauty of Britain which no other land possesses nor can ever capture. However bad things may have seemed in February and March, in April and May it is impossible not to believe in our strength and our surviving sense of destiny. The spirit of the Spring has brought a revived energy and optimism. People are more than ever aware of the dangers and difficulties that beset us, and a great new Government campaign of pro- paganda has been launched on this subject— including some extremely dreary and old-fashioned John Bull posters. But now gloom has lightened and the feeling that we shall pull through has grown increasingly. Even Edward Banks, who seemed to have sunk into his shell at Newport. Monmouth- shire, has come out of hibernation and sent me some very interesting diaries of some of his unpublished travels in the Ulu, which I hope may be made use of presently.
J. Delaney has sent me a fascinating diary of his experiences in B.M.A.—this should be a best seller on Labuan! And the Rev. W. Linton, now vicar of Kingston, Canterbury , has generously sent me some books to fill in the gaps left by the Japs in the Museum Library. Professor Le Gros Clark may be able to help too. I hope by the end of this year that the Library will be almost back to its previous strength—and even improved in some respects. And within a few days of this being published, Sir, I hope I may be on the spot to get on with the job of putting the Museum back into shape after five years of neglect, as well as to continue my Kelabit studies after nine months blessed relief from sliding down hillsides and picking off leeches.
. Yours sincerely.
Tom Harris son.
Brief Outline of the Rice Industry.
The following article was brought back to Sarawak by a recent visitor to Singapore who happened to find it on his table one morning. It is said to be ”By an American,” but we have no other know- ledge regarding its source.
"Despite the popular notion, rice is not a grain but a pain. It is produced in the States of Arkansas. Louisiana, Texas and California, by mixing a government loan with manure and irrigation water. Its purpose is to keep the grower in clover, the miller in bankruptcy and the consumer in constipation.
Rice is mortgaged in the Spring, planted m the Summer, harvested in the Fall, and stored in the Winter until warehouse charges, weevils, interest and insurance have eaten up its value. Then it is sold to the miller by the barrel, but never in a barrel.
The millers are a crowd of lunatics who employ professional guessers, called buyers, ostensibly to appraise and purchase the rice, but actually to guess that it will yield more than it ever does, and to pay for it on the guess. To the grower the buyer is a damned thief, to the Attorney-General he is a sinister conspirator and to the miller he is a button- headed moron.
Rice is milled by giving it three round trips up and down a four-storey mill building, in order to wear it down and break it up into, little pieces. That helps to reduce its value. Any whole grains accidentally remaining are then separated from the brokens, and both are separately stored, so that they can later be mixed back to ether again and because a miller likes to watch a clumsy buck nigger pick out the stitches in the storage bags. And besides, that also helps to make the process more costly. Some rice is coated with glucose and talc, at extra expense, so that the consumer can wash it off before rooking the rice. Milled rice is stored in open, warm warehouses, to make it attractive and convenient to rats, moths and weevils, which decorate it with holes, web and droppings thus adding a further discount to its value.
Milled rice is sold to the trade in 'pickets.' which are not pockets, at the lowest price that the miller can think of at the moment, there being keen com- petition to see which can name the lowest. Terms are cash, less 1% ten days—or sixty days if the customer so decides.
Then again, the price depends. It depends on so many things that the millers often compete for the privilege of possessing it for half of the milling cost. The excess profit so earned is charged to inbound freight and credited to depreciation which balances, doesn't it? Then you add the value of the fuzz on the bag, deduct the brokerage not paid in this ease, add the value of the bran lost in milling and there, after allowing for transit, you have a price. But then the miller learns after studying seventeen bushels of OPA orders, regulations, directives, opinions, schedules and amendments thereof, and supplements thereto, that the price has already been conceived and brought forth by an authority in Washington who does not produce any rice, or mill any rice, or own any rice, and who cannot tell rice from peanuts, but who finds, and so orders, that there is no such thing as an FOB price: and so now you add the freight from some other point to a different destination, deduct a switching charge for the service used but not disallowed by the OPA if performed on the first and third Tuesday, and also deduct wharfage if the month has an 'R' in it, and there you have the official price—or something.
After studying the rice market carefully for several days, a buyer recently wired his firm as follows: 'Some think it will go up, and some think it will go down. I do too. Act immediately in order to avoid the risk that situation may clarify.' "
Hollywood and Sarawak.
Those of Us who spend many precious minutes every evening twiddling the knobs of our wireless sets in an endeavour to escape from the American invasion of the air are inclined to take a narrow- minded and jaundiced view of that great nation. The voices of "information and education," the smug "news" bulletins, the myopic talks, the raucous "musical" programmes, all tend to breed resentment for the pretensions of plutocracy. But it is as futile to judge a powerful and cultured people by these short-comings as it would be to consider that the representations of judicial tribunals shown on American films in any way typify the courts of that country. Mutual tolerance and understanding between the two branches of the Anglo-Saxon race, as well as between the British and Russian peoples, are indispensable conditions of world peace. Whether or not the achievement of this goal is assisted by an offer from Hollywood to provide a script for a fifteen minutes weekly broadcast is a matter for individual opinion, but at any rate the fact that the offer has been made is worthy of record.
Many of our readers will remember that before the occupation a broadcasting station operated from Kuching for a short time on Wednesday and Saturday mornings. It was little more than an experiment but the novelty was enjoyed by many local listeners. The "General Manager, Radio Station, Kuching, Sarawak (East Indies)," has now received a letter from a Hollywood company suggesting that he might like to be sent weekly a "15-minute script program containing the latest news about the stars and studios" entitled "INSIDE HOLLYWOOD.” "From a listener’s point of view," he is told, "this program gives a radio station the prestige of having a personal reporter in Hollywood. And for publicity purposes we supply you once each month with a photo showing "your reporter" interviewing a motion picture star.’’ The operative words would be "a personal reporter in Hollywood." No doubt the vaunted acumen of American business men revealed that this would be a particular attraction to the citizens of Sarawak.
The sample programme itself has to be read to be believed. Its full flavour can only be appreciated when it is realised that, if broadcast from Kuching, it would be compared by Mr. Tait or Mr. Harding with, presumably, Malay, Chinese and Dayak translations to follow in accordance with the pre- war practice. Thus, after "Theme Music (As Selected)," Mr. Tait (or Mr. Harding) would say : "From Hollywood, the glamour capital of the world, we present the latest inside news, chatter, and human interest stories of the stars and the motion picture studios, gathered by our personal on-the-scene reporter. Learn what goes on behind the studio gates, in filmdom's social circles, in the smart clubs and stars’ homes, all up and down Hollywood Boulevard." The operative words would be "our personal on-the-scene reporter.”
Then, after a short interval for "Music Or Sound Effects," Mr. Tait (or Mr. Harding) would continue : "A comedy of errors straightened itself out the other day when Paulette Goddard, the actress, met Pauline Goddard of the Ballet Russe." He would go on to explain that "the girls had quite a heart to heart talk." and to inform his thrilled audience that Pauline, being only a ballet dancer, was quite pleased with the similarity between the names because, as a result, she got treated like a film star. After that we would be entertained to a bit of news about a "young Italian actress Valli,” who is fortunate in that "even more fetching than her pulchritude is her deep, resonant voice, alive and vibrant with overtones.” Then we would hear about the forthcoming film featuring the story of Black Bart who "was famous as a versifying bad man," a revelation so staggering that it would have to be followed by "Music Or Sound Effects."
But no doubt the most interesting item for Sarawak listeners would be the gossip, although it would be no more reasonable to think that it was founded on fact, than to be deceived by the "personal reporter” hyperbole. "Dorothy Lamour,” we would lie told, "enters John Hopkins Hospital for a complete cheek up after she finishes 'The Road to Rio.' " After this sorry indication of the perils of stardom we would hear that "Charles Boyer has the extremely painful ailment, Bursitis,” and then that "Maureen O’Hara and Joan Fontaine both have the same allergy ; liquids cause their hands and ankles to get puffy." Betty Grable wants to retire from the job because "her heart isn't in it any more—it's with her husband and family." Our local announcer would go on to say, no doubt with his hand on his heart, that "we thought" that somebody called "Annabella” would, "after the property settlement,” not buy a new hat, but "get her divorce at once." However the announcer’s opinion would have been proved fallacious because the said "Annabella" would have proceeded to France. Gossip, indeed, would get so hot that another pause for "Music Or Sound Effects" would become necessary and then, after a little chat about one, Slezak, we would be regaled with a sparkling witticism imputed to Claude Rains. After telling us that Mr. Rains was "recently back from his country farm in Pennsylvania," Mr. Tait (or Mr. Harding) would be compelled to assert that, on finding "his name in lights on four movie theatres on Hollywood Boulevard," Mr. Rains remarked; "Wags were telling me ‘it never Rains but it pours,’ but next they’ll be saying ‘it never Rains but it bores.’ Another alleged quotation from "Claude” deserves mention. The announcer would inform us that he said, referring to his next film : "I’m going to try to be good but I hope to be careful too”; a sentiment which would no doubt strike many Sarawak listeners as topical, since it would have been echoed by them during the course of their dai’y round.
And then, after a little more gossip, and a little more "Music Or Sound Effects," Mr. Tait (or Mr. Harding) would say : "One minute interview's with the famous stars of Hollywood." The first famous star would be Miss Veronica Luke and here is where the "1st Female Voice" comes in. Who or what would be the authorities’ choice for "1st Female Voice"? Suggestions are invited from readers but it must be understood that the ‘1st Female Voice” would have to
speak as follows: “I'm often asked what my reaction is to seeing myself upon the screen. To tell the honest truth I’m heartily amused. I have yet to play a role which even remotely parallels my true character. You’ve seen me most often as a calculating blonde with ice water for blood and a heart of stone. Such a person is scarcely the home-loving, husband-adoring type. Yet, I am the type exactly. I love my home, my husband and my children. My family is first with me—-and always will be. Most of these cold nights Andre and I sit by the fireside at our ranch in Chatsworth and make plans. We discuss fencing, fruit trees, live-stock, cultivation, plowing and other things pertaining to operating a ranch. We like that better than going to night chibs, and we find it’s a lot more wholesome, too.” Any more offers for “1st Female Voice”? Then we would have a “Male Voice” doing a little advertising for “Holly- wood.” “There's nothing like it anywhere for variety, excitement and generosity. You hear a lot about selfishness on the sound stages—where players try to steal scenes from each other. ' I suppose it does happen.” And so on, and so on. explaining for the most part that it hasn't happened to the “Male Voice.” The “2nd Female Voice" would be supposed to represent a named “comedienne” and would say, inter alia : “I have tried driving around and around to find a parking space but I get dizzy. 1 shouldn't have said that. Someone is sure to observe that it is a natural con- dition for me. Now I ask you. is that nice? Somehow we feel that in Sarawak it would be easier to obtain the services of a “1st Female Voice” than of a “2nd Female Voice.” But that’s not the end of it, not by any means. “Announcer (Laughs).” That is to say that Mr. Tait (or Mr. Harding) laughs. In celebration of this achieve- ment the text says that we would be treated to a “Fan Fare.”
A build-up of Mr. Wall Disney’s “Song of the South” would be followed by yet more “Music Or Sound Effects” and then, in case we had missed anything, we would be told : “For those of you who have tuned in late this is INSIDE HOLLA - WOOD, the latest inside news and chatter, direct from our special on-the-scene repórter in Holly- wood.” The operative words would be “direct from our special on-the-scene reporter in Holly- wood.” The first of the “additional short notes from movieland“ would be an allegation that it was the Annual Irish beauty contest which, eight years ago, “uncovered Maureen O'Hara. A lot more gossip would include the announcement that “Charles Chaplin has just finished his latest picture which is tentatively called “Bluebeards Eighth Wife”; “tentatively,” presumably, because thev are waiting to see whether Bluebeard will have a ninth. The programme would close with the information that a. projected new film, “Adam and Eve,” is “to be a revolutionary sort of a picture.” Apparently it is to have “but two human players." “Everything else” (sic) “is to be animal, vegetable, and mineral.”
And then, before the curtain was finally rung down, Mr. Tait (or Mr. Harding) would say : “.And that, ladies and gentlemen, completes another edition of INSIDE HOLLYWOOD—which comes to you direct from Hollywood, film capital of the world.” The operative word would be “direct."
That, then, would be that. It would only remain for us to congratulate this enterprising firm on
doing their best to foster Anglo-American relations, on possessing such a keen insight into the needs and wishes of listeners in Sarawak, and on controverting the current absurd contention that the crown of “Hollywood" has been ceded to Mr. Rank.
Stamps.
When I wrote letters in Malaya my husband posted them at his office.. Eight months before the Japanese invaded the country he was released from banking to join the Perak Motor Transport and went south for his training, I realised I should now have to post my own letters so next time 1 was in the town I stopped the car at the Post Office. There were three square holes with a clerk behind each: rather like booking offices on a station.
"What can I do for you Madam?” inquired the clerk kindly through the hole I was facing.
I said, “I want some stamps please.”
"Certainly Madam. What stamps?”
“Oh,” I said uncertainly, as I tried to remember if I had ever seen a letter ready to be posted, "just ordinary stamps to stick on letters you know." And then, as my memory began to work, I added, “Pale grey ones would be nice I think.”
The clerks who were attending to the holes on either side of mine now joined my friend, and three faces peered through at me.
“How many pale grey stamps suitable to go on letters do you require Madam?" asked one.
Though I had been lucky enough to remember the colour of the stamps I wanted, I had no idea how much they cost, so I said, “Please give me a dollar's worth.”
One man then gave me eight grey twelve cents stamps, and as soon as I saw them I felt sure they were the right ones. Another gave me one orange four cents stamp.
“But I didn’t ask for an orange one,” I told him. “It wouldn’t go on a letter, and as I don’t collect stamps I am afraid it would lie of no use to me.’ One of the clerks took back the orange stamp obligingly and another gave me four one cent pieces. They are copper coins about as large and heavy as half-a-crown.
I said, "I am afraid these will rattle about dread- fully in my handbag. I believe I have one cent in my purse so I wonder if you would very kindly give me a nice light five cent piece instead.”
"Certainly Madam," answered one of the clerks. “Copper coins are indeed lumbersome!”
Please don’t forget your letters,” said the second clerk, as I prepared to depart.
"Perhaps you had better stick on the pale grey stamps,” suggested the third.
I had three letters. Each clerk deftly stamped one of them, and then a very dark man on my right, who was dressed entirely in peacock blue, offered to post the letters and one of the clerks went with him to show him where.
I now noticed that an officer was standing on my left, so I said, “I hope I haven’t kept you waiting.”
"Please don’t mention it," said be. "I only have thirty-two important cables to dispatch and if you are completely satisfied with the colour of your stamps and the weight of your change, perhaps ONE of the Post Office assistants will now be free to attend to me!"
K.S.
This Sarawak.
(With apologies to the New Statesman and Nation.)
The owner of the one and only motor vehicle was convicted under the Vehicles Order for driving an unlicensed motor lorry.—A monthly report.
A lawyer practising in Sarawak, instead of calling himself "Advocate and Solicitor," might have to put up the sign "Advocate, Solicitor, and Diver."— A very high Government official.
During March there was a great deal of fever in both (X------) and (Y------------) and the
general health cannot be considered to have been good. Reports from (W--------) and (Z--------)
are rather better but this is probably due to a dresser not being in these two places.—.A monthly report.
(The Editor is unable to follow the example of our illustrious contemporary and offer a prize for the best entry in this column. Contributions from all parts of "This Sarawak” will, however, be warmly appreciated and the most favoured will be given pride of place.)
Sidelights on Internment: 10.
At the time when the first North Borneo con- tingent arrives from Jesselton our Head Cook is a Scotsman, who, although still only twenty-six, has had a varied and interesting career. He joined the navy when a boy and his service included a period in the Yang-tze Patrol. He left the navy to enter the Singapore Dockyard Police, and arrived in Sarawak in 1941 to organise the Coastguard Sendee. On the day of the invasion. Christmas Eve, when his launch, coming up-river, got fired on by mistake by the Punjabis, he grounded her and escaped across the mud. He made his way to the seventh mile, and joined up with the company of Punjabis which was detailed to fight a rearguard action. On Boxing Day lie was duly taken prisoner, managed to pass himself off as a soldier, and resumed his civilian status in internment. His lectures in the camp on various phases in his career, delivered in a broad Scotch accent, are easily one of the most popular of our mental recreations. His rich and varied life is naturally and inevitably well matched by his rich and varied language, an indispensable accomplishment, it must be said, for a Head Cook in internment. The preparation and distribution of food composed of scanty and monotonous rations, cooked and served by amateur assistants to a heterogeneous collection of hungry and angry men, is a job which requires a good deal of organisation and regulation. The representatives of the new arrivals are therefore introduced to the Head Cook without delay. He takes pains to explain to them
in a tongue, which is a strange mixture of Scotch and Royal Navy, the arrangements by means of which meals are produced and obtained in the camp. An interpreter's services are invoked and, after a long and tortuous discussion, the strangers return to their huts to pass the information on to their constituents. The Head Cook sighs with relief, wipes his brow with the back of his hand and turns to his grinning underlings. "Funny lo’ of bastards these--------------frae B.N.B.,” he says,
"Dinna seem tae ken the King’s--------English."
And with that, the most famous of all the famous remarks of that fine personality. "Sailor” Crawford, this series comes to an end.
Fifty Years Ago.
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, JUNE 1st, 1897.
General Order.
No. VII, 1897.
In commemoration of the long and glorious reign of Her Majesty the Queen, and as a mark of that respect which every British Subject must entertain in his heart towards his Sovereign. I hereby com- mand and direct that the 28th of June shall be set apart as a holiday and day of rejoicing, when a Royal Salute will be fired at 9 o’clock in the morning, ship’s and flag-staffs dressed, and the school children of all denominations numbering about 400 will be feasted at Santubong and taken there in the Adeh with the band on board.
Under my hand and Seal this 3rd dav of May, 1897.
C. BROOKE, Rajah.
THE SARAWAK AND SINGAPORE STEAM-SHIP COMPANY.
To the Editor of the "Sarawak Gazette.”
SIR,—Every one must be much obliged to Mr. Smith for his lucid explanation of the founding of the above Company. If the Secretary would in the same way add to my knowledge of the names of the Shareholders, resident and non-resident, I should be still further obliged to him, as I am unable to accept Mr. Smith's invitation to enquire at the Company’s Office.
In using the word "parasite” it was not my intention to hurt the feelings of any of the Share- holders, but as it seems to have had this effect in some instances, I would withdraw it, and, to improve the knowledge of those whose feelings have been so hurt, refer them to any copy of an English Dictionary for the several meanings of the word. Moreover I have no feelings of spite (sic) towards the late or present Chairman or any of the Share- holders, personally; but I do admit a feeling of animosity against a Company bolding outwardly a monopoly of the carrying trade of Sarawak, which undoubtedly deters other shipowners from running steamers to the port, and persisting in keeping the freights at a high figure in order to pay a very large dividend, while the public are to be content with
what is little hetter than a bi-monthly service, and therefore under these circumstances I do not con- sider that the words "avaricious” and "Israelitish greed" are in bad taste or other than justifiable language.
If the present Company desire to go in perpetuum let them endeavour to please the public of Sarawak by conceding some of the advantages ordinarily granted by Companies earning large dividends, and foremost amongst the advantages should be lower freights and more frequent communication with Singapore.
Yours faithfully.
"JUNIOR".
A CORRECTION.
To the Editor of the "Sarawak Gazette.’’
Dear Sir,—In the "Queen" of April 17th in his notes on "Empire making,” during sixty years of the Queen’s Reign, Sir Richard Temple volunteers the information that in 1888 Sarawak was "placed under" the Chartered Company of British North Borneo. Can you, or any of your readers, who know more of Sarawak politics and history than I do, tell me what event it is in the recent history of this country which has been perverted into a state- ment so insulting to the Flag of Sarawak?
I am,
Dear Sir,
Yours faithfully, AN OLD SARAWAKIAN.
Kuching, May 31st, 1897.
We received the. above letter as we were going to press and too late to make any prolonged com- ment on. Of course Sarawak being an independent State has not been, and cannot be, "placed under” any foreign Government, let alone that of a "Chartered Company.” Sir Richard Temple is not alone in his ignorance, similar blunders are frequently made by English Politicians and others. We came under British Protection in 1888, in return for which the foreign policy of Sarawak may be controlled by the British Government, but the internal Government of the country was not in any way affected.—(Ed. S.G.)
News from Far and Near.
FIRST DIVISION.
The Honourable the Resident reports that a shortage of petrol was experienced during April and at one time it looked as if stocks would run out. Fortunately supplies arrived in time. He was informed that the black-market did excellent business at five dollars a gallon.
The Native Officer-in-Charge, Kuching, reports that in April an Arab was fined $100 for increasing the rent of a house without the permission of the Rent Control Committee.
The Land Dayaks at the 16th mile, Simanggang Road, are complaining that Chinese squatters refuse to leave their land. An attempt is being made by the Land Office to find other land for the Chinese.
The Native Officer-in-Charge, Kuching, reports that during April textiles flowed in abundantly but there seemed to be a shortage of milk. He says that fish were plentiful in the market, a phenome- non which the Tua Kampong of Buntal attributed to the semah, the ceremony referred to in the last issue of the Sarawak Gazette.
28 crocodiles, measuring 206 ft. 0 1/4 in., were destroyed at Muara Tuang Police Station during April.
The District Officer, Bau, reports that April was a bad month as far as crime was concerned. On the 18th a report was received of a savage attack per- petrated on two women by a man who lived in the same house. The man subsequently died in Kuching hospital as a result of throat wounds. The Native Officer-in-Charge. Kuching, says that the women were his sisters-in-law. Mine-owners have com- plained of the loss of ore. It is alleged that these robberies have been carried out by gangs. The cement floor at the former Government store was broken open. The District Officer believes that the reason for this was a search for arms alleged to have been hidden there by the Japanese.
Signs have at last been discerned in Bau of a revival of the mining industry. The Tai Ton Mining Syndicate and the Seburan Company both showed signs of life, and Rumoh officials reported that they might be starting soon. The only con- cern that has so far been operating, the Krokong Mining Company, produced 31.32 ounces of gold during March.
The following extract from the April report of the District Officer, Bau, is significant, and raises many queries in the mind : "Kampong Grogo Dayaks were found to have planted rubber on an area of farming land belonging to Kampong Suba, Bau. The Orang Kaya admitted telling his people to do this, explaining that the Suba Dayaks wished to give this land to Chinese for growing pepper with which he did not agree, and that he hoped to draw Government's attention to this area by his action. He was told to confine his activities to his own land and to report to Government in a more orthodox way."
The following is another extract from the April report of the District Officer, Bau : "The Bau-Batu Kitang Road was found to be in a sorry state of disrepair during the month, especially that section between Paku and Batu Kitang, and as a result this road was completely closed to traffic from the 17th, major repairs being necessary, but seemingly impossible to carry out owing to lack of money, equipment and labour. Subsequently I called a meeting of all Bau and Siniawan owners of motor- vehicles for transporting men and materials to repair the road in return for merely the benzine and oil consumed in this way. I am glad to say that this action on the part of the persons con- cerned, which was public-spirited in the extreme, resulted in a temporary track being constructed out
of wood, earth and tailings, which enabled a few vehicles to run to Kuching again at the end of the month. Even motor-vehicle in the District was used and the result was that the problem of restoring vital communication with Kuching was solved for the moment.”
The District Officer, Serian. reports that photo- graphs of Anthony Brooke and Sarawak flags are being sold to land Dayaks in the Ulu Sadong at 60 cents and 30 cents respectively. In addition an attempt is being made to collect $1.50 per door to further the cause. The District Officer says that the response in the Land Dayak areas is mixed and so far as is known these activities have not spread into the Sea Dayak areas.
In the Sadong District the old quarrels between Christian Dayaks and non-Christian Dayaks are once again rampant. The District Officer says that the Christians want to break away from their old adat and yet wish to retain all the land rights which they hold under the same old adat. “The aggressors in every quarrel seem to be the Christians; they won't work on Sundays and they ignore pantangs." Apparently solution of the trouble has not been assisted by the intervention of the Seventh Day Adventist priest in the role of mediator.
In April 1,115 1/2 piculs of padi were purchased by Government in Simunjan as compared to 1.89 piculs in Serian.
The Batang Kiri, Ulu Simunjan, is said to be so choked that it is difficult to get through to the main stream.
The Acting Native Officer-in-Charge, Lundu, reports that 247.41 piculs of padi were harvested from the Sungei Pasir Scheme.
SECOND DIVISION.
The Honourable the Resident reports that on April 26th a meeting was held in the Resident’s Office to allocate the newly-formed land at Tanjong Engkala. Various Dayak Tuai Rumah and Malay Tua Kampong were present. This land has been formed by the silting of the main Batang Lupar after the Japanese had cut through the narrow neck of land at the top of Tanjong Engkala, thereby altering the course of the river.
The Honourable the Resident says that “it is strange but gratifying to note that the Dayaks of the Ulu Ai have not encroached into the Lanjak Entimau Protected Forest during the period of Japanese occupation."
In April a Sea Dayak trailing company began operations in Simanggang. The Honourable the Resident comments that this is a very good sign, and it is hoped that this company will prosper and be an encouragement to other Dayaks to start similar businesses.
The Assistant District Officer, Simanggang, reports that it appears that the prisoners there are all very pleased at receiving mosquito nets in accordance with the request made by them to the Prison Visiting Board.
All officers who have served in Simanggang will be very sorry to hear of the death of pensioner Corporal Alam.
The following is an extract from the April report of the Honourable the Resident. Readers may remember that this subject was mentioned at the end of the article ‘Cession And After," which appeared in the Sarawak Gazette of September, 1946. Our Dayak, however, appears to have been slightly imperfect. "Since it was evident that many of the Police did not know the correct words of the call which is made nightly at 8 p.m. from Fort Alice, and which was re-introduced in September, 1945, after the Japanese occupation, so, after consultation with some of the older inhabitants of Simanggang, the following words were laid down as being correct:—‘Ho Ha! Pukul lapan udah munyi, tangga udah tarit. pintu udah tambit, orang kampong enda tau niki agi, Ho Ha!' "
The Assistant District Officer, Simanggang, reports that Barikei anak Chendang, a Rawan Dayak, about twenty-five years of age, got lost in the jungle when looking for damar, and remained lost for fifteen days. He fed on wild fruit and plants. The Honourable the Resident comments that he appeared to be in good health and none the worse for his experience.
Mr. Griffin, the District Officer, Simanggang, during the Easter holiday brought a football team to Kuching which succeeded in defeating the locals 4—2.
The Government store at Betong was broken into during the Easter holiday and 521 3/4 yards of cloth were stolen. No arrest had been made.
The District Officer, Saribas, reports that Ugat anak Muli was appointed Penghulu for the Ulu Paku on April 18th. He says that this man served for many years in the Malayan Constabulary and retired therefrom on a pension.
The Officer-in-Charge, Kalaka, reports that on April 16th he was informed by Penghulu Undom that an incident had taken place in Unti's house, Awas, Krian. A party of 61 Julau Dayaks had arrived with shields and spears and demanded a cock-fighting with a betting stake of $30 from one of the inmates of the house named Egu. The Officer-in-Charge says that fortunately Egu was not in the house that day as otherwise there might have been a serious outcome. Penghulu Undom, who was sick at the time, sent his son-in-law to act as mediator and a sum of $60 was paid to the Julaus, ‘‘$30 stake money plus $30 compensation." The Honourable the Resident had called for a full report.
THIRD DIVISION.
The District Officer, Sibu, reports that the con- version of the old Gambling Farm at Sibu into a Market was completed in March, and the building was occupied by the various stall-holders. This provision greatly relieved the congestion in Sibu streets caused by “displaced persons.’’ The old Market was totally destroyed by bombing.
The first meeting of the Sibil District Council was, says the District Officer, an unqualified success. It was formally opened by the Resident who explained in his address the objects of these Councils.
The District Officer. Sibu, reports that the Sarawak Constabulary Band, under the command of Captain Marlow, arrived there on March 19th. The band played in the evenings at Sibu in widely dispersed areas, and also at the Police Variety Show and the Recreation and Island Clubs. The District Officer says that it is hoped that Sibu will see more of the band in future as “the whole show was an enormous success and was much appreciated by the people here." The District Officer. Lower Rejang, reports that the band gave selections for about two hours in Sarikei and it was greatly enjoyed by the inhabitants. The District Officer, Kanowit, reports that the band paid a short visit to Kanowit on March ‘22nd. It was unfortunate that so many had gone home, but those who heard the band told him how much they appreciated it. The Honourable the Resident suggests that it might be possible to work out a full year’s programme for the Con- stabulary Band, including visits to outstations so that all may enjoy good music and know when the band is likely to visit them.
Senior Native Officer Abang Indeh travelled up to the Ulu Balleh to investigate reports from Dutch Borneo that the Balleh Dayaks were about to attack the Ukits of Mahakam and Kapuas. The District Officer, Kapit, says that he found no truth in the rumour. The District Officer continues: “It appears that about June, 1946, many Ukits, believed to be fugitives from justice in the Kapuas, were seen in the Ga’at. At this time two Pene- hengs from Mahakam were visiting Temonggong Koh’s house, and heard and saw that quite a few Dayaks were going to the Ga’at to assist their friends there in case the Ukits proved to be trouble- some. There was never any question of going over to Dutch Borneo, merely defending their own land against the invasion of Ukits. However it is thought that these Penehengs took the story back to Mahakam, and, by the time it reached the authorities, it had grown to the proportions reported from Samarinda. Not content with making enquiries through Kuching the local authorities in the Mahakam decided to send a deputation over, consisting of nineteen Penehengs, to see for themselves. These men arrived while Their Excellencies and party were at Belaga, and have since been trying to earn enough to buy sufficient rice, to take them back to the Mahakam, by cutting firewood, etc., for the local Chinese. They were given no expenses by their own autho- rities and were not even allowed time to collect their own food for the journey here and back.”
In view of the fact that there have been com- plaints in some Districts to the effect that the price offered by Government for padi is too low it is interesting to note that the District Officer, Kapit, reports that “the more far-seeing and altruistic of the Penghulus fear that it will mean increased hardship for the poorer Dayaks who obtain poor crops. Normally these persons can purchase from their more fortunate friends at 25 cents per gantany, but if Government is in the market to buy at 55 cents, then these persons will have to pay 55 cents also. The fact that Government is
willing to purchase surplus padi will have no effect on the amount planted by Dayaks, who normally plant as much as they can." It is indeed difficult for a Government to walk aright.
The District Officer, Kanowit, reports that the Dayaks of the Jagoi and Poi have led their fellows in styling themselves the “Iban Association.” They are definitely opposed to the Dayak Asso- ciation of Kuching. Dayaks in this District have advanced an additional reason to favour the cession as they say that they like the frank and open countenance of His Majesty on the currency, while the Rajah appears to have a quarrel. This view has more significance than justice.
willing to purchase surplus padi will have no effect on the amount planted by Dayaks, who normally plant as much as they can." It is indeed difficult for a Government to walk aright.
FOURTH DIVISION.
The Sarawak Gazette is informed that, in spite of all the difficulties that have been encountered on the Pujut-Lopeng Padi Scheme, a useful amount of padi has been obtained.
On March 25th Mr. Thomson, of the Hongkong- Shanghai Bank, visited Miri with a view to seeing whether a scheme for opening a bank in Miri would lie worth while or not. Nothing further had been heard at the end of the month.
Referring to the padi purchase arrangements the Honourable the Resident says that padi is flowing in from the Sibuti area in considerable quantities. Storage is the main difficulty.
Work continued satisfactorily in March on the rehabilitation of the Miri field. Several more old wells had been brought into production, and preparations for drilling were well advanced at the end of the month.
The District Officer. Miri. reports that in March “another good crop of lunatics was leaped and at the end of the month five more were sent to Kuching.” The Honourable the Resident com- ments that “the number of lunatics brought before the District Officer, Miri. these days is quite astounding. One of the explanations put forward to account for this is the unrestricted use of Atebrin.”
The District Officer, Miri, reports that there has been a bad outbreak of stomach trouble there. He says that "the vast majority" of the Europeans of Government and S.O.L. have also suffered from this complaint. The Senior Medical Officer was investigating and the District Officer had under- stood that he had changed his mind about the water which at first came under suspicion. We have considerable hesitation in pointing out that the diagnosis in other parts of the country has been “inordinate eating of fruit.”
The Chinese have been given a plot of land up Sungei Krokop, Miri, for the erection of a sub- stantial pauper house.
Two fatal accidents occurred at Lutong in March. A machine-gun post, erected by the Punjabis in 1941. suddenly collapsed and killed a coolie who was cutting grass at the base of the post. The second mishap was a Chinese boilerman being scalded to death by steam escaping while he was repairing a boiler in the refinery.
At the Miri Chinese school over four hundred pupils are taught by twelve teachers.
The District Officer, Miri. reports that Sibuti was well and truly "strafed" by the allies. It is in an appalling state and needs complete rehabilitation. Only four shops remain of the old bazaar, which was itself a new construction as it was built after the great fire of 1934. Plans are on foot for a new lay-out and for the re-building of the Government offices and quarters.
The District Officer, Baram, reports that during March an auction of edible birds' nests was held at Long Lama. In some instances the prices realised amounted to as much as $40 per kati, the quality being unusually good. It is said, however, that nests are being taken from the caves at Long Lama before they are properly matured, and at wrong seasons of the year, thus upsetting the breeding habits of the swifts and reducing the productivity and value of the caves. The Honour- able the Resident comments that the figure of $40 per kati must be almost a record. He says that the usual price varies between $20 and $30 per kati.
The District Officer, Bintulu, reports that there were several bad accidents there during March. By far the worst was the explosion of a small hand grenade in a house in a rubber garden near Sebauh. Six children, aged from a few months to ten years, were in the room at the time. One child hit the grenade with a hammer and the resulting explosion badly injured three of them, who were squatting on the floor over it, and the baby who was hanging in a sarong a few feet away. A little girl sitting on top of a pile of rubber sheets was not touched, nor was another standing at the dapor about ten feet away. This accident occurred at 10 a.m. on March 3rd but the casualties did not reach Bintulu till 5 p.m. They were immediately sent to Miri on the Doreen, and it was subsequently heard that one died on board and another in hospital soon after admission. The injured children were all of the same parents neither of whom was in the house at the time of the explosion.
One, James Chia, was fined ten dollars at Bintulu in March for forcing open the door of the pig slaughter-house. This was the third time, according to the caretaker, that the lock had been wrenched off and damaged during the past month. The accused’s defence was that he wanted to close the water-tap, which, he said, had been left open, in order to increase the pressure to his house.
FIFTH DIVISION.
The Honourable the Resident reports that the monthly visit of the Medical Officer, Brunei, is proving most popular and useful.
A fatal accident occurred at Tagai Sawmill, Lawas, on March 15th, in which one of the workers, when climbing on a beam to adjust the belt drive system, became entangled and was killed. The Honourable the Resident says : “The enquiry revealed the fact that the employee was acting against standing orders not to do this without per- mission of the mandor and a verdict of accidental death was returned.”
The District Officer, Limbang, reports that Dr. Mott of Brunei noticed, during his visit to Lim- bang in March, that drugs such as M. and B. 693 were on sale in the bazaar. The doctor said : "It is definitely dangerous for these drugs to be taken without medical supervision, and, further, should the wrong dose be taken, it will not only fail to cure the disease but will make it more resistant to any further treatment."
Rumah Pengiran of 18 doors at Nanga Ensured, Ulu Limbang. was completely burnt down on March 2nd owing to an accidental fire. Two children were killed, one of them dying in Limbang hospital. Two other small girls were successfully treated for very severe burns. Relief was afforded with rations of UNRRA clothing.
The Native Officer, Lawas, reports that large numbers of Muruts and a few Kelabits visited Lawas from the ulu during the month with rice for sale. Approximately 850 gantangs of rice were sold in Lawas, the price dropping to $1.50 per gantanq.
The Native Officer, Lawas, visited Tagal Munchoh, Ulu Merapok, in March. He found that Penghulu Paigon was very sick. This Peng- hulu’s anak biak built a new home last year, which they have now abandoned in favour of a newer house still. The Native Officer disapproved this latter because it had no ventilation and was much too low for the ground below the house to be cleared properly. They have agreed to build a bigger and better house shortly. They abandoned their first new house because they believed that evil spirits had caused many people to sicken and die. The Native Officer told them that this had nothing to do with the house or evil spirits but was due to lack of hygiene and to bad food. The Native Officer has twice seen that they eat decomposed or preserved wild boar flesh full of hair, which, he thinks, “even their brother Muruts’’ refuse to eat. The Native Officer points out that constant visits of Government officers to the Tagals are required. He says that they are one of the poorest tribes and “have neither wealth, padi nor cattle except burak at home." The Native Officer attributes a good deal of their poverty to their habit of planting padi asas. This padi is planted in March or April and reaped in June or July. It is the prey of pipit and it obstructs the proper planting and care of padi tahun. The Native Officer discovered that there were a lot of outstanding cases between the Muruts and the Tagals. Penghulu Paigon has not settled these because “he is not so good about Muruts adat therefore he has to adjourn those of Muruts until he can meet Murut Penghulu to find out which always resulted a failure on his part.’’
The Honourable the Resident reports that in April an interesting and successful operation for “trachoma” (in-growing eyelids) was performed by the Medical Officer of Brunei on a Trusan Murut. He says that the effect is moat dramatic. The man. who was partially blind and in some pain, can now see well and is very pleased.
The District Officer, Limbang, reports that enrolment at the Chinese School dropped from 135 at the beginning of March to 95 at the beginning of April. It is interesting to note his opinion that this was mainly due to an increase in school fees from $l to $3.
The Native Officer, Lawas, reports that news of two murders was received during the month. At Fa Luping three Muruts were alleged to have been murdered by four Kelabits from the Ulu Baram. The Honourable the Resident comments that the cause of this tragedy is unknown but it is probable that it was the result of an isolated quarrel. Seven Kelabits were detained by the police. The second case referred to by the Native Officer was the shooting of ex-Penghulu Khamis Pasir, who sub- sequently died in Brunei Hospital. A man has been arrested in connection with this crime.
CORRESPONDENCE.
[The Editor is not responsible for the opinions of correspondents.]
Kuching,
18th May, 1947. The Editor,
Sarawak Gazette,
Kuching.
Dear Sir,
As a good way of circulating it may I ask you kindly to print the following request in the Gazette ?
Approximately $400 is still owing for copies of my book “Lintang Records" which have been posted long ago to people who applied for them.
I know that the cost, $4.25 a copy, is considered by some to be a lot to pay for such a meagre and unsensational book. I am ready, therefore, to take copies back if the purchasers are dissatisfied.
It is known, I think, that the entire proceeds, less the bare expenses of printing, go to charity. I have already paid money to needy persons who helped us in those days, and to whom more than our bare gratitude is due.
I hope that should this appeal catch the eyes of purchasers in Sarawak and elsewhere they will send the money to me, or to the Superintendent of the Government Printing Office, Kuching; or if they do not like the book send it back.
Thank you, Mr. Editor.
Yours faithfully.
J. B. Archek.
Kuching,
20th May, 1947. The Editor,
Sarawak Gazette,
Kuching.
Dear Sir,
Your article on “Travelling’’ in the May Gazette certainly calls forth an amount of memories, some pleasant, others not quite so. In my earlier days here I can, I feel, claim to have done a fairish amount of travelling on the country-wide basis, as distinct from the detailed area travelling carried out by the Administrative Officers.
In the late Hume Gillan’s time as Postmaster- General I used to toil through the land checking stamp stocks and books which had already been
checked and re-checked by District Officers, Native Officers, Auditors and what have you. Con- sequently, I often found myself obliged to stay in ullages for 2 or 3 days when the actual work entailed only a few hours activity. It would appear that my form of travelling came under the heading of "second form" in vour article.
On looking these experiences over I find that one's opinion of any particular station depends to a large extent on circumstances. For instance, your own quoted places, Lingga and Sebuyau. Lingga I do not recommend a lot although I remember John Fisher, Mrs. Kennedy (then Miss Scott), my wife and I spending a quite pleasant if rat-ridden night there; while Richard Baron will certainly remember a chance meeting at Sebuyau with Messrs. Middleman, Combe and my- self when, after a bath under the waterfall, we took in a Bangsawan and a Malay Wedding in one evening. One of those nights! !
On the other hand Simatan, which is quite a pleasant spot really, always brings back to me the first night I spent there. I had a bad burn on my finger from a lamp and also painfully sunburnt legs, and consequently passed the night in agony with a high temperature. The fact that two noisy policemen's families were sleeping on my either side did not help. -
Again, Balingian which is about as cheerful as Tunbridge Wells on a wet Sunday, has very cheer- ful memories. Lyle Noakes and I spent practically a whole week end there playing Euchre for matches; very amusing. Spaoh is both grim and muddy and I haven’t a lot to say for Daro. Debak is no metropolis either. Kabong is one of the poorer of the seaside stations, but the fishing fleet used to be worth going to see.
Rejang always gave me the creeps. I suppose it was the moon shining on the "Lone Sailor's Grave” outside the bedroom window. But for the real creeps give me Ska-an. I am not an unduly nervous guy, but that District Officer’s bungalow at Ska-an certainly had me strung up. Maybe it’s the monkeys, I don’t know. Anyway on my last two visits I’ve stayed in the wireless station. One real hair-raiser I had was in Lawas. I was shifting the wireless station and the late Murray Scott, who was then District Officer, was in Miri sick, so I had the enormous Fort quarters on my own. After a very hard day erecting masts, I popped into bed and was asleep by 9 p.m. I was suddenly awakened by the most unearthly din. Shots being fired, crackers exploding and what sounded like ten thousand dogs howling. I had already been through World War I, but never had I been so scared. As you know I’m not very big and I certainly felt half-pint size sitting in that huge place waiting for the end. However, it was only an eclipse of the moon to which the Muruts apparently take a strong objection.
I don’t appear to have been able to give my idea of the worst outstation, but I can tell you the best. Meluan, as was. On my only visit I built the new Wireless Station and for three whole weeks I was not at the end of either a telephone or W/T link for the first time in 20 years. It was there that I really appreciated the lovely words “The peace of God which passeth all understanding."
Yours sincerely,
F. Harding.
From “Adversity”: Internment Quarterly.
(The following article was published in "Adversity" on October 1st, 1943.)
OUTPATIENTS AND ALL THAT.
“Will you please send a Misture for my daughter, aged 17? She is suffering from headache and stomache."
This marvel of literary condensation, the work of a worried father, is one of a few that on occasion help to brighten the lives of those of us doctors who spend an hour or two daily with outpatients at hospitals in this part of the East.
On our way past the laboratory we have noticed an unusually large and motley crowd gathered there, and on enquiry are reminded that it is a weekly event when the Tamil dresser informs us that he is “taking bloods for washerman, Sir." Startling though it may sound, this remark merely means that he is taking samples of blood for examination by the Wassermann Test, the standard test for syphilis.
We have now elbowed our way to our seat in the examination room, and the stream of humanity begins to flow through our hands. If we take women and children first it is not, much as we would like it interpreted thus, out of consideration for the weaker sex or for the tender buds of the rising generation. Rather it is because we wish to shorten the time during which our ears are to be dinned by the decibels of wailing childhood and chattering feminity. Not that the men are silent ; on the contrary their noises, albeit softened by distance, are more raucous and penetrating, being mainly those associated with what might be politely termed laryngeal toilet, but which a long- suffering friend of ours once described as “clearing the throat from the knees up." But while we can post an attendant who by exhortation may succeed in stemming the tide of these great expectorations, and thus keeping the surroundings in a reasonably sanitary condition, no amount of cajoling or threatening will soothe a frightened child to silence or still the voice of a talkative woman.
It is Injection Day, which means that more time will be spent in convincing some that they do not need and will not get an injection than in dealing with those who ought to and will. Here is a strapping and handsome young Malay, who asks for an injection and complains of wind in the joints and weakness of the limbs. Examination fails to reveal any physical disorder to account for these, nor do the symptoms fit in with any known disease. We suddenly remember that he turned up a week ago with the same request and an entirely different set of symptoms. We strongly suspect that this alleged patient has discovered for himself the aphrodisiac effect of the arsenical compounds used for these injections; but before giving him or refusing him the benefit of the doubt we will have his blood examined "for washerman."
Here is another Malay, younger and more timid. He does not ask for an injection, but explains that some time ago he was bitten on an intimate part of his body by a keringga while climbing a coconut palm, and that the wound has not healed up.
Examination shows that the bite of this ferocious ant has become strangely metamorphosed into a typical chancre, the primary sore of syphilis.
On they come; Malay women, with that maddeningly deliberate saunter that even an earth- quake would fail to hasten; Tamils of the coolie class, eager and willing to perjure themselves on the subject of worms and constipation if by so doing they can obtain a free supply of castor oil with which to anoint their newly-born children’s heads, or include as an ingredient in cakes, or use as a totally unnecessary purgative; elderly Chinese with dirty indolent ulcere on their legs, and elderly Sikhs with rheumatism. And here is a young Chinese mother leading in a very sick little girl whose blood is swarming with malaria parasites. But the mother steadfastly refuses to have the child admitted to hospital, until the argument is abruptly ended by the collapse of the child on the floor in a small pathetic heap.
Here is still another Malay, suffering from malaria; who has come from an outlying district. Guessing the nature of his complaint, he never- theless begs us earnestly not to give him quinine. He is very reluctant to say why. but at long last tells us that it is known to all in his kampong that quinine is made from dead men’s bones.
It once happened that a colleague of ours, during outpatient hours, heard a commotion outside and saw four Malay policemen going past the window at a rapid trot, making for the hospital exit. The commotion continued and he went outside to investigate. He found in the centre of an excited crowd an old Tamil woman sitting upright, rather dazed, on a stretcher. After patient enquiry he patched her story together. On the previous day the patient, who was suffering from severe dropsy, had set out to walk to the hospital from her home, fifteen miles away. By nightfall she had readied the neighbourhood of the police station where, exhausted, she went to sleep in a ditch. Here she was found by the police next morning and. believing her dead, they had procured a stretcher and taken the body to the hospital, as in duty bound, for a post-mortem examination. They laid down their burden near the steps of a ward, whereupon the corpse, much refreshed, sat up. Hence their terror-stricken flight.
The human stream dwindles to a trickle, now stops. But we are not finished yet, for there remains a group of hopeful aspirants for opium permits, and they have been referred to us for an opinion as to whether they are genuine addicts and whether their physical condition justifies the use of chandu. In practice such medical certificates are given only to addicts suffering from some pain- ful or incurable disease if withdrawal of the drug might adversely affect their health.
Some of this particular group have allowed their permits to lapse, in others it is proposed to cut down their ration, and still others are unregistered addicts. But there is yet another class : those who do not smoke chandu at all, but hope to get permits and sell their ration of chandu at an enormous profit. These are very persistent ; their eager fingers flit over their bodies in an effort to describe travelling pains, the nature and course of which are anatomically impossible, and these people are often quite truculent when their demonstrations meet with scepticism.
We once examined an elderly addict, suffering from advanced tuberculosis, who had allowed his permit to expire and now regretted it. He was an obvious case for a fresh permit, and before giving him his certificate we made a detailed examination of his throat, which had been invaded to an alarming extent by the disease. Next morning four healthy young applicants appeared, all gesticulating frantically in the direction of their throats.
Many and varied are the treatments for opium addiction, and all are more or less successful provided the addict sincerely wishes to be cured, but not otherwise. One of these treatments con- sists in hypodermic injections of a compound of hyoscine until the addict becomes delirious, after which he is said to lose his desire for opium. We shall not easily forget our first experience of this method. The addict, a strong young male Chinese, was duly started on his course of injections. He reached the delirious stage abruptly one afternoon, catching the ward attendant off his guard. When next seen he had climbed on to the roof of the ward through a hole made by himself from inside, and was sitting astride the top and hurling loose tiles and abuse at all comers. A Malay policeman, on guard at a ward near by, approached at a trot, but hastily turned tail and fled in the thick of a shower of tiles. A ring composed mainly of the hospital staff soon formed outside tile range. For a while the position was stalemate, as the patient’s supply of ammunition was apparently inexhaustible. Eventually an intrepid Chinese Assistant Medical Officer created a diversion, dashed into the ward and, following the original route, clambered on to the roof and overpowered the offender. The broken tiles, collected later, made an appalling heap; but there were no casualties. Patients were only admitted for this treatment later if they brought friends to take care of them.
A Chinese medical friend of ours has developed a technique of his own for the treatment of opium addiction. He claims that he has never known it to fail, but adds that its sole drawback is that it is applicable only to the ignorant and credulous coolie class.
He first gives the addict two bottles, one con- taining (amongst other ingredients) tincture of opium, the other a belladonna compound. The addict is told (correctly) that the latter bottle con- tains a drug antagonistic to opium, and is instructed to take measured doses from the first bottle, each time filling it up again from the second. This is continued for a week or ten days, towards the end of which only a negligible and dwindling amount of tincture of opium remains in the first bottle. He must, of course, abstain from opium-smoking during this period.
Thus far, then, the withdrawal of the drug has been carried out on orthodox, lines. But now comes the principal part of the treatment. The addict is informed, solemnly and at considerable length, that he is now ready for the Injection.
"But consider well," our friend warns him, "before you agree to the Injection. If you are afraid to face it, you may go back now to your opium-smoking. But if, having had the Injection, you smoke opium again within two years, you will die! Go now, and think it over."
Next morning the addict returns, for very few will risk losing face by backing out at this stage, and declares his willingness to have the Injection. Whereupon he is given a harmless and minute hypodermic injection of atropine sulphate, and departs, nervous but exalted.
An unfair deception, and ethically unsound? Perhaps. But it helps to harden in its mould a newly-formed and inchoate resolution. And who can say with certainty whether, in this type of case at least, the end does or does not justify the means?
Kuching Market Price List.
Average monthly Market Price (April 20th to May 20th, 1947).
