The Sarawak Gazette
THURSDAY, JUNE 1, 1922.
HIS HIGHNESS THE RAJAH'S
TRIP NORTH
UNOFFICIAL VISITS TO JESSELTON
AND LABUAN.
H. H. S. Y. Zahora arrived at Brooketon at 6
p. m. on 23rd April, and His Highness the Rajah
took up his residence at his bungalow there. His
Highness paid an official visit to Limbang from
the 3rd to 6th of May, and to Lawas from the 8th
to the 10th.
On the 11th His Highness, accompanied by Mr
 L. A. Allen. British Resident in Brunei. .Mr.
 F F. Boult, Resident 5th Division and Mr. E. A W.
 Page-Turner, D. O. 2nd Division, paid a visit to
H H. The Sultan of Brunei, afterwards lunching
at the Residency.
The Zahora left Brooketon on the 17th and
dropped anchor in the beautiful harbour of Jessel-
ton on the same afternoon. The visit was entirely
unofficial, but His Highness was given a salute at
the moment his ship came to anchor, the Zahora
returning the compliment. As soon as the ves-
sel was moored alongside the quay H. E. The
Governor of B N. B., with the Hon'ble Mr. G.
C. Irving, Resident of the West Coast and the
Hon'ble Mr. H. W L Bunbury, Government Se
cretary, called on His Highness who afterwards
accompanied H. E back to Government House.
That evening His Highness dined at Government
House, amongst these present being Messrs. F. F,
Boult. F. A. W. Page Turner, who were accom
 panying His Highness, and Mr. P. M. Adams.
After dinner the whole party visited the Cinema.
 On the next day His Highness and party were
given very prominent seats to view the arrival of
His Royal Highness the Prince of Wales Jessel-
ton was gaily decorated and had spared no pains
to give the Royal visitor a proper welcome. Cap-
tain Knight M. c. was detailed to act as His
 Highness A. D. c. throughout the day. His High-
ness- car followed immediately behind that
of the Prince" on the way up to Government
House, where His Highness was a guest at the
luncheon given in honour of the Prince. In the
afternoon the Prince and the Rajah attended the
races. The same evening the Rajah and party
dined at Government House going in afterwards
to a dance at the Jesselton Hotel.
On the 19th His Highness was “at Home” on
board his yacht, when a large number of people
called and were refreshed with most excellent
cocktails, the handy work of Dr. Campbell. In
the afternoon the party played tennis and in the
evening attended a wonderful fancy dress ball at
Government House.
 His Highness was deeply touched at the very
 warm welcome that was accorded to him by
H. E The Governor and all those in B. N. B. with
 whom it was his pleasure to come in contact.
The Zahora left Jesselton at daylight on the 20th
and reached Brooketon the same afternoon.
The Rajah and party paid an unofficial visit to
Labuan on the 25th, when they lunched with the
Resident and Mrs. Eley, staying to tennis in the
afternoon. Mr. L. A. Allen, British Resident in
Brunei lunched with His Highness at Brooketon
on the 29th.
We feel sure that all our readers will agree with us in applauding His Highness' decision to pay a visit to Jesselton.
We had hoped that the Prince would have found it possible to have included Kuching in his visit. This, however, was not to be. Nevertheless we understand that H. R. H. expressed his desire to visit Sarawak and perhaps one day this may be so.
Editor's Notes.
Will the sender of a poem entitled “Origin of Country Lunes, which is said to have been culled from an American Paper, please note that letters and contributions must be authenticated by writer’s name sent privately to the Editor.
We will keep this contribution until time for going to Press of our July issue in order to give the sender of these lines an opportunity of having them printed.
We regret that, owing to the indisposition of the author, there will be no continuation of the very interesting articles on “ Native Medicines " and “ The Animals of Sarawak ’’ this month.
[ The Editor is not responsible for the opinions of . Correspondents.]
E. 6. B.—We have forwarded a copy of your 
letter on to the Honorary Secretary of the Simang
gang Regatta. In another column we be found a 
notice of your challenge.—Ed. S'. G..
DEPT, OF TELEGRAPH & TELEPHONE.
Sarawak, 23rd May, 1922.
The Editor,
Sarawak Gazette,
Kuching.
DEAR SIR,
I notice in the Personal and Social column of
the May 1st issue of The Straits Times the following
paragraph:—
“His friends in Sarawak will learn with regret that
Mr. L. I. Warder, who was for some mouths in
charge of the Wireless Department at Kuching, has
been compelled to relinquish his appointment in the
Sarawak Government. He holds the highest certifi-
cates obtainable for Wireless. He is now homeward
bound accompanied by Mrs. Warder."
The above information must have been supplied
by Mr. Warder himself, and as he has thus courted
publicity, be cannot take exception to the true facts
of the case being stated. Mr. Warder was never at
any time in charge of the Wireless Department in
Kuching or elsewhere, and his appointment as an
operator was terminated by the Government after
some three months service, more or less. During
this period be produced no certificate.
Yours faithfully,
J. R. BARNES,
A Question of Uniform.
The Editor,
Sarawak Gazette,
Kuching,
DEAR SIR,
For many years before 1918, the official Sara¬wak Service buttons—or rather, copies of the ori¬ginal—were obtainable in the bazaar by all who liked to pay for them. In 1918, when the new white tropical uniform was introduced, all these buttons (known locally as "S” buttons) were called in, and many of us of the Service understood that orders had been issued that only Government Offi¬cers were entitled to wear them in future.
I am sorry to notice that many persons without the slightest title to do so are still wearing “S” buttons. and it is a fact I believe that some Europeans encourage their servants to wear them, or perhaps do not discourage them—at. any rate several “boys” wearing these buttons may seen waiting on their masters who are probably also wearing tin m.
Is this not calculated to bring ridicule on the Sarawak Civil Service uniform? These buttons bear the Government motto "Dum Spiro Spero” and should be kept for the special purpose for which they were intended, in the same way as Regimental buttons, and those entitled to wear them should jealously guard this privilege.
Yours faithfully,
Letter from our special Correspondent
in B. A. B.
The Editor,
Sarawak Gazette,
Kuching, Sarawak.
MY DEAR OLD CUTHBERT,
It was indeed a pleasure to read your letter in
the Gazette of the 1st April. We are determined
to bring racing to the forefront in this country
and with every confidence rely on you as our Am-
bassador in the quest for pomes. That you had a
good time in B. N. B. no one who has been to that
delectable country can question. 1 have no doubt,
dear Cuthbert, you have gained many new triends in.
North Borneo, in fact when we last visited that
country it was a case of “Save us from our friends"!
And Percy, we quite agree with your remarks on
the luxury of railway travelling on the West Coast
but what is this we bear that you, ready to enter the
Rupide de Luxe at a certain Estate Railway Halt
en route for Jesselton, caught a glimpse of a bevy
of roysterers in the Pullman Car who were generous-
ly bent oil your destruction, returned ventre a lerre,'
to beg another night's lodging with your recruit host ?
And is it true that on another occasion, so tired
were your cronies with your insatiable lust for ponies,
that you were forcibly incarcerated in an almeirah
in the Hotel in order that yon, in fitting solitude,
albeit cramped, might consider the horror of your
 offences in fitting gravity?
Yes, Cuthbert, we have also heard about that poor
fellow who slipped in the Hotel, but as an acrobatic
feat it was merely a mediocre performance compared
with the superb double turn by our two brothers in
arms some years ago when, with magnificent eian.
they utterly destroyed the entire appurtenances of a
well loaded dining table at a feast given them in honour of their arrival when all the wit and beauty of the Capital were present at this humerous turn.
Cuthbert, we shall always be glad to see you back, to hear your adventures, to see again your bright face, to press your gnarled hands	that is if
ever you get out of Borneo alive and even if
you become an inmate of one of the luxurious hos¬pitals in that country, as the result of your untiring efforts on behalf of our Turf Club, we shall never believe that you have been led astray by your roysterous cronies, no, Cuthbert, not a word not a
single drop of it.
Ever Thine,
PERCY.
P. S. - Did you meet Mr. Pecksniff there?
P, P. S.—Did you gain your 24 per cent??
The Youthfulness of Language.
As I entered the Club—it is the Referendum Club in Malladilly—Browne, the oldest living member was coining down the steps, and I saluted him with a dignified “ Good evening,” which he courteously ignored. As I approached the wide staircase inside, Jones met me. He is the youngest member, and be greeted me with "Cheerio old Fruit."
That is the exact difference between Club members in these post-war days. The old ones cling tena¬ciously to their old fashioned courteousness in the Club, which comprises of ignoring one another, and all in general; the young ones insist upon introdu¬cing their new cult in speech and manner, which embraces everyone, and ignores being ignored. Rather paradoxical, hut that is the most economic way of explaining it.
I, myself, am not an old member. I refuse to be classified "old." And why not, since the Doctor said " General Service ” in 1915, and I've been at it ever since. No, most certainly am 1 not an "old” member. But I remember the Club in the days when nobody would dare have greeted me with “ Cheerio old Fruit.”
There was something about that expression which I disagreed with. Not on any personal ground, mark you ; I think it is because it is not meant. That is, I do not for one moment think that, literally speaking, you could apply such a term as “Old Fruit" to any clubman. But it were belter left unsaid, if it is not meant. There is one more difference between the young and the old members. Now Browne did mean whatever it is in his greeting that makes you know and feel that he ignores you and your existence. But Jones and his cult cannot possibly mean their new fangled greetings and speech. And yet the incident above related was prompted to my mind by the very difference 1 have sketched, which occurred at the Club on the occasion of a Service Dinner, given by General Bone-Warrier to celebrate the re-union of members once more returned to civil strife from the gates of the enemy. I remember now, yes, it is highly probable, come to think of it, that these boys (we older members always refer to them as boys), do mean something or other by their wanton misuse of English.	
About 280 gentlemen sat down to dinner, given by the dear old General, and the Club was alive with various uniforms. Quite a number were Royal Air Force Officers, (who mostly turned out on parade in top-boats and spurs; which I could never under¬stand, because, as far as I know no Aeroplane re¬quires touching up on its flanks when charging the enemy; at least, some Cavalry Officers I know, told me so.), and there was Jones, a nice lad despite his behaviour to me, in that new breezy manner of the day.
He was a flying man—a pirate or a pilot, I don't know what it is. He must have been a somebody —something,you know what I mean—a thingamebob, in the Flying Corps, because several Flying Corps men were placed a long way down the table, and be was only 2 removed on the General's immediate right flank. In fact— yes that is it. He was a leading Flanker in Squad formation in his Corps, and I know he holds a rank of something equivalent to a Colonel in the very old Army. I sat next him. I am a modest—or was a modest Battalion Com¬mander. He was full of chat. I spoke but little. The wine was good ami the Joint of the choicest— in fact the Quarter-Master of the 281st Battalion Fusiliers supplied the Joint, Oh no. you don’t get joints like it, except in the Army. Perhaps, some¬times, in the Navy. But then—the Navy,
well nobody notices what goes on in the Navy these days
Jones actually told me he was in a quandary about what dress to wear tonight A military gathering, and he, of all people, the young blood ; the obno¬xious young blood, did not know what to wear. But on resuming his tale of such a regrettable taste, he explained. It appears there was a standard uniform in the old R. F. C., but on joining forces, and amal¬gamating the Naval Air. Service and Army Ait- Service, a dispute arose as to colour and uniform. The army airmen were all in favour of khaki, but not double-breasted tunics The naval men required blue with reefer jackets. General somebody attended the Admiralty one day at a meeting, and Vice- Admiral something attended the next meeting-well Jones says it was dispute not a meeting—at the War Office. A terrible antagonism arose in the ranks of the amalgamated service. When he told me this, it explained what I had never before quite understood, and that is why was that ugly office called the War Office? Now 1 know. At any rate, Jones said they decided io mix the colours. So a forem n dyer was sent for, and he blended Khaki and Blue to show them the result, and the Navy men went into hysterics
What” they cued, "Wear that never-before-seen shade of sky-slate-grey-blue? !!!
"Never. We could never take our wives to Mar¬shall and Snelgroves, shopping, without being asked what frills we required for the sleeves and pockets.!!”
"A very poor argument don't you think, old bean? Fancy, and they the Navy—had the cheek to try and put the muff on our eyes by hiding behind their dear little cherry lipped Strawberries." said Jones to me.
“By hiding behind what?” I gasped.
" Their wives, my dear peanut ; wives" explained Jones.
"Oh!" said I. not comprehending the relation between wives and the Cherry Strawberry things Jones had referred to.
Jones went on to explain how, eventually, the Army "allowed" themselves to be talked over by the Navy, and some kind of uniform decided upon for both services I forget what it was, but there was a difference anyhow. The way he put it, was. “We agreed to spin straws with the ' Blighters,' and dub ourselves with the 'dear old glad-rags’ which suggested the sweet old 'daisy days’ of the Cherry peckers" !!’
Dear me ! I did not know exactly what he referred to, but I may say that I am not now unaccustomed to Jones' ami Co.’s new Jargon, having heard it in my Service days. But only at a distance. I mean, no subaltern would speak to me like it, but at dis¬tance strange jargon floated across Mess to me. However—.
It appears that his R. A. F. had had 3 or 4 different uniforms in the course of 2 or 3 months, and as he and many others, were stickers for discipline (yes, that was the excuse) he had bought each one as it was
authorized. So you see, according to Jones, he had 4 or 5 different uniforms, any one of which was authorized to he worn, and it. was this which put him in the quandary. To me, it presented no di¬fficulty, but then 1 am one of the old brigade. To Jones A Co. it was a real difficulty. At any rale, he told me that what decided him, was the mere fact that "his bally old socks he was wearing when he changed, were 'Mauve blue’ and he thought he might just as well put on his 'deuced dear old beans' the thingamebob Khaki-Blue uniform."
Just then, the General arose and proposed the health of the King. Afterwards he made an admirable speech, in admirable English. It is a nice language, when used by men like the General. I was astounded at the easy flow of perfectly chosen words, in which the General spoke of the Army new’ and old, and also the simple phrazeology by which he embraced all manner of subjects of interest to this particular Dinner Party. About half an hour later, Jones got up from his seat to propose the General's health. And this is the gist of it. 1 ask forebearance if I have misstated what he meant, but I am certain these were his words.
"Gentleman, we are cornered herein the precincts of the jolly old club to a re-union, as il were,- er-a gathering of the bally old clams. Yes, and a lot of merry old things I see here. All the old bachelor buttons of the blinking old Army—er-that is— New Army, seem to have had a damned good limo I must say it was priceless The merry old Hun gave us no end of a sporty bit of hustle, that really. I think,—er-well, what a sporty old Top he must have been, only he bally well didn't know it—the poor fish. However, all of us have come hack to the jolly old place, and it is priceless to see so many old buds back to the priceless old spot. There’s an old thing next to me—er-on my right, who was no end of a guy in his priceless old regiment—er-and I'm getting a hunk on me, to make it plain to the old Fruit” (now I knew it was I whom he ulluued to) “that it is good-to see him again. He is really a priceless old thing, and our host has already put it across him to have something—yes, really he ought to too—to say to us tonight. So I'll wave you jolly old pearls farewell, with first a word of thanks to the General for his kindly thought in—er- abringing us all together—er-yes, all together.”
Now I cannot recall ever hearing anything in the way of an afterdinner Club speech, which embraced so little and so much. I met Browne in the lounge next evening, and asked him what be thought of the previous evening’s gathering. Browne did not exactly look at me; he looked beyond me, through me, over me; never quite at me. He said "M m m m" “Ah mmm" and so on. He took a pinch of snuff. He lit his pipe. I jogged his memory. And then he said a surprising thing.
“Uncommonly amusing and instructive” he said, as Browne only, could say such words with such emphasis.
He took his pipe from left to right in his mouth, and then glared at me.
“You men who are prematurely too old to take up with new ideas, new speech prazeology, new man- nerisms and all the paraphernalia which the incident of War has compelled us younger ones—that is, younger, in the comparison, not in any other parti¬cular,—to first tolerate, then jocularly acknowledge, and finally adopt, do not, or may not, appreciate the speechifying of a man like,—well say Jones. It is all a matter of degree in toleration, and then a degree of humour, always providing your companion of the new School of language, is a gentleman."
I did not exclaim, or faint, or anything in a hurry. I hadn't the breath to do so. After 1 recovered, 1 looked at Browne, and said.
“ Did he ever greet you with ‘Cheerio old Fruit' ? " Who " ? asked Browne.
' "Young Jones.” I replied.
“Bless me, no no no. Ha! Ha! Ha! Old Fruif!! Is that the latest?"
“I do not know the earliest, the origin, or the latest, of this Jones A Co., language.
But I distinctly remember him greeting me with a winking eye, a seraphic smile and “ Cheerio old Fruit ", said I.
Browne got up and went out. Shortly after, I heard loud laughter, and then the door opened, and in came the—well I would have said ' Old Brigade'- Browne and Smyth and Dacre and General Bone- Warrier, all of them laughing.
"Hello old Fruit", the old asses bawled at me.
This was really an impertinence. You can stand that sort of thing from Jones and Mildoo, and young Graves. But these baldheaded old gentlemen seemed so impolite when using such expressions. It is oil very well in the mouths of Jones A Co ; but imagine what it would sound like if Mr. Asquith came down the steps of the Liberal Club, and seeing you, called out ‘ Hey Hello my sweet old peach ' I mean yon cant its... well you know you might just as well misread Mr Gladstone as having said m the House. "Now we come to a delightful point my dear old beans " No we can’t usurp the place of youth. I do not like the ‘cheery’ irrepressible youngster, who uses expressions un-understandable. and greetings too breezy and familiar But Jones A Co., are not of that obnoxious gang. They are gentlemen at any rate They would not address an acquaintance in such terms, only a well-known friend.
" Gentlemen” I said adjusting my monacle, and using stern tones, "this is really impertinence. For four elderly—I will not say old—gentlemen, to burst into the library of this club, and in front of other members, address their Club member ami friend as you have done, is the height of ridiculousness. 1 will not complain to you, but I ask you, gentlemen, is there not an age at which it is perfectly natural for men to stick to their accustomed speech, manner and mode?
To assume the mantle of these young men, whose environment for 4 years has been such as to spur them on to recklessness, is not for men like us. We are just sufficiently old to come through a new War as we came through the old, with our customs unchanged. Youth is not so built and never was. It is youth which has changed the English of Chancer to its present terms, but men usually stick to their youth's customs and manner. This youth around us I do not deplore—but I think probably you do, really. Forty years hence these youths will be using the expression of their youth, but there will also be a new one, as ever. It is refreshing, gentlemen. I do not believe Jones and his like, are, or mean to be, impertinent to me. But if ever you gentlemen address me as you have, I shall resign the Club. Camouflage is now a new word in our Diction, come to stay. But don't you camouflage yourselves with the new language of youth, and think people will not recognise you in your decaying age "
Then I resumed—er-whatever it was I was doing when they came in.
It was a week before I again went to the Club. Jones was just on the top step, when lie turned and saw me. He greeted me with "Good evening" and made way for me to precede him, while the porter held the door. I was preplexed.
“I hope" said I, thinking Jones was very stiff and formal, "I hope there is nothing in which I have offended you?"
“Why no" replied Jones, “I was thinking that perhaps yon were feeling that I had been treating you in a spirit of levity."
I thought this over. When a man like Jones thinks that then someone has been talking to him.
“ Who told you so?” asked I.
“Oh nobody said so—at any rate not quite. Only I heard about the little episode in the old croc—er-in the library " (The Library is where all the older members go after dinner. I know what Jones was going to call us) "So I thought I’d offended too."
“ My dear Jones, please do not let the cautious gravity of speech from an older man like I am, make you feel you have offended me I admit you younger chaps might have to exercise care, but so far as I am concerned, a gentleman is a gentleman despite his years or his figurative decoration of English.” said I.
“ So that’s that " said Jones.
" What?’’ I asked.
“ Only figuratively ” answered Jones.
“ Ah " said I, " You know Jones, a foreigner going into the library would hear English as it was— fluent, coherent, understandable, and he would learn the English of our present School books. But ha would not be understood, twenty years hence.
No. He must commence his English in the smoke- room and Bridge room. He must not enter the library or the Whist room."
“ Are you Whisting tonight?" asked Jones.
“Am I whittling?” I asked Then I smiled. “Oh! you mean am I playing Whist I Ah!" He went to the Billiard room, saying “Cheerio then, old thing.”
As I sit in front of my fire on winter evenings, I think of all these small incidents. And the foregoing one, I always attribute to the War and George Robey.—(Contributed).
Perchance,
Alas I that Dreams should vanish in the Light For morn dispels the glowing Hopes of Night
And Poetasters small who “do not think”
How rudely are their visions pul to flight.
No A ready for ye—this F. M S.
Where Work and Play mean hearty
Strife and Stress.
Full many a shock the tender Youth might gel Should he forsake—secluded wilderness.
No faithful friends, with all—admiring Eyes When from his Put—the Ball leaps to the skies
To gently murmur “ Splendid ! " and the like,
Until—in hats, he takes—the Largest size
This “ Serious Bridge " no doubt he
could forsake
And in some Corner Dim, a Haven make, Where, not beset with Pitfall and with Gin
Might play his gentle game, of Putt -and—Take
Not all the Clubs, from farthest East to West
Can hope to end the bitter fruitless Quest
In one and all, Thou’rt liable to meet
Our woman-folk—an honoured Guest
But stay ! A Ray of Hope shines from afar Perchance we can alleviate the Jar
So leave Thee, having done our very best
Select and Happy, a Kuching Star.
Birth.
AT the Residency, Sibu. on the 20th the wife of Mr. D. A. OWEN of a son.
NOTES.
ON the evening of the 27th April a salute of seven guns was fired from the Fort to give notice of the beginning of the Mohomedan month of Ramthan.
WE congratulate Mr. and Mrs D. A. Owen on 'the birth of a son on the 20th at the Residency Sibu, and to Master Roland Henry Lewis Owen we extend our best wishes.
BY the p s. Adeh sailing on the 25th six scyces were sent to Baram on instructions from His Highness the Rajah.
We have no particulars as yet nut it seems that some ponies have been obtained and that there is a likelihood of races taking place this year
MR. P H. Hayward and the rest of those who had remained in Singapore in connection with the Malaya-Borneo Exhibition returned to Sarawak on 28th April by s. s. Kuching.
We are sure that it is not too late to ex¬press our gratitude to Mr. Hayward for the able way in which he assisted in Singapore. We are informed that the success of the Sarawak exhibits was largely due to Mr. Hayward’s exertions and the business like way in which he set to work.
MR. F. H Kortright has been down from Bau several times during the month in con- nection with the electric lighting at the Astana. A complete new set has been in- stalled and we are informed that the lighting is a great, improvement on the old system. It is rumoured that His Highness intends to hive a cinematograph in the Astana grounds.
MR. and Mrs. G. B. Stooke left for Sadong on the 2nd accompanied by the late District Officer there, Mr. W. F. de V. Skrine, who was handing over to Mr. Stooke. Mr. Skrine re- turned to Kuching later
ON the 7th the Police were informed that a Tamil, named Apoo, had been found hang¬ing from a rubber tree at the 11 mile. The Superintendent of Police, accompanied by the Acting Coroner, proceeded to the spot and after examination of the body gave orders for its removal to the Mortuary. An inquest was found to be unnecessary.
WE are given to understand that His Highness the Rajah has intimated that he wishes the “Week” in Kuching to take place in the first week in August.
YET another crocodile tragedy is reported
from Lundu.
This time it appears that a Malay named
Taip, together with his wife and child, was
bathing from a pengkallan at Munggu Raman
when a crocodile appeared suddenly and seized
Taip who had, however, given the alarm
enabling his wife and child to escape.
Three days later a search party found the
unfortunate man’s leg about a mile away
from the scene of the accident.
ON the 20th the Kuching Police, under the
command of Mr. O. Lang, Superintendent of
Police, were inspected by the Resident 1st
Division on the Police Parade ground.
The Resident arrived on the ground at 6.15
a. m. and proceeded to inspect the men drawn
up in close column. The men were then put
through Battalion drill, and were dismissed
shortly after 7 o’clock.
H H. S. Y Zahora called in at K aching
twice during the month for His Highness the
Rajan's mails. His Highness and party were
still away at the end of the month.
THE S. S Yuet Wha. Captain Thomas
Brov , sailing under Chinese colours, arrived
-on the 12th and left again for Sadong on the
15th. She loaded over 1,000 tons of coal nt
Sadong and returned to Pending on the J9th.
sailing again for Hongkong on the 20th.
The Yuet Wha is a vessel of 864 registered
tonnage and 1,472 gross tonnage. She has
very fair passenger accommodation and many
local Chinese took the opportunity of visiting
their native land. We understand that she
will be coming again in the near future.
Du. W. E. LE G. Clark P. M. O. reported
to the Police on the 8th that, on the previous
afternoon, various coats and pairs of shoes etc.
bad been stolen from his bungalow. On the
next day the tukang ayer, a Malay named
Jais, absconded and has not been found to
date.
We understand that there has been much
petty thieving from European’s bungalows
lately. Mr. K. H. Simpson reports that a
thief visited Snipe Cottage one night but got
away without taking anything. In many
cases we fear that the house servants them-
selves are the thieves.

CAPTAIN and Mrs. Lowe returned from
Singapore on the 10th May.
The p. s Adeh, which arrived on the 18th,
brought Mr. A. E. Lawrence from Mukah;
we understand that he is proceeding to Singa-
pore to meet Mrs. Lawrence and child who
are coming out to Sarawak. By the same
vessel Father A. Mulder and Brother Simon
were passengers.
We learn that the latter is far from well
and we hope he will soon be enjoying a well
earned leave in Europe.
MR. F. G. Day has been laid up with lum-bago for the last month—but are glad to see that he is down in Office again and hope that he is quite recovered.
WEDNESDAY, the, ‘24th being Proclamation Day, the Govt. Offices were closed and a gen- eral holiday observed.
WE read in the Straits Times and other papers that experiments have been tried with rubber shoes for the Straits Police. We sup-pose that this refers only to the soles of the shoes. Here is a chance for an enterprising local shoemaker to make an offer to supply the Kuching Police.
We saw shoes, in Sibu recently, composed entirely of rubber. They were in great demand by tin Foochows there. We should imagine, however, that they would be extremely trying on a hot day.
THE month of Ramthan came to an end at 6 p. m on the 27th, and at 8 a. m. on the 28th a salute of fourteen guns was fired from the Fort. On this day ceremonial visits to many Govern- ment Officer's were paid by the chiefs of the Mohomedan Community, and in the evening the Kampongs were brilliantly illuminated.
Rain feh early in trie day but fortunately cleared up later.
The roads in the neighbourhood of the Kam- pongs were alive with gaily dressed Malays, and everybody had made an effort to keep tne great Mohomedan festival of the year with the usual customs and rejoicing
On tujoh likor the Kampongs were also lighted up; especially to be commended were those responsible for the Police Barracks from which shone a brilliant display of light
MR. J. W. Evans, Manager of the Sadong Collieries, arrived in Kuching on a short visit, by the Sri Sadong on the 25th.
H. H. S. Y. Zahora returned to Kuching
on Monday 29th with Mr and Mrs. H. A.
Adams, Miss Patricia Adams, Mr and Mrs.
K. H. Gillan and Master John Gillan.
We understand that His Highness the
 Rajah win not be back until the 5th.
WE are informed that 29 Borneo ponies
 have been purchased. They are arriving in
 Kuching by the Adeh.
MR. E. Parnell arrived back in Kuching by
the s.s. Kuching on the 21st after an absence
of two months. We understand that Mr.
Parnell was obliged to go to Java after the
Exhibition on account of his health. We
hear, however, that he underwent a strenuous
course of riding, which to judge by appear-
ances would seem to be an excellent tonic.
DRY rubber harvested at Sungei Tengah during April amounted to 82,000 lbs.
LABUAN NOTES.
TEN Sarawakians were foregathered in Labuan to welcome His Royal Highness the Prince of Wales.
At a cricket match Labuan vs: H. M. S. Renown, Mr. S. W. Harris of Brooketon took 4 wickets for 1G runs, Mr. R. L. Daubeny made 24 rung, this was the highest score put up by any one player on either side. Mr. E. D. Humphery also played and added a humble three to the runs for his side.
Mrs. Boult and Messrs. Daubeny and Hum¬phery were very lucky to get a look over the Renown. They also had lunch on board, and attended a cinema show which H. R. H. the Prince of Wales gave to all the Europeans in Labuan.
JESSELTON.
MR. P. M. Adams rode in the races, three we think, and we believe came in third in one of them.
STOP PRESS NEWS.
Derby 1922.
Sarawak Library.
The following books nave been added to the
Sarawak Library 
The following books have been kindly pre- 
sented to the Library by Mrs. Mead :—
Two Hundred Years Ago.
We print below a quaint article from the “Jersey Critic”.
One of the oldest newspapers in England. “The Gloucester Journal,’’ recently celebrated its two hundreth birthday, and the owners published as supplement to the issue of April 8th, a facsimile of their very first number, dated April 9th, 1722 The contents make most interesting reading, and no part of the issue is more curious than that devoted to figures regarding the London weekly Bill of Mortality.
They evidently suffered from peculiar complaints  in those days, but they certainly called a spade a spade "Griping in the guts" wouldn’t be called
that now, would it?
Confessions and last words of people about to be executed were very useful to newspapers in those days. A man who went to the gallows without making a speech was reckoned no gentleman. In its first number “The Gloucester Journal” chronicled the speech made on the scaffold by a certain Francis Smith, WHO bad murdered his uncle. “The first occasion,” said Smith, “of committing this bloody and wicked deed, was breaking the Sabath and Gaming, for I was very much addicted to it of late, which both are the fore-runners of untimely ends.”
At Worcester, a woman had been sentenced to- transportation for housebreaking: A man was made to stand in the pillory for playing thimbles and ball, and another got five years in Bridewell for attempt¬ing to (as the paper naively puts it) hang his father. One feels rather sorry for the “thimbles and balls man,” who was evidently a clever fellow. And transportation for housebreaking was a bit stiff. But five years for attempting to hang one’s father was certainly going it.
Monthly Golf Competition.
Topical Topics.
Extract from an Outstation Report:—
“	 ..There has been a great deal of petty
thieving going on in the Bazaar. On the 25th a shop-keeper reported that ten pikuls of his jelutong were stolen the previous night	”
It is not surprising that a district, where they breed such a race of Spartans, gave the Government such trouble formerly.
One of our readers is of the same opinion and sends ns the following lines:—	•
THE SNEAK THIEF.
“Petty thieving must be fun.
Snatch some trifle—off you run,
But when the swag's o’er half a ton
It appears to me to be a pretty severe physical strain on the thief and consequently any financial results accruing to him by reason of his evil ways seem dearly won.”
The last line does not seem to scan somehow or other—but anyway the rhyming is alright.
We are asked to contradict the statement made in our last issue wherein we said that palatial mews were being erected at B. M K. We understand that these mews are not so palatial as we thought.
Our reporter must have taken the wrong turning and looked at “ Aneberg. ”
The New Club has burst out into unusual brilliance during the month—an electric lighting system having been installed therein. We are informed that even some the valiant die hards returning from “ The " Club are attracted by the brilliant beams of light and may lie seen wending their way up the front steps with unusual timidity. It has been suggested that some steps be made leading into the “men’s room ” thus enabling these timid Clubmen to enter the brilliant portals unseen.
Those who wish to add to their collection of Sarawak curios are advised to visit the Museum where, for the next fortnight, the articles left over from the Exhibition will be sold at greatly reduced prices.
The attention of would-be purchasers is particularly directed to exhibit No. G. 4. This is an ex¬tremely choice piece of work and, no doubt, is a very rare fossilised root bearing the distinct impression of a human face and body. Perhaps the whole question of the aboriginees of Sarawak may be solved by an examination of this interesting specimen from the ulit Limbang, the price of which is very moderate¬ly marked at $300.
A Challenge.
We have received a letter from E. O. B., in which he says that he is willing to race a Melanau crew of 45 men and One flag bearer, in a boat of local build, against a similar Balau bout and crew.
The race to take place next Race Week. Course 3 miles, best of 3 races.
We have sent the letter on to Simanggang. If this challenge is accepted it might prove a welcome diversion. E. O. B. advocates having an open Re¬gatta in Race Week. This has been suggested many times but apparently the idea has not met. with much approval.
We look forward to an acceptance of this challenge.
With H. H. Y. "Zahora.”
On Friday April 14th H H. Y. Zahora cast off
at 3p.m. from her moorings in the Kuching river
having on hoard a party consisting of H. H. The
Rajah, Mr.. Mrs. and Patricia Adams, Mr., Mrs.
and John Gillan and Mr. F. A. W. Page-Turner. San-
tubong was reached at 5 p.m. and the party put
ashore for exercise and bathing. A convivial party
of Faster trippers were found to be in residence at
the Government bungalow who extended a cheery
welcome to the new comers. His Highness invited
the shore party, Dr. Clark. Mr. Archer, Mr. Griffiths
and Mr. Holl to dine on his yacht. The weather
reports being unfavourable, H. H. decided to delay
his departure for another day and on Sunday the.
16th at dawn the Zahora sailed for Min.
Squally weather was experienced on leaving the
river and when off the mouth of the Rejang H. H
decided, for the comfort of his party, to put into
that liver and make for Sibu. At living at this
station at nightfall, the Resident Mr. D. A. Owen
came off and shortly afterwards the whole party went
ashore. The following day was spent at Sibu. An
important race was to have been held in the morning,
but as one of the competitors failed to appear at the
starting post at the arranged time, the winner had a
walk over and what promised to be an event in the
annals of the district, fizzled out The Resident
and Mrs. Owen entertained H. H. and party to din-
ner in the evening and there were also present Mr.
and Mrs. Hoover and Mr. Aplin. At daybreak next day
the Zahora was on her way down river, stopped the
night off Jerijih village, when the party took the
opportunity of a walk ashore, and sailed in the
morning for Min.
Miri was rescued on the 20th in the morning.
The. D. 0. Mr. C. D. Adams and Major Benjamin,
General Manager of the Sarawak Oilfields, Co. Ltd ,
came off and took the party ashore where H. H. was
received by the Staff of the Company. After inspect-
ing the guard, H. H. was motored by Major Ben-
jamin to his house with Mr Page-Turner. The
other members of the party were most kindly enter-
tained by Mr. Adams at his bouse. Three days were
spent at Miri, a most enjoyable experience. The
wells were visited, motor drives, football and base-
bail matches filled the daylight hours, whilst on two
evenings Major Benjamin entertained H. H. and
party and a large number of guests All proceeded
liter to the Rest House where cinema entertainments
and most entrancing dances made perfect ends to
perfect days. The Jazz band was a feature of winch
too little has been beard. Led by Mr. Mears at the
piano, who with the two companions gave such
an exhibition of the Jazz art as has surely not been
seen in Borneo before, the dancing went with an
abandon and a zip that carried one away and even the
unexperienced found themselves beating time, rising
in their seals and finally summoning the courage
necessary to take the floor. On the morning of the
23rd II. H. and party left for Brooketon. The
European community, headed by the D. O. and Major
Benjamin were on the wharf to hid farewell to H.
H. The river side rang with the heat of the hooters
on H H. departure and three hearty  hoots were
given in return by H. H.Y. Zahora.
Brooketon. the next port, was reached after a
calm trip, at 7 p. in 11 H was met by the Resident
5th Division. Mr. F. F Boult and Mr. Harris,
Manager of the Brooketon Collieries who had made
and simplified all arrangements for getting ashore
and to 11. H. bungalow with all expedition.
Brooketon was H. H. headquarters and from that
place he visited Limbang, Lawas. Brunei, Jesselton
and Labuan. H. H. party were also able to visit
Limbang, where they were most kindly entertained by Mr and Mrs Boult. Labuan on the occasion of H. U. H. The Prince of Wales’ visit and Brunei where The British Resident Mr. Allen and Mrs. Allen invited them for the day.
On the 27th of May at 4 p.m. the stay at Brooke- ton came to an end and H. H. Y. Zahora shaped her course for Barnin River. In the early hours of the 28th the anchor was dropped and H. IL accom¬panied by Mr. Page-Turner, transferred his flag to p. s Arieh at 6 am., to proceed to Baram.
H H. Y. Zahora then continued her voyage to Kuching with the rest of the party.
The Kuching Christian Cemetery. 
STATEMENT OF RECEIPTS AND EXPENDITURE
1ST JANUARY TO 31ST DECEMBER, 1921.
Subsequent to 31st December 1921 a sum of $10 WAS
received in addition to this for the repairs to the memorials,
etc. in the old cemetery.
At a meeting of the Cemetery Board held on 10th March
1922 at the Resident's Office, it was decided that the repairs
to all the badly ruined memorials and monuments be carried
out.
This work is now being put in hand, and will, cost about
$110.
ROBERT J. SMALL.
A Reuter cable of the 22nd April announced the death, on 20th idem, of Mr. Peter Duguid Thomson, formerly Managing Director of The Borneo Co., Ltd, To the few now in Sarawak who had the privilege of knowing him, it may be of interest to state that Mr. Thomson joined the Company in 1864, and in 1890 was appointed Managing Director.
He retired towards the end of 1916
For his ability and devotion to duty Mr. Thomson held the absolute confidence of the Company. He was also endeared to the Members of the Staff both at home and in the East for his personal sympathy and interest in their welfare. — (Contributed.)
The Navy and Eastern Oil Supplies.
Earlier in the month Mr. Geoffrey Drage stated that the Government has not at present enough oil to enable it to send the Battle Fleet to Singapore or Hongkong, and that it. case of an attack at the present time "Hongkong and Singapore must fall at once." A correspondent, whose knowledge has been gained from a close practical acquaintance with the subject, puts a very different face on the position in a communication to “The Times." Ex-actly what amount of fuel oil the Admiralty may have at their disposal in home waters our corres¬pondent does not pretend to know, but he thinks it incredible that they should not have enough to send the Battle Fleet to Singapore.
He proceeds to point out that there exists within a few hundred miles of Singapore a newly-developed oilfield of great potential value, the resources of which are, he asserts, fully able on the present basis of output to cope with any demands of the British Navy in that quarter of the Empire, and of para¬mount importance is the fact that tins oilfield may, for all practical purposes, be said to be in British hands. There are, of course, oilfields in Dutch Borneo and in other Dutch possessions adjacent to Malaya, but the quite recently-developed oilfields of Sarawak are those on which, according our correspondent, the British Admiralty can rely for ample provision at a momenta notice of any demands for naval purposes. We are told that, thanks to the patriotic foresight of the late Rajah of Sarawak— himself an ex-officer of the Royal Navy-certain arrangements have been made to secure an adequate supply of oil being always at the disposal of the Navy in Singapore. — (China Express & Telegraph.}
Sarawak Club Derby Sweep.
The draw took place at the Club House on the
evening of the 30th instant, 909 tickets were taken
up out of a total of 1,200 printed It is unfortunate
that the book containing tickets Nos. 551—575 was
hot returned, and as it was not known which of
these had been taken they had all to be excluded
 from the draw.
Mr. Parnell examined the numbers, before they
were placed in the wheel and checked them with
the counterfoils of tickets taken The actual
drawing was done by two small Japanese, the
children of Dr. Ujita, who brought them up to the
Club for that purpose.
The following list shows the numbers of tickets
drawing the various horses :--
It is hoped before closing the Gazette to be able- to publish the winners.
Mr. Albert Whelan, the actor, is telling two good stories Here's one of them A man rushed into a bar. "Give me a double whisky before the row starts," he cried. The barmaid stared, and gave him his drink. “ Another double whisky before the row starts," he said. After he had repeated this trick for about ten minutes, the barmaid said: “And when does this row start, and what's it all about?"
Tim row starts now," came the reply. ‘I've got no money to pay for what I’ve had.”
The Opening of Parliament
at Ballyagenda.
Our special correspondent in the new Capital was present at the opening of the new Parliament of Iremandia lust night. Owing to the great digres¬sions of opinion, and the probability of '‘events’' regrettable on such an occasion of just emancipation, the opening was privately and secretly fixed for 12 o'clock midnight. Our correspondent, not being an Ireinandian, got to know of it through a rabid, and unusually quiet, member of the Left Wing, over dinner at O’Mallorie’s Grand Italian Bar and Restaurant in O'Sullivan Square, the centre of the dining community and Gourmet of the capital. It happened during the 8th W. & S . and after the 4th bottle of Le Cloche (this 4th bottle, it should be well to add, being consumed after the 3rd tankatrd of “muscular.” the latter being the Ireman- dian for Guiuness). The “Unusually Quiet Member" had partaken of (we must be fair to our corres¬pondent and to the u. q. m) four fifths of the whole of the American forbidden fruit. What happened was this Our man was sitting at his table (large enough for 3 more) when he descried a hairy face its eyes looking through actual nine-coloured glssses They and the hairy face belonged to the u q in., and he beamed upon our laddie, which should be so, through such glasses. Of course they didn’t know each other, but “Ours" has an open, kind, and generous face, and he Was chosen as one who would be ai. agreeable companion over dinner, for no Iretiiandnin drinks alone Nor one drink. Seated at the table, and having tasted his soup and turned immediately to his “muscular," he putted the. table, and purred. “Ours" looked up from ins soup, and the u. q. m. finding that he had uimstt n- tatiously attracted his atientum, whispered across the table, “You* know of course, what all this silence in the city means"? “Yes." (He didn’t, but you can't admit ignorance nowadays).
“Then you will want a ticket" ?
A vague doubt assailed "Ours.” Was it more Bond Clubs, or was this a sweep tout?
“Yes, I must have one.” (“Ticket" is a magic. Everyone wants tickets).
“You shall me bhoy. Never will ye hear the Ibike of the brhoth av a spache I have for to flatten out the opposition. Mayhap ye have friends. No? Well between the two av us, the opening is secret, and limited to just the friends av members, so the fewer that come, the less likelihood of members claiming loo much of the chairman's time. Here's ye ticket bhoy. Not a worrrd."
There were pauses, of course, in this conversation, but mainly to refill and replenish, and the ticket was banded over at the stage of lubrication mentioned above.
The orchestra played “See the Conquering Hero comes," the two friends parted, and “Ours” was about to look at the ticket, knowing not what it was for, when a delightful old gentleman in evening clothes jostled his elbow, and remained smiling—in fact chuckling—at him. Rising, he politely asked what the old gentleman wanted.
"“Want”? shrieked the old gentleman. “Want? Come, come, smile bboy. For do ye not know what all this mysterious silence of to-day means? Och, ye’ve not bin an’ lost yourself among those foreigners? Waiter—eh! Two Jameson’s—no, large ones. Sit down bhoy. Which wny did ye vote” ?
“Ours"—a quick lad saw daylight.
“Oi arrhived too Ihate to vote.”
“Och, well never mhoind that. Devil take it. Ye’ll soon have another vote."
“Why''?
“Why? The bhoy has been too king away surely. Why? D’ye imagine for wan moment that that splosh eyed fool av a spalpane, O’Figgerty is going to boss this united people, eh. ? Not for me.”
“But why shouldn’t he” ?
“Whoi should he”? A pause, but no answer. “Ours" is no wizard.
"Good health. Come to-night an’ ye’ll see. Here—here's a ticket. An' now I must be going, or I’ll be late. An’ then
He looked about him. He got up and looked about, and bent down and looked about.
“Have you lost something?”
Grunt. Growl. Hm! Ha’
“I swear I brought it. I know I did, because didn't I hit that moon-headed parrot-faced rat M’Derniot on the middle of his back when he said good-night.”
A waiter came through the throng about us, and handed him his Shillelagh.
“Ours" wended bls way to the Central Avenue, there to quietly look at his tickets. He was about to do so. when a rifle butt gently tapped his shoulder.
“ Mhove on SUIT.”
" Eli? What is the matter”?
" Mhme on Sorr. One's a crowd Mhove on Sorr.”
"Our's” moved. He came to nn oyster bar. and went in. It was full of the most delightful people, suddenly having felt the need for oysters, and who were discussing the usual Iremandian topics of coal and manufacture, shipping and the rise in gilt- edged securities at home and abroad. All except one man. and he was talking about racing ; of course, to himself He was evidently a humourous man, for according to his conversation with himself,  he had lost all he had to lose, and was now engaged upon plotting his programme for the morrow, with a green paper in front of him.
But strangely enough he it was, who, having worked out his losses for to-morrow, greeted “Ours." And no mean greeting it was. He pulled “Ours" into a chair by him, caught a waiter by the coat, called two Jameson’s and cigars, and still having hold of “Ours" by the and, hurriedly explained all he'd done.
“You’ve seen me before me bhoy. Whoi, we lay together in a hole, front av Hooge War's whar, an’ a brhoth av a wan was that. Here’s cheer bhoy."
And then “Ours” knew him He had been earned away by him at night, from a fairly unhealthy shell¬hole at Hooge, and knew him to be an Iremandian of the temperament of that people; and when, after they started on their way back to safety. "Ours" being a bit crochetty on his pins owing to a piece of something sticking him somewhere, he was cheerily swung on to the Iremandian’s shoulders, as Patsy said “Jhust to kspe me from bein’ hit in the back," he disclosed his identity and regiment, neither of which was Ireinandian; his deliverer had turned to him, mid to Ins surprise said, “Och bhoy, phwat's it mhatter anyway. Oi know we’re nor. at all Iremandians here to-day, but it can’t be Helped,” just as though what “Ours" mid told him, was an explanation of how he had saved u future enemy.
“ Bhut tell me. Phwy are ye here to-night. Sure there isn't a real Iremandian here to-night, an’ thats whoi 1 came, in order to quietly work out to-morrow’s programme An’ ask any wan av ’em what's doin' this night, an’ not wan of ’em will tell ye about the opening of Parliament that’s been secretly arranged.”
So that's what these tickets arc for! “Ours” was in lucks way.
“Have you got a ticket”? asked “Ours."
" I have not. not havin’ any friends who are tn embers, an’ 'not having been to the Grand Italian to-day.”
“Then here’s one. I have two. We’ll go together.”
It was now 11.45 p. in. The business of Parlia- ment opened at 12. They, therefore, left the bar, and walked to Bliss Terrace. Here, all was as ’’Ours” expected it to be, quiet, and almost empty, because the opening of Parliament was secret. Suddenly the Iremandian struck “Ours” on the shoulder, and turned back in dismay.
"What’s the matter"? said "Ours."
"Och, bhoy, oi must away at once	I	shan't
be ...5 minutes	"
"Oura” was along with him.
"But what is it.	”?
"Oi've forgotten it. Must have it. You wait here.. Back in two twos.”
He came back in 5 minutes carrying a beautifully polished blackthorne.
“Ours" and his companion got separated, owing to a quiet discussion on Poker. taking place just as they reached the Long Gallery. It was quite accidental, but forceful, and as stated already, it was sufficient to separate them. Arriving at the swing doors at the entrance to the Long Gallery, they heard quiet voices, in argument nevertheless ; such phrazes as " Oi tell ye it was fhour Kings oi had," and “ Yere a loir, it WAS two pairs av Kings ye had, an’ 2 two pairs don’t beat 4 twos.” And then, with the sudden swiftness and poetic action of the Iremandian, the swing doors parted and a swilling mass of arms legs and Iremandian expletives gushed forth. Not, as you may think in your quiet Engmandian way, reader, adjusted upon balance by equilibrium plus locomotion, but by locomotion supplied by separate bodies of powerful force, and without any part of this flying mass touching the ground—until some seconds later. It struck "Ours” by an unlucky chance, and both rolled to the next landing.	
"Phwat did ye want interfering for anyway” asked the ejected one, of "Ours."
" I didn't, friend. 1 simply ..
” Friend ! No friend o’ moine wad sphoil what should av’ been	’’
But here, further speech was drowned by deafen¬ing roars Not mere cheers. Deafening roars.
“Ours" was in, just in time to see, filing into the splendid chamber below, men of all sizes and shapes, men of dignity, and men of obvious importance. Amongst them, be recognised his two companions of the early evening, though on opposite sides of the chamber. And as they tiled in, they laid their Shillelaghs’ on the table in front of them. The clerk announced a harmless enough thing, but it seemed to electrify the Left Wing and the Kight Wing. This is all he said;—
“Gentlemen, Honourable Members of the First Parliament of Iremand after the Oppression, I have the honour to announce, and do declare, that the Honourable Member for Mulligitawny, Shaughan Carroll M’Dermot has been unanimously elected first speaker to this house.”
That’s all. Simple, tite, and quite understandable. But no ! Dismay was writ large on a score of faces. Unanimously? How? The member for Betticolly Wabbol was on his feet. He adjusted his glasses by taking them off. He seized his blackthorne.
"Gentlemen’' he started, striking an attitude of defiance, and the table with his blackthorne.
“Chair, chair, chair," howled others. .
"Chair ho blowed—there an't a chair yet Phwat is ut that has been told to us, by that long nosed jackanapes in his wig? A chairman, and in this house of Iremand, elected unanimously! Did
anybhody here, or elsewhere, ever hear of a unani¬mous action in this fair country av ours ?”
"No, no, chorussed many voices Right and Left.
"Then whoi is he sitting in that chair"?
The Chairman, a man of sense and tact, arose, and said there could be no objection to the “Chair.” The ballot was taken before members took their seats, and those who did not attend the ballot, could but blame themselves This led away Mr. O’Brien.
"Misther Chairman” he said "give me the worrd to throw out that brow-bating, bullnosed, cheating swindler, who rooks everyone that buys his horse¬flesh ; and	”
"Sh ! Sh ! You must, not say what you think privately about members. You may think what you like, but don't say it here” interposed the Chairman.
“Och, 1 can thing phwat o loike can I? Then I think that the member for Bettycolly Wabbol is a thaving rascal, a chating swindler
A Shillelagh relieved him of further necessity for speech, and he was taken out.
The incident closed, with a motion of protest against the word “Unanimous."
The Chairman--Speaker really, but Iremand cared nothing for that then took his chair, a thing apart from, mid slightly above the floor of the house.
He called upon the Principal hero of the recent elections, who arose amidst masses of surrounding papers He was a man of bulk, with matted hair, mid a large nose.
"Mr Speaker, I have the honour and pleasure, on behalf of this house, to announce to the people, that we have at last obtained what we wanted
"I disagree with that entoirly” bawled Mr. Macushla.
And others having notified similar opinions, the police entered, and dragged them out.
"Ours” waited 5 minutes, and then left. On the stairs he met his Hooge friend.
“Och” said he "the meeting’ll be a great success. They’ll get no forrarder with their business for a week or two."
"Then why, in Heaven’s name, do you think it a great success"? asked "Ours." The Iremandian looked at him in speechless amaze for one second.
“Och ye wouldn’t understand if I thold ye Good night.” And he went.
The following day “Ours” lunched at the Grand Italian, and was just seated at the table, when a figure in rose-coloured glasses appeared in the door¬way. He looked around, and at last espied his companion of yesterday. He jubilantly jigged up¬to the table. Seating himself, he asked.
“What did yon think av ut” ?
“ I was alarmed at the absolute nullity.”
"But bhoy, ye don’t understand. It was planned all av phwat ye heard was planned. It went off fine."
“But why plan to block the most elementary and meie processes of forming a Government."
“Did ye hear my own spache bhoy”? he asked.
"No, I left after Mucushla—left."
"Let me tell ye av ut. There are among the candidates for Cabinet honours, tnen who don’t want, an' won't have, any trade relations with Engmand. You quite comprehend me? Well, when their names were put up for election to the Cabinet, I noted these bhoys down, an' compiled a spache in favour of trading with the enemy—I mane av course, trading with Engmaml. to break the.back of those votes which would carry the day. An' I won. Old Flaherty said, as we camo dlowrl th” X shteps of the house afterwards, that if I’d make.
such a spache against trading with England, I'd  he in the Cabinet in a month myself. An' av it 
He drew from his voluminous pocket, a roll of paper. When put in front of “Ours” it% represented the exact opposite policy to the u. q. m's, speech of last night, and occupied 163 pages of quarto, paper.
At this juncture, the old gentleman, the second* acquaintance of “Ours” of the previous night, joined them.
“What time did ye lave the Chamber Denis"? he asked of the u. q. m.
“About 11.30 a. m.t an’ went to the library an’ wrote this speech." And he handed it over.
The old gentleman rend part, and then smilingly interrogated.
“What time did ye say ye left this morning’s sitting”?
“About 11.30 ”
“Then ye won’t have, beard Old Flaherty’s speech ou this question, winch expressed the same senti¬ments Almost word for word as fnr as I’ve read, Denis He got elected ” The old gentleman raised his hat, which forgetfulness, excitement, and The poetic licence, had made him forget to doff on coming in, and left.	.
“Ha. Ha!! He has eh ' The ould spalpane! I told him what I’d write. Now me bhoy, I must away rewrite a more powerful indictment against him and his Bill,” said the excited u. q. m.
“But which are you in favour of” ? asked “Ours."
“Nather of’em," bawled the u. q. m. And then he suddenly beamed
“Och ! Ye an't of Iremand, and so ye don’t un- derstand US. Any Iremandian would have under- stood. but not anywan else. Ye never did, ah’-.ye never will understand the intentions, honourable and otherwise, nor the deep feeling of Iremandians.”
He paused awhile to cogitate, and slipped his fingers over and over each other, as if thinking of a parallel type of psychology to heller explain his point.
After ten minutes silence, and 2 W. and S , he beamed again
“Ye wonder, an’ all the world wonders, why. we Iremandians can, when faced with facts, take refuge in fiction. Well its p'raps because we are suckled on too much fact of an unsavoury kind, that for re¬lief we turn to poetry and fiction. In fact, bhoy, ye have a concrete barrier. In fiction, ye can ex¬pand and expand. An’ isn’t it foine to feel no boundary”?
He was quiet for a little longer. “Ours” says he felt he understood a deal more now.
“Ye saw a throoping of the colours in the house last night, a quiet an’ orderly meeting. But just wait a bit, an' give us toime to organise, an' ye'll hear the full purport of our grievance.”
“Ours” was again in a quandary.
“Grievance? What on earth grievance has Ire- mand got now" ? he asked.
The u.q.m. looked mildly at him.
“D’ye mane to tell me that you"imagine we have no grievance'1?
“Ours” said he did.
The u.q.m. got up adjusted his hat, buttoned his coat, and grasped his Shillelagh.
Then walking to the door with “Ours,” he proffered his bund. As he went down the Hotel steps, he turned for one minute.
“If ye never could guess, an' if ye’ll try an’ under-stand, its this. We shall cherish a lastin’ grievance agin Engmand for throwin’ us over on our own, and . ve shan't rest until we have forced her to admit ns into the Union where we belong."—(Contributed).
“Oi					
“Och, e, mum," stud the tramp, '“I’ve eaten Ye’ll soolut snowballs for three days. ”
ean woman smiled. “ Summer is coming," ,d, “cheer up."
The Water Hyacinth.
We print below a short article from the “Straits Times” on the (water-hyacinth. ThiS will be of in¬terest to those who have already encountered this prolific pest in Sarawak
It is difficult to say where this flower was first introduced into Sarawak but it appears to be more prevalent in the Oya river than in any other district.
In spite of various efforts to combat thia weed the water-hyacinth is gaining ground and many of the small streams off the Oya river are completely choked up causing much difficulty to the sago workers
In the past few years it has appeared in the Igan river probably getting there through S. Kut and the canal which joins the Oya and Igan riversand which is generally known as the “Cut.”
As far as we can ascertain the natives have no dis-tinctive name for this flower but simply call it bunga bakong. It is noticed that if the flower manages to get out to sea it dies, but unfortunately the greater pan moves up and down with the tide and apparently little gets out to sea to stay there.
Some districts seem quite immune from this weed. It is said that Melanaus use the juice horn the distended stalks as medicine.
A PLANT THAT HAS BECOME A PEST.
Pests are seldom beautiful. On exception is the water-hyacinth, which for over 20 years (says Every¬day Science) has made many of the canals and waterways of the State of Lousiana. in America, impassable during the summer, and for which, after many attempts ami many failures, an erudicator has at last been found
The pest was another instance of introducing a thing which was not a pest in its native count iv. The water-hyacinth (Piaropus itrnsKipes) is a native of Venezuela Leaf stalks distended with air at the base cause the plant to float after the seed that has fallen to the bottom of the scream sprouts and uses to the surface.* Six weeks later the plant sends up blossoming stems, which bear 35 or 40 flowers of great beamy, and produce about 170,000 seeds a year.
The flower was first introduced at a New Orleans exhibition in 1884. It aroused great admiration, and visitors carried away specimens for their gardens and ponds. The climate suited it so well that it quickly became a nuisance to the gardener, who threw his surplus into the river. By the early nine¬ties it was a nuisance in the riveis. So rapid is the growth that a stream 50 yards wide, with only a fringe of water-hyacinth along the edges in March, will Ire completely coveted in June with a tangled muss. and almost solid crust from bank to bank, through which no river boat can pass.
Conceited efforts to light the pest began in 1897. A special boat was built, which gathered in the flowers at. the end, mangled them between rollers, and shot them out at the other end on to the banks. That was slow and cosily. An arsenic spray was tried, which was cheaper, but it was dangerous, because the cattle like to eat the hyacinth, and didn't mind the arsenic until after they had swallowed it. Two years ago, in spite of all efforts, a Government official sent to investigate came to the conclusion that in a few years all but rhe largest rivers of Louisiana would be choked by the flowers.
Then, last summer, after botanists had been sent to Venezuela to try to discover what fungus, para¬site or Other natural enemy kept the hyacinth in check in its native country, a chance suggestion was tried, an!"found to be successful It was to use live steam from hoses.
[The plant is very common locally and its beautiful
delphinium blue flowers may be seen in almost any pig pond round Chinese coolie dwellings.]
(S. T.)
A NEW CURATOR FOR THE MUSEUM.
The Sarawak Government Gazette of the 16th, Muy publishes the appointment, of Dr. Erie Mjoberg as Curator of the Sarawak Museum.
Dr. Mjoberg arrived by the Kuching on the 10th May.
From the S. F. P. we learn that Dr Mjoberg was previously Swedish Consul in Medan, where he, during three years, was attached to the Planter’s Experimental Station. As an appreciation of his work in Sumatra he was accorded the Lilinas Gold Medal of the Academy in Stockholm. At the same time the King of Sweden created him a Knight of the Wasa Order, First Class.
We wish to record, and we are sure that our readers will agree with us. our appreciation of the effort' made by Mr. C. E. A. Ermen and Mr. Jee Khoo to carry on during the seven years in which the Museum has been without a Curator. The result of their work is shown by the excellent condition, considering the circumstances, in which the Museum was handed over to Dr. Mjoberg.
House of Commons.
North Borneo Company.
APRIL 5.—MR. JOHN WILSON (Stourbridge) asked the Secretary of State for the Colonies whether his attention had been drawn to the published work of an official of the North Borneo Chartered Company, in which allegations were made that under the company’s rule gambling, the sale of opium and spirits and pawn broking bad been made monopolies, and whether he proposed to draw the attention of this company to the deplorable results which were likely to accrue to these organised monopolies over the means of degradation.
MR WOOD (Under-Secretary for the Colonies) replied: No, sir. I do not know what publication is referred to. I have no doubt that the court of directors of the company are aware of the possible risks attending monopolies of opium and spirits as well as of the advantages which are often considered to accrue from unified control in these matters. I would remind the hon. member that under the terms of the chatter the Secretary of State’s rights of intervention are limited.—(C. E. & T.)
Extracts from the Annual Reports.
Sadong Colliery.
THE following is the annual report of the work¬ing of the Collieries during 1921.
The members of the labour force the Collieries numbered 590, 92 persons were given their discharge and 5 died during the year.
At the end of the year the labour force at the Collieries numbered 493 then and 35 men at the 'Wharf Department total 528 men.
These figures only includes the regularly employed members of the force as there were a good number of Malays and Dyaks intermittently employed in the jungle, working timber, coaling vessels, erecting building etc
The health of this labour force, and the record of its attendance at work, was satisfactory.
Mr. Mackie and his wife also visited, and in¬
spected the Collieries in March, on behalf of the Peninsular and Oriental Steamship Company, with a view to purchase.
Samples of this coal were sent to India for ana¬lysis in April, by Mr. Muckie.
Major Bullis of the Philippine Island's Service visited the Collieries in December
Messrs. The Borneo Company discontinued their shipments of small coat in March
The F. O. B price per ton of coal was reduced to $12 m April.
The rainfall for the year was 136’43 inches.
OYA.
With the exception of scabies, which has been rather prevalent, the health of the district has been good with no epidemics
Unfortunately it has been a bad year for coastal fisher folk, big catches being few and far between. Hence a shortage and corresponding increase in the amount of the salted article imported for consumption during the landas.
The new telephone instrument at the Dalat ex change has proved a great improvement, but it's installation has not overcome the. repeated troubles always experienced with the long stretch of wire to Sibu.
A wireless installation would be a very welcome boon.
The nett Revenue amounted to $23,270.92 and the nett Expenditure to $44,442.12, and exceeds the nett Revenue by $21,171.20.
Buffalo stealing has decreased. There were onlv six convictions, for this offence as against eleven the previous year
The health of the district has on the whole been good.	.
Arrangements were made with the Treasury whereby the Sarawak Government should con tribute a sum annually towards the maintenance of the Labuan Hospital.
The amount paid is at the same ratio as that contributed by the Brunei Government, and the agreement holds good for 3 years from the 1st July 1921.
A site was cleared for the new Residency bungalow. The building itself was started in April, but at the end of the year had not been com¬pleted, as had been agreed upon in the contract.
The rubber trees planted on the side of the hill facing the river were destroyed. They were neither ornamental nor profitable.
H. E Sir Laurence Guillemard and suite paid an unofficial visit to Limbang in June.
The proposed sale of His Highness the Rajah s coal concession in Brunei, and the Brboketon Colliery, to Mr J. Hatton Hall was cancelled in July.
The harvest was are excellent one.
Practically the whole of H. H. the Rajah's wild cattle, at Brooketon were caught and sold.
In January a stone image was discovered at Limbang. It created very great interest in the surrounding country and in Kuching. Prof. Dr N. J. Krom of Leiden University believes it is a Ganesha of direct Hindu origin, possibly7 dating back to the 6th or 7th century.
The total rainfall for the year was 144'74 inches.
Lawas and Trusan.
Trusan.—The Fort is in a bad state of retail; especially the prison cells. As practically n... repairs have been executed in either Law Trusan for some years, a fairly heavy exp may be anticipated in the near future. .
Owing to numerous deaths amongst the Murut population, jungle produced is not worked to the extent worthy of the district. If Dyaks could be encouraged to settle and make their homes here, far more produce would eventually find it’s way to the market. It should not be difficult to find land for them for farming, at any rate in Lawas. The scheme for starting a bazaar at Tengoa was not favoured by the Chinese, and appears to have fallen throughon this account, though no restriction has been put upon anyone opening shops if they desire to do so.
The padi planted promises to yield an excellent harvest in 1922.
Interior. -There have been no serious distur¬bances amongst the Muruts. Tai Langub of Pah Lupin, was ordered to remove to below the Fort at Trusan, but on being allowed to return to fetch his property, he took the opportunity to defy this order, and is still at large. Those who went security that he would remove have been ordered to produce him. In the event of this failing more drastic measures will be taken, as this man's pre¬sence in the interior in a menace to peace.
Extracts from Half Yearly Report
Nationality of Force.—
Malays Sikhs Sepoys Dyaks Javanese Panjab Pathan Melanau
CASES HELD IN THE COVETS.
On 1st January 1922 the. fire engines were handed over to the Municipal Department relieving eight constables for ordinary Police duty.
A small force of Sarawak Rangers and Police visited the districts of Sejingkat, Goebilt, and Sambir, on 14th March, to arrest certain undesirables wanted by the Dutch Authorities.
Your sympathy is requested, through all the long shopping hours of this week, for the young man who kicked his aunt with loathing, and hissed be- tween his teeth, “ If my aunt Ambrosia had wheels, she would be a charabanc."
MONTHLY REPORTS.
SADONG
General.— Early in the month the exhibits, chiefly Land Dyak curios, which had been collected locally [or the Malaya-Borneo Exhibition were sent to Kuching en route for Singapore.
A mechanic named Abun bin Resat, who has been trained locally at the Colliery, was kindly, supplied by the Manager to take charge of the steam launch Vava.
A large number of Sebangan Malays and Dyaks came up during the month and demanded payment for the timber they supplied early last year to the Kuching Steam Sawmills Company through one Sapong, I told them that their claims were still sub judice in Kuching.
There being a large number of Chinese vagrants in this District I decided to have them rounded up. It transpired on enquiry that the majority are ex¬Colliery coolies who were sent back to Kuching on completion on their contracts, but were brought here almost immediately afterwards by the local Chinese traders to work off credit given them while working at the Mines. A number of these Chinese have now been punished for living among the Dyaks. after which they are to obtain work locally, or go elsewhere. During the month I inspected the Bazaar shop houses the majority of which are in a very dirty and dilapidated condition. I instructed the Chinese to pull down or remove a number of leaf out-houses adjoining the main buildings. I also or¬dered some Malays living in the Bazaar to return to the Kampong
On the 16th I sailed for Gedong in the s. I. Vava, accompanied by Native Officer Haji Mahidin and Forester Abang Daud. On reaching Gedong 1 em¬barked the Tua Kampong, Abang Samsudin, and proceeded on up the Gedong river stopping at Kuala Engkuan for the night.
The following morning we pushed on up-river to Bali Ringin where were there are a number of small Chinese shops and a Chinese rubber plantation- This was as far as the launch could go so I decided to land there and visit the Melikin Dyaks.
The tracks through the Milikin country having recently been cleared and we were able to visit most of the important houses between Merbau and Tam- poi managing to teach Orang Kaya Nyami’s house at Sungei Tampoi late the same evening. These Dyaks seem a very happy and orderly people and had very few complaints to bring forward except possible interference by the Sea Dyaks, whom they quite rightly wish to keep out of their part of the country. Their padi, which was just being harvested, was looking very good The following morning we left for Kuala Tampoi where the launch was awaiting us, and proceeded on down river reaching Semunjan the same afternoon.
Dresser Mohamad Zaidell arrived from Kuching on the 22nd to relieve Dresser Suhaili in charge of the local Hospital Many Sea Dyaks applied for treatment for yaws by N. A. B. injection; this treat- ment is becoming very popular locally.
Owing to a misunderstanding, Abang Bujang of Sebangan attempted to collect the Semrah Exemp¬tion Tax. This I find should be collected by Haji Semail; the matter has now been satisfactorily settled.
Corporal Wan Ali, who has been in charge of the local Police Force for many years, and who was at one time pensioned off but afterwards re-engaged, has now been permitted by order of His Highness the Rajah to retire for good with a gratuity of four
months full pay. This will be carried out at the end of next month when P. C. No. 2.	Awang Bujang,
who is being promoted to Lance Corporal, will take over charge of the local Police Force in Wan Ali's Stead.
Mr. J. B Archer called in here on his way to Sibu on the 9th . Wireless mechanic Mahli, having been granted the month's leave, was relieved by mechanic Kontol from Kuching on the same date.
Court -A number of Chinese vagrants were im-prisoned for living among the Dyaks and the Dyak chiefs fined for harbouring them. Chin Quee, a Colliery coolie, was convicted and sentenced to eighteen months imprisonment in Kuching Gaol for theft at the Colliery. This is his third conviction. Tar bin Hassan was sentenced to nine months im¬prisonment for theft in Kampong Gumpih, this being bis second conviction. Lau Ka Cho was punished for attempting to abscond from the Col¬liery. Bujang bin Merali and Tusin bin Usin were imprisoned for breach of contract. A number of Dyaks were fined for breaches of the Forest Re¬gulations. A partnership dispute between Goh Keng Choon and Goh Kim Choon Chop Keng Huat was settled by arbitration. The usual number of debt cases were dealt with and in the Native Court two women were lined for tazir
forest. -The Forest Guards inspected jelutong tapping at Gedong, Ensingai and Sebangan, and detected a number of breaches of the Regulations  tite Forest receipts and entries in the cash books Were all checked to dale.
P. If’ D. - The old leaf attap boat shed collapsed toward the end of the month It is contemplated erecting a larger and more permanent. building to take its place with a view to Housing the s I Vava as well as the Government boats A small plank house with belian roof was erected during the mouth for the use of the mechanic of the s. l. Vava, and the old leaf Police Barracks were pulled down
The prison gang, averaging 23 men, was employed white-washing the various Government buildings, filling in swampy parts of the ornamental ground, clearing drains and raising the water pipe-line from the Colliery to the Wharf.
Shipping.— Five steamers and one schooner cleared with cargoes of coal during the month.
The Trade Returns are as follows:—
April.
General.—The Principal Medical Officer arrived on the 1st in the s. s. Alice Lorraine to inspect the local hospital mid work of the dresser; he sailed again tuo days later. Other passengers by the Alice Lorraine were Mr. S. V Down and Mr, R. XV. Lowman, who came over on jelutong business
During the month the Tua Kampong of Tebekang, Gnmpib, Gedong and Sebangan paid in the Exemp- tion tax, and a start was made with the collection of the Dyak tax through the various tuai rumah.
A number of small Chinese traders were granted permission to open shops at Padang Peropok, on the Semunjan right hand branch, and Bali Ringgin in the Gedong river. These places having been the site of Chinese settlements for many years.
The Land Dyak chiefs of Tebekang, Kerosin, Pichin and Melikin came down during the month to receive payment for the curios they supplied for the Malaya-Borneo Exhibition, and to make arrange¬ments about the payment of this year’s tax.
On the 24th the small son of a Chinese, named Yeo Ah Seng living at Ensingai, was taken by a crocodile, and the body had not been recovered at the end of the month.
Having received orders from His Highness the Rajab to do duty in Kuching, I left Native Officer Haji Mohidin in charge of the District, and a tiled fdr Kuching on the 21st and was still away at the end of the month
Good Friday on the 14th and Easter Monday on the 17th were observed as public holidays
The s 8. Chee Foo, Captain Thirwell, arrived from Hong Kong to bunker'nn the 18th, and sailed for Telok Serabang to load timber two days later
Courts. — There was very little Court work during the month.
Mat bin Jalil. Ali bin Jalil, Salleh bin Chandi and Tosen bin Musip were imprisoned for breach of agreement. Lee Ah Thiam and Sim Ah Soon were fined for living among the Sebangan Dyaks and Dungan was fined for harbouring Chinese vagrants. The usual number of debt cases were dealt with.
Forest.—Early in the month the Kuching Forester, Ripin. was sent over by the Conservator to settle the Ensingai-Sampun jelutong boundary dispute. The local Forest Guards inspected jelutong tapping in the Sebangan and Seinunjan They detected some Dyaks felling jnngkar trees and working jelu¬tong without permits in the Sim-mjan, these men have since been fined.
P IK. D.—Sufficient timber having been collected, work was commenced on the new clerk’s house: The roof of the Native Officer’s house, which being of leaf is constantly needing repairs, was stripped and fitted with belian attaps,- the frame work having originally been constructed with this in view.
The pipe line, which have sunk into the swamp alongside the colliery road, was raised and the prison gang, averaging 25 men, was employed on the up keep of the Kampung roads, clearing out the re¬servoir and laying out the site for the new clerk's house.
Shipping.—Ten steamers and four schooners en¬tered and cleared with cargoes of coal during the month.
The Trade Returns are as follows:—
SADONG COLLIERY.
April.
The gross out-put of coal produced from the mines
during the month was 1,369.08 tons; 450 tons of
this was consumed by our boilers, and the balance
of 919 08 tons delivered to the wharf for export.
The shipments for the month were as follows: —
The balance of coal in stock at the end -of the month was 2,869.02 tons.
Geological conditions continued very disturbed below ground in Nos. 8 & 9 mines. Old workings were struck in the pillar-working section of the former mine on the West side. It is surmised that these workings belong to the old Blacksmith’s mine, which was abandoned about 32 years ago, but it is difficult to confirm the accuracy of this as there were no survey records of mine workings kept IN those early pioneering days of local coalmining.
The coal in the upper seam mine was normal and fair drivages were obtained in the new mines.
The Principal Medical Officer paid a visit of in-spection to the Collieries early in the month.
Mr. D. Evans left by the s. s. Alice Lorraine on the 18th for medical treatment at the Kuching Hospital. The s. s. Che Poo arrived the same day, about 8 p. m and left again on the morning of the 20th, with 301 tons of bunker coal
The rainfall for the month was 12 45 inches. Nearly 6 1/2 inches of this fell on the evening of the 17th, and was responsible for a considerable amount of damage.
J. W. EVANS,
Manager.
SIMANGGANG.
March.
The District Officer returned to the station on the 9th instant.
Malays and Dyaks have started planting sago at Engkilili, behind the Malay Kampong. The land there is very suitable, and it is hoped that others will follow their lead.
There have been a number of complaints, by the up-river pepper planters, of pepper vines being des¬troyed; out of seven complaints there are nearly 400 vines destroyed. It is, unfortunately, difficult to get proof in such cases ; three planters took action but they had not a vestige of proof. In some cases the planters have not even reported their vines cut, as they know that they can prove nothing.
Tuanku Ali, Inspector of Schools in the 2nd Division, held examinations at all the schools, and reports a satisfactory percentage of passes.
The contingent of Dyaks for Singapore left on the morning of the 22nd instant for Lingga, the District Officer left by the midday tide the same day.
Wan Laham, a prisoner who escaped from jail here in October last year and who was caught by the Dutch Authorities, escaped from his guards while Being brought to Lubok Antu to be handed over; he bad not been caught up to the end of the month.
There has been a great deal of petty thieving going on in the bazaar. On the 25th a shop-keeper reported that ten pikuls of his jelutong were stolen the previous night; the thieves took advantage of the heavy rain to drown any noise they made.
The Court Writer of Lingga reports that a Dyak living at Slanjan was pierced in the side by a pig trap supposed to have been set by himself
Abang Adeng. Native Officer, was transferred to Lubok Antu and Abang Zin returned to Simanggang.
The Court Writer of Pusa reports that on the morning of the 29th P. C. Siew was found to have been murdered during the night, the Government safe was broken in and $750 in silver stolen. The murderer or murderers appear to have been well ac¬quainted with Pusa Fort, and also evidently knew that there was a large sum of money in the safe due to the Malay tax having been paid in during the month.
The Court Writer of Kabong reports that the fishing season has slatted very well nearly every pengireh giving a return of $10 in one neap tide.
On the 31st Mr. H. E. Outfield and I left for Engkilili by the s. 1. One arriving there at midday. There were no cases for hearing and in the evening- we walked to Murup.
Court.—There have been a number of cases be fore the Courts during the month, the only ones
calling for mention being Mawat, who deserted from the Rangers and was arrested at Merenggai's house Saribas. He was sent to the Officer Com¬manding Sarawak Hangers to be dealt with. Bungok an Ulu Dyak, was charged with and admitted com- milting an unnatural offence, he was sent to the Principal Medical Officer for examination, as he appeared to be insane.
P W. D—The prisoners finished clearing the cattle plain, weeded and repaired the Sabu road also the road from Sabu to Brayun.
The following are the Trade Returns for the Division:—
LOWER REJANG.
March.
REJANG.
Court.—There has been a fair amount of work in both Courts
Ho Ku Hu. Ho Kun Bon and Chin Guan were found guilty of being in possession of an outfit for use in counterfeiting subsidiary coins. They, were sentenced to 3 years, I year and 5 years imprison¬ment respectively by order of the Resident 3rd Division. Chin Guan was previously’ imprisoned in Sibu for a similar offence.
P. W. D. The prison gang, averaging 16.33, has been engaged in general up-keep of the Station.
General. - On the 7th the Assistant Conservator _ of Forests arrived by s. l. Mermaid.
Together with Mr. Hallett, I left by s. 1. Mermaid for Mulu, via Daro, on the 9th, leaving Mr. Hallett at Daro
I returned from Matu together with Mr. Hallett late in the evening of the 30th.
S. A Cheyne, the 2nd Clerk, has replaced J. C. de Rozario as Court Writer, the latter being transferred lo Matu to take the place of Ng Fong Seng, who was recommended by the Principal Medical Officer to be replaced.
Trade.—The foreign trade returns for the mouth are as follows:
MATU.
Court. There were rather a large number of cases before both Courts, including the usual edition of sago land disputes.
P. IF. D. - The prison gang, averaging 5 in num¬ber, has been employed generally on the Station and also in constructing a leaf attap house for the Government cowman.
General.—I arrived from Rejang via Daro on the 10th, s. 1. Mermaid returning to Daro the same day.
A petition was received from the Chinese asking that the sago blubors, constructed by the Malays in the Kampongs, be removed; also another from a large number of the people of kampong Bruit asking for the removal of Haji Ahmat from his Tua Kampongship Both these petitions were, referred to the Resident 3rd Division.
The Native Officer, Penghulu Abang Adeng, pro- ' needed to Bruit to examine the Samangka lands, on instructions received from the Resident 3rd Division, the result of a large number of the Bruit people
having petitioned regarding the redivision by the  tua kampung, of lands already planted up.	
On the 18th the Assistant Conservator of Forest  arrived from Daro; being temporarily incapacitated  suffering from poisoned feet. He left for Oya on the 26th and returned again on the 29th.
I returned to Rejang, together with Mr. Hallett, on the 30th.
Trade : — The Trade Returns for the month are as follows:
P. W. D — The prisoners, averaging 3 in number, have been employed generally on the Station.
General. — I called in on my way to Matu on the 9th leaving the Assistant Conservator of Forests.
Mr. Hallett was employed in surveying the Daro Forest Reserve until he left for Matu suffering from poisoned feet.
Trade:—The Trade Returns for the month are as follows.—
R. D. ST. J. HORTON,
Officer-in-Charge
BINTULU.
March.
Court work at Bintulu has been very light this month. The father of a small Malay girl has brought a very serious charge against a Chinaman winch is being investigated.
On the 16th, accompanied by Native Officer Abang .Nag a and the Court Writer, I left for Tatau taking the bandong and buah anggan boats, the barong being lung out of commission. We arrived after ft tiring trip of 15 hours. .
The Dyaks for the most part were still busy harvesting, hut there was a fair amount of Court work nevertheless. Two cases of incest were proved, and a third, a Punan case, was adjourned.
I went up-river and stayed one night in Tama Gran’s house in the Kakus and one night at Penghulu Bunyuh’s house in the Anap. Reports of the padi crop vary, but all have suffered greatly from the damage done by pigs, which arc said to be more numerous than for years past, and are so hungry owing to the scarcity of jungle fruits, that they root up and jump over fences to get at the padi.
The Punans asked to be allowed to move further up the Kakus, but instead of this being allowed they were ordered to move further down river to a place which was pointed out to them.
A tongkang was being loaded with belian logs for the Sarawak Oilfields, Ltd., but owing to a heavy fresh in the river and the fact that the logs were some depth under water and mud, the loading was most difficult and must have proved rather costly. There is a large quantity of belian logs both in the . round and square, and I hear that two junks are expected shortly to take consignments to China. There is also a large stock of sawn belian in the bazaar in the form of kassaus, paks and planks.
I found that the Tatau Chinese were in debt to Dyaks to the extent of several thousands of dollars. In not one case had a document been made or securi¬ty given. One shop-keeper owes six different Dyaks sums of money, amounting in all to over $600. In another case a shop-keeper has borrowed some $950
from three Dyaks, the sum of $650 from one man alone. They may possibly pay higher interest than is allowed but they have given no security, which is a poor game for the lender I have given the Chinese two weeks time in which to make documents in Court showing security or to repay the debts in  full. This is only as laid down in Order XVI, 1912.
A contract for $25 given to repair the Police Barracks, and the necessary wood was supplied. This building is in a very rotten state. The coolies white-washed the Government buildings, built a small boat shed and did a certain amount of clear¬ing.
The clerks were kept busy checking weights and measures, nearly all the datchings were found to be false.
Kong Guan has retired and Ah Chin has taken his place as clerk.
In order to get a favourable wind to return by I left Tatau at night but meta very severe wind and rain storm mar the month of the river. The bandong, none too safe at any time, very nearly sunk. Everything in both boats got wet and we did not reach Bintulu until noon the following day, the 26th
The Bintulu Chinese, in complaining of the irregu¬lar steamship service to this Port and the excessive freights charged by the Steamship Company, have asked that, in the event of their coming to an arrangement with Chop Soon Bee of Singapore, whether a steamer making a round trip passage Singapore—Bintulu, possibly Balingean and via Sibir, would he permitted. The Chinese coinplain that the Steamship Company only send a steamer when it suits them to do so, and not necessarily when there is cargo They are thus delayed in getting returns far their produce, and on account of the irregularity often lose on consignments through the fluctuation of the market. The matter has been referred to the Resident of the Division. Personally I do not think anything can be arranged, as there is not stability enough amongst the Chinese here.
The channel marks at the mouth of the river were changed during the month, a continual fresh in the river had considerably shifted the previous fairway.
The Exemption tax of the District has been prac-tically all paid in.
April.
I left on the 18th to visit the up river sub-stations. At Pandan certain Punans seemed dissatisfied with their Tuah, Tama Jaw, and wished to split up and put themselves under one Tama Tiro. This was not allowed, but an election was held and, as Tama Jaw was-re-elected, the dissatisfied party was obliged to recognize him as Tuah and were told to act accordingly.
There was a fair Amount of Court work at Pandan a case of incest was proved. There was a case of a row in a Dyak house, where weapons were drawp which created a begoh the parties concerned were fined as was also the tuai rumah, There was one case of assault and several others of.no great impor¬tance.
Partial arrangements were made for the rebuilding of the Court house. All the wood, with the excep¬tion of the wall planks, will be supplied by kampong people and Dyaks and will be of belian. The only parts of the old building that can be used again are the posts.
At Labang I saw the oil, concerning which I have
already communicated with His Highness the Rajah
and the Manager of the Sarawak Oilfields Ltd., and
a small sample of which I sent to the latter some
time ago. By Stirring the and in the river bed close
to the bank the oil wells up. but it is impossible for
me to get a good sample as no great quantity comes
to the surface at one time.
The people of Labang are still grieving over the
entry of Penghulu Merdan and 40 doors of Dyaks
into’the S. Labang. and the old Tuah Kampong,
Jarah, is absolutely irreconcilable.
At Tubau there was very little to do, but most of
the Kayan and Penan tax was collected.
The Kayans bad arranged a small tuba fishing
which, however, turned out an absolute failure for
lack of sufficient tuba.
I returned to Bintulu on the 16th.
Referring to my report for March, wherein I men-
tioned the complaint of the Chinese concerning the
irregular Steamship service, and their hint of wish-
ing to arrange with Soon Bee of Singapore to take
their produce. I referred the matter to the Resident
of the Division and he strongly advised against this
step being taken. There certainly is not enough
cargo here to warrant Soon Bee sending a vessel,
even at regular intervals, from Singapore to this
Port unless, perhaps, a sawmill should be erected
here, when the export of belian and other timber
might make it worth while. There is nothing else
here except jelutong and rattans, and when the price
of jelutong is low, the Chinese will not ship it, and
a vessel might come and get no cargo at all.
Outside communication has been very bad lately,
and Singapore papers containing news from Match
31st only arrived here on April 30th and between
March 23rd and April 29th only one mail was des-
patched from this Station, and that by schooner
on the 15th. between March 21st and the end of
tins month no steamer has called here for cargo.
Ou the 27th, the eve of the Bulan Puasa, the
.customary salute of 7 guns was fired from the Fort.
One Dagong, a Malay, who had been suffering
from fever for some time and apparently lost his
reason, committed suicide on the 28th. He jumped
into the river and, swimming out some distance,
sank. Boats put out at once to rescue him, ami
although he appeared on the surface once, had sunk
again before he could be reached. His body was
recovered 36 hours later.
The Bintulu-Tatau telephone line has been atten-
ded to during the month, but is nevertheless still
in a hopeless state.
Work on the Forest Checking Station has pro-
gressed and the building should be ready for occupa-
tion in two weeks’ time.
HENRY H. KORTRIGHT.
District Officer.
MIRI.
April.
The usual number of cases came before the Courts.
Tan Ming was sentenced to penal servitude for life
for murder. Pang Wong, the leader of the “ sam-
seng ” here and of all the riots and strikes, v as
sentenced to a year’s imprisonment and deportation. 
Fines and fees amounted to $464.25.
I returned from Singapore on the 13th instant  with the Kayans, and am sorry to say that Tama Matu, a Leppu Tau Kenyah, died the night before  arrival aud was buried at sea.
On the 17th instant the Resident 4th Division paid
a visit to Baram, returning again on the 23rd nist.
His Highness the Rajab paid a visit here from the
20th to the 23rd instant.
Dr Andrew arrived on the 12th instant to re-
lieve the General Manager of S. O . Ltd Major
Benjamin, who proceeded on home leave on the 24th
instant.
The Auditor, Mr. Calvert, arrived by p. s. Adeh
on the 18th instant and was still here at the end of
the month.
A heavy thunderstorm occurred on the night of
the 3rd instant and an oil tank at derrick No. 8 was
set on fire by lightening hut was promptly put out.
H. E. the Governor of B. N. B. arrived by the
s. s. Kajang on the 16th instant and spent the day-
ashore.
Chan Swee Sang, who was concerned in the
strike in March but was cleared from all blame by
the Court, was again found holding meetings in the
Bazaar. He was sent to Kuching to be deported.
Rainfall was 8’90 inches.
BARAM
March.
The Resident returned here on the 8th instant and
was accompanied by Mrs. Douglas and Mrs. T. 8.
King.
There was a great deal of Court work to be got
through, but no very serious cases were brought up.
Arrears in the Probate Court and Court of Requests
were wiped off and affairs brought up to date.
On 14th the Resident visited the Kayan villages in
the Lower Baram and Tutau rivers returning again
on 15th The same evening news was received
from Miri that a serious riot amongst the Chinese-
bad broken out there.
The Resident and party left for Miri at 6 a.m. the
following morning.
On 20th Penghulus Tama Wan Bayer Tingling
Saong, Tama Kuleh A rang and Ballan Deng with
60 followers left for Miri en route for Singapore to
attend the Malaya-Borneo Exhibition, and inciden-
tally to perforin Wore H. R. H. the Prince of Wales.
The prisoners have remade the road between the
front and back bazaars and partially relevelled the
Fort hill.
The Malay Court House was finished and a Malay
contractor started work on the new Hospital aud
Dresser’s quarters.
The prisoners also started the annual white-
washing of the Government buildings.
The rainfall for the month was 8'04 inches.
R. S. DOUGLAS,
Resident 4th Division.
BROOKETON COLLIERY
March.
The gross out-put of coal amounted to 1,490 tons, and of this 707.5 tons were consumed by our boilers, and the balance of 782 5 tons was sent to wharf.
Coal shipped to Labuan by s. 1. L’Aubaine and lighters amounted to 762 tons, and 94 tons were supplied to p s. Adeh and local launches.
Goal sales at Labuan totalled 490 tons, of which 480 tons were taken by Messrs. The Straits Steamship Company.
The balance of coal in stock at the end of the month was 1,036 tons.
Everything went well in both mining and me¬chanical departments. Cleaning of boilers and re¬pairs to machinery were carried out.
The s. l. L’Aubaine was laid up for three days for cleaning her boiler and general overhaul.
The rainfall for the month was 3'75 inches.
S. W. HARRIS,
Acting Manager.
LIMBANG
March.
Court.—One Jambul WAS fined for creating a nui¬sance by depositing a dead crocodile, on which he had received the reward, in the swamp opposite the down-river Kampongs. Pangenran Amjah was fined for theft of sago, or in default a term of imprison¬ment. Leniency was shown him as he had had recent domestic troubles. Pangeran Draman and Lusin were each sentenced to one month's imprison¬ment for Contempt of Court. Mail and Gani of Merasam were fined for creating a disturbance, and three quarrelsome Chinese women were, each bound over in $10 surety to keep the peace for six mouths.
P. C Jaya and Pte. Nyaru, S. R., were sent upto Madalam to arrest one Langga a Dyak who had re¬fused to answer a Government summons.
General.—Mr. P. M. Adams, A. D. O, Lawas and Trusan, returned to his district on the 3rd I was away st Brooke ton from the 14th to 17th. Here a deputation of the Hokien Chinese met me and com¬plained against one Gani having encroached on their cemetery reserve. I personally examined the area in dispute, and ordered Gani to remove to his former boundary, I told the Chinese that the cemetery must be enclosed with a belian fence within three months.
The Brunei Government have now removed the wireless stay posts, which had been fixed on the side of the road, and the fence has been put buck to its original position. The wireless masts have also been dismantled.
1 went over to Lawns from the 24th to the 28th. The s. s. L’Aubaine towed the Djamil from Tanjong Sapoh to Kuala Punang slid Kuala Lawas to Puloh Chermin The A. D. O. met me at Punang and we walked to Lawas. On the Sunday the A. D. O., with M. G. M. Allman and myself, walked over part of the area for winch Messrs. Vanscolina Co. are to be granted a license to work timber.
Tama Suling came down from Madalam He complained against Manang Manggris. The latter and a Chinaman named Kong Thai were severely censured for tlieir high handed behaviour.
The mad Dyak Juak managed to escape from the Rangers barracks where he was living. It is thought he will eventually find his way back to his house in the Lubai. If recaptures he will lie sent to Kuching for medical examination.
The balance of the 5th Division exhibits for the Malaya-Borneo Exhibition were shipped to Kuching by the Adeh of the 10th.
The British Resident in Brunei, with his wife ami family, spent the night of the 12tl: here. Mrs. Eley of Labuan arrived by the MacAuthur on the 29th on a visit.
Appointments.- The following have been elected Tua Kampnng; Inchi Ahmat to Pengkalan Tarap, Ahmat to Pamukat and Pangeran Sleman to Bera- wan. All these are vice Abang Tamit, deceased.
Forest clerk Ah Tak Chia and Forest Guard Melani returned from their training in Kuching on the 21st. F. G., Melani went on to Lawas on the 24th where he is to do duty.
Shipping.—The p. s. Adeh called in twice from Kuching, and the launches Peter Duff and A dele three and four times respectively from Brunei and Labuan.
Only fifty-one buffaloes were shipped to Kuching.
The rainfall for the month is recorded as 10'74 inches, which fell on 12 days.
F. F. BOULT,
Resident 5th Division.
LAWAS AND TRUSAN.
March.
Court.—The cowman was fined for being drunk and neglecting his duty, Jenis, a vagrant who came from B. N. B., was imprisoned for living in a Tagal house, Jumaat, a Kedayan, was fined for trespass; during the case it transpired that he was an escaped prisoner from Miri, he is being detained awaiting an opportunity to send him back. Abai and Samat were imprisoned for debt and Dullah for breach of agreement A case brought by Guan Soon vs: Hok San for defiling plaintiff’s shop door during Chinese New Year festivities was dismissed owing to insuffi¬cient evidence. Twoprisoners, Ah Tai and Ah Chong, were sentenced to 3 months extra and the former given a dozen cuts, for attempting to escape from custody by removing a plank from their cell.
General.—The Resident 5th Division visited Lawas from 24th to 28th, arriving via Punang. Several matters were discussed including the intro¬duction of the Forest rules and the timber licence to be issued to the Vamco Timber Co. The Resident, accompanied by Mr. Allman and myself, walked through part of the timber stand to be included in the licence.. The Resident also visited Merapok.
A batch of ten Tagal s was sent to Miri en route tor the Singapore Exhibition.
I went to Labuan on the 20th to ship some pro¬boscis monkevs to Singapore, and returned on the 22nd
I regret to report the death of Datu Tai, a Murat chief and a member of the Council. He had been ill for some time and his death is attributed to old age, being reputed to have been over eighty.
I visited Sundar from Kith to 14th. Usman bin Kurus was elected T. K. of Awat Awat in place of Jenudin dismissed. The kampong people repaired the fence round the station There were some new applications for land on buffalo alaman, but the applicants were told that the matter would be referred  to H. H. the Rajah on his visit next month. A.
voting bull was killed at Lawas and $40 realised
on the sale of the meat. Muruts from aH parts of
the district came to attend the late Data Tai’s funeral,
and whilst under the alcoholic influence befitting
the occasion, Lakai Ukap of Pah Lupin betrayed
the whereabouts of the rebel Tai Langub. A party
has been sent to investigate and arrest some other
people accused of various crimes. Lakai Ukap is
being detained meantime.
I went to Trusan on the 30th taking all the
prisoners to clean up the station.
P. IT. D.—The jail was strengthened inside and
out. Owing to the uneven distribution of planks
the carpenter was unable to continue work on the
bridges straight through to Trusan, so has started
from the Trusan end. There is every reason to
hope that the work will completed by the end of
April.
The prisoners, who averaged 18. were employed
on the kampong and Gayah roads, the path to the
lookout hill and the O. G. Sundar. The road and
telephone line contractor for the Trusan half has
done his work well and as the Lawas contractor has
withdrawn his offer, the Trusan man has agreed to
contract for the whole way for $40 per month.
The rainfall was:—Lawas 14 21, Trusan 2111
inches.
P. M. ADAMS.
Assistant District Officer.
