Sarawak Gazette.
SATURDAY. JULY 1, 1922.
ADVANCE.
In our Correspondence columns will be found a letter entitled “Awake Sarawak" by a gentleman who calls himself “A Pensioner."
We have read this letter with the greatest in¬terest the more so because “A Pensioner" ob¬viously knows the Country of which he is writing about.
We find it extremely difficult to comment on tins letter but we think an attempt should be made and it is with diffidence that we set to work.
We suppose that “A Pensioner" had immigration
 in view when he advocates the production of
sago, coconuts, sugar, rice, pepper, tea. chinchona,
etc., on anything of a scale likely to bring big ex-
ports of these commodities.
Innovations have ever been unpopular and it is
easy to see that the Sarawak Malay or Dyak cares
very little about the quality of his jelutong or
rattan.
It takes very little energy on the part of a
native to provide himself with food and clothing.
It is probably true that the average European re-
gards the slackness and conservatism of the Malay
with astonishment often mixed with disgust, but
after all is there not. in the bottom of our hearts,
often a feeling of envy of the life of these happy
people—no thought of the morrow—no terrible
anxiety as to the probable loss of a job—no paup-
erism—it is not surprising that these people shirk
the responsibilities which they might take upon
themselves. We once heard it remarked that it
seemed a pity that the Melanaus were not forced
to increase their acreage under sago. We were
told that with a bigger area under cultivation the
export of sago flour would be greatly increased
and much profit would accrue, not only to the
Chinese merchant, but to the Melanau sago plant*
ers themselves. On the face of it this seems a
sensible suggestion but practice proves that the
Melanaus, bar a very few exceptions, will not
work more sago than is sufficient to provide for
their own needs.
We realise, of course, that there is plenty of land
in Sarawak enough to provide for a population
many times bigger than at present. If it is decided
to introduce planting and farming on a big scale,
then it will be necessary to import labour pro-
bably Javanese and Chinese. At first, so huge is
the area uncultivated, there will probably be very
little interference by these new arrivals with the
present population, but in time we suppose the
Dyaks will be compelled to abandon their waste-
ful method of padi farming.
With regard to education we feel that we are not competent to deal with such a big question. We only suggest that the late war has shown us that education, and consequent civilisation, are a very thin veneer
Experience teaches us that there are very few inhabitants of this State who care to take on the responsibilities of a Government position. It has generally been difficult to get even the most im¬portant people in the Country to give an opinion on any subject, not that they have no opinion to form, but simply because, we think, they do not court unpopularity by giving an unpopular decision. After all, who can blame them?
We do not wish it to be supposed that we are advocating the “ Thank God 1 am not like my neighbour" policy but it behaves us to beware of, making sweeping changes in order to “	raise
the development of the State to something ap¬proaching that of its neighbours	"
We suppose that most of our readers will agree with the policy put forward by “A Pensioner," and looking at the question from a big point of view we must admit that it is inevitable that Sarawak must produce her share of the world’s requirements.
It is said that a country cannot stand still—it i must either go forward or backward. Possibly this is so, but we can only hope that the advance of Sarawak will not be heralded by the wild rush of speculators but led by those who have the good of the country at heart, always remembering the weaker ones going to the wall.
Editor's Notes.
We must apologise for printing two stories
again but as no one else will send us copy what
are we to do?
Extracts from other papers always bring forth •
the exclamation "Oh. we have seen this already."
We hope our readers appreciate the stories
published. It is our aim to publish only original
ones and as this is more or less an innovation we
expect a lot of criticism. Anyway the tales are
new and, after all, that is something to their
advantage.
A second instalment of “Tropical Medicines"
will be found, the writer having recovered from
his temporary indisposition.
We have printed a letter from " K," not on
account of its literary style, but because we con-
sider that here is a subject which needs bringing
to light. Despite any deficiency in literary art it
is impossible to mask sincerity. We feel sure that
“ K ” really means what he says and that this is
a real appeal to natives to bring some idea of
sanitation and cleanliness into their daily lives.
Much could be said about this subject but most
of it would be unsavoury.
It is well nigh impossible to bring about reforms
without the assistance and co-operation of the
people themselves.
Let us hope that some of the better educated 
will realise the need of reform and, by their efforts, 
assist the Public Health Department in carrying 
out their schemes.
The Rajah Charles Brooke
Memorial Fund.
( The Editor it not responsible for the opinions of
Correspondents.}
Awake Sarawak.
LONDON,
May 1st
The Editor,
Sarawak Gazette,
Kuching.
DEAR SIR,
As I sit in retirement, endeavouring to keep in
touch with the outside world in general and the East
in particular, 1 am impressed by the feverish en-
deavour of the World to increase production with a
view to financial reconstruction after the Great War
and my mind recalls life in Sarawak.
I rend of the wonderful advance made by the Oil
Company which now appears to provide a large in-
come to the State which should steadily increase
year by year.
On the other hand I read that the Government
has reorganised both the Senior and Junior Services
granting increased pay to both, this was obviously a
primary necessity.
Fl. H. The Rajah announced at Council Negri
that the future policy of th« Government would lie
to open up Trunk Roads through the State, thus 1
feign would hope that the dawn of the advancement
of Sarawak is near
The latest news from the East contains an account
of the Malaya-Borneo Exhibition (at which Sarawak
made such an impressive display) with the fervent
hope of its Organizers that mutual benefit may ac-
crue to all Countries and States which devoted such
time and labour in ensuring its success.
Dare one hope that Sarawak will not be unres-
ponsive and that the time has now come when a
genuine effort will be made to raise the develop-
ment of the State to something approaching that of
its neighbours?
The untouched wealth of Timber is surely a field
for development, not by means of the feeble
attempts of local Chinese working under temporary
licenses, but by some Company of standing whose
bona fides should be unimpeachable. In this direc-
tion cannot the Forestry Department, although re-
cently inaugurated, produce a descriptive handbook
of the Timbers of Sarawak to be distributed world
wide, especially in Europe where there is. at pre-
sent. such a dearth of wood.
Have the Mineral Resources of the State been
thoroughly exploited?
Again the Produce of Sarawak must be improved;
in this direction a strong Chamber of Commerce,
powerfully backed by the Government, should be of
great assistance. The adulteration of produce
should lie. stopped by heavy penalties enforce 
throughout the State.
The preparation of Produce could be improved to
raise the standard to that of other producing
countries.
Why should Sarawak Rattans take so low a posi-
tion in Eastern Markets or Jelutong from Sarawak
be inferior to that from Palembang—What steps
have been taken to prevent the spread of Pepper
disease, is "black berry disease” to be accepted as
incurable or is its rapid spread due to planting of
infected vine shoots? Here is a field sufficiently
large to exercise the energies of a Chamber of Com-
merce with Government assistance.
Then as to future development, what country is
in a better position then Sarawak, at present unde-
veloped? From the F. M. S. it has had its lesson
in avoiding reliance on one or two staple industries.
It would appear to be an ideal state for the produc-
tion of Sago, Coconuts. Sugar and Rice in the vast
plains on the coast; Rice, Pepper, Tobacco, Coffee,
Rubber and Tapioca on the undulating hills inland ;
with Tea and Chincona on the slopes of mountains
of the interior. With the promise of Trunk Roads
to connect the Main Rivers at suitable spots for ship-
ment of cargoes and later the development of the
Railway, when roads are no longer adequate means
of transport, what endless possibilities the develop-
ment of Sarawak presents.
I notice with interest the development of the
administration of Kuching Town, the Municipal
Advisory Board has been granted powers to suggest
improvement in Sanitation, Housing, Public Health
etc.; if it uses its powers with discretion it should be
of inestimable assistance to the country, besides
giving the Tax-Payer some say in the expenditure
of his money. Dare one hope that this is the begin-
ning of a Legislative Council and local J. P’s. to
assist the Courts with advice on matters concerning
the communities they represent as well as their
usual duties?
Education does not seem to be making the strides
one would like to see—Church Schools are necessary
for training the sons of the wealthier classes but are
useless fur those who require to earn a livelihood
by manual labour. Vernacular Schools are required
in every Kampong and Dyak District with technical
instruction in Agriculture and Arboriculture.
Of what use to the State are "Tribal” schools with
their ridiculous military (?) training; the Chinese
Community is essentially that of trade, to what end
the beating of drums and inane marchings round a
room 20 feet square. The only visible result is a
tendency to disrespect of parents respect for whom
is the foundation on which the Social life of China
is built.
One would have thought that the essence of suc-
cessful trading would be a tolerance of the various
tribes of which the Trading Community consists; do
“Tribal" Schools assist to this end?
No! Rather let us see the foundation of an Edu-
cation department where social differences are sunk
in a common endeavour to attain respect from those
governing the State, in which a man has elected to
live, by reason of his tolerance of others and impec-
cability in Trade.
I fear my lucubrations have occupied more space
than I intended but may 1 appeal, for the good of
the country in which so many of the best years of
my life were spent, for some definite, well considered,
policy for the advancement of Sarawak?
I enclose my card
and remain, etc.
A. PENSIONER.
Buttons.
KUCHING,
9th June, 1922.
The Editor,
Sarawak Gazette,
Kuching.
DEAR SIR,
Referring to the button question again, I notice
that the writer of the letter on this subject in your
last issue states that orders have been issued to the
effect that only Government Officers may wear
these. Since 1 have always been rather hazy as to
what constitutes a Government Officer, perhaps
someone will kindly enlighten me on this point.
Some of us follow professions and may, or may
not, be on the permanent Staff. Again, arc those
entitled to wear these emblems required to do so
daily by the Government during office hours.
Yours faithfully.
CURIOUS.
CURIOUS. - We have shown your letter to S. C. S.
whose reply to your first question will be found below.
With regard to your second question the answer
is in the negative.— [Ed. S. G.
DEAR MR. EDITOR,
You ask me for my definition of a Government Officer. I suppose a Government Officer is one who has authority granted to him by the Government. You will perhaps have seen the circulars which have gone round on certain occasions. "Officers who have uniforms will wear them, others will wear white tunics with polished "S" buttons." By Government Officers I meant those who hold an appointment in the Government Service, whether Europeans or Malays. However, my letter was not intended to start H controversy but to call attention to the fact that many persons wear buttons which they are not entitled to wear I wonder what would be said if I took to wearing the buttons of the Royal Navy—or even the Sarawak Rangers' or Police bn items ?
Yours faithfully,
S.C.S
An Appeal.
Sarawak! Will you not co-operate !
To The Editor.
Sarawak Gazette.,
Kuching.
SIR,
Co-operation of the people is essential for the
success of any good which a Government tries to do
for its subjects; and the people that would heartily
and intelligently co-operate with the Government is
a pride to the latter. Will not the Sarawakians
like to be such?
The sudden and expansive development of the
Sarawak Medical department by the appointment of
several European doctors is a ci edit to al) who are
responsible for it; and the launching of the scheme,
even m spite of the present alarming universal trade
depression, is a bold and sensible act, otherwise
poverty would fan the flame of sickness. There is
need for all the doctors we are getting and Sarawak
should welcome them and be profited by their skill.
Everyone is aware of the havoc played by leprosy,.
consumption, venereal diseases and yaws. The
cause for the widespread prevalence of these diseases
m this country may be mentioned in one word—
ignorance- ignorance of the people in regard to the
elements of hygiene. and hitherto we had none to
put us right. We need not blush at our ignorance,
for every country passed through such a stage.
There is no need to describe the appalling misery
which the above-mentioned diseases produce to the
individual and to the community. Who would like
a consumptive to throw out numberless germs with
each act of coughing, and yet live in a house with no
chance of purifying the air by ventilation. Remem-
ber one consumptive in a family would have sown
sufficient disease germs before his death in almost
every one that came in close contact with him, that, 
unless the contacts are careful and live a hygienic 
life, they stand a great danger of developing the
disease themselves.
It is really a matter of surprise that the educa-
tional department has not in any country thought it
necessary to give a few sound, work-a-day element-
ary hygienic lessons, to the boys in the higher
standards at least, by people qualified to deal with
such subjects.
If our people in Sarawak learn the A. B. C. of the
Science of sanitation, they will not fail to be horror-
stricken and ashamed of the appallingly insanitary
interiors of most of the houses of the place; they
will not fail to advise their less literate brethren at
every opportunity, nor to co-operate wholeheartedly
with any or all the advice which our Health Depart-
ment may give—nay, cry for better street sanitation, 
conservancy service, back lanes, ventilated houses,
in short, anything to get rid of the curses of the .
country so as to have the benefits of the insular
climatic effects.
Even in the absence of such a training let us hope
that the educated and intelligent class of population
would co-operate with our officers of preventive,
and curative medicine, and, more than that, spread 
the idea of, and the necessity for co-operation
amongst the rest of the community.
Yours Etc.,
K. •
Courtesy.
KUCHING,
25th June, 1922.
The Editor.
Sarawak Gazette,
Kuching.
DEAR SIB,
I should be obliged if you will allow me to 
make the plain statement that the average European 
woman nowadays is not interested in the art of
etiquette or is it that she has not had the necessary
instruction. For instance, why does a lady when
meeting a gentleman invariably take no notice until
the latter has raised his hat?
Since the writer has been cut dead many times
when only trying to be courteous he takes the
liberty of inquiring.
Yours faithfully,
CURIOUS.
“CURIOUS”.—We really do not know. We have
not, however, noticed it ourself. We will try and
find a book on etiquette and answer you next month. I
Ed. S. G.] j
The Rule of the Road.
——1
The Editor,
Sarawak Gazette,
Kuching.
SIR,
I should be much obliged if you could tell me
whether there is a rule of the road in Kuching and
its outlying parts.
In the event of a collision taking place, owing to
one of the parties keeping to the (in our mind) wrong
side of the road, would the aggrieved party be en-
titled to claim for damages in the Courts?
Yours faithfully.
ROYSTON CROW.
“ROYSTON CROW”.—We are making enquiries.—
(Ed. S. G.)
“Thirteen Barrels of Brandy.’’
By
Arthur Mortimer.
“You can see it from here. They pass that
corner on their way to Almorah. The old thief!"
Drew glanced sharply at the back of the elderly
man who, standing at the window, pointed towards
the low lying town of St. Helier.
" Their it is! Glass hearse, three carriages—one
containing the minister. Rah! The length of the
procession is the width of his popularity. Old thief! ’*
“Poor chap," said Drew, quietly.
“Why poor chap?”
“One feels sorry for the dead; think of all the
wonders they will miss in the years to come.”
Le Galla turned from the window with a shrug of
disgust.
“He won’t miss much. The right place for his
drink sodden body is up there, below the tombstone.
He'll be very well there”
Drew smiled, and said: "He evidently wasn't a
friend of yours."
“He was neither friend or enemy. He was just
a thief.”
“But surely—"
" You don't understand- you don't understand,"
interrupted Le Galla irritably. " I’ll tell you though.
Thirteen years ago he was on the verge of D. T.
He was also on the verge of bankruptcy. He'd drunk
everything except his property, this very house—”
“Was his,” put in Drew
” A good house, excellent garden and three vergees
of early land."
“Worth to-day. what? Three to four thousand
pounds.”
“But not when I got it.”
“Anyway, now you have a bargain."
Le Galla shrugged his shoulders.
“Not one which you would be satisfied with,” he
said, significantly.
" Probably I should be. I'm a bit of an ass at
business.”
“I can't understand a man being that," said the
elder man quickly. “A man may be unfortunate,
as I have been, but foolish or careless in business,
I can't understand it. But see., I'll tell you. The
position was this. He wanted money; wanted it
badly. I offered to take his place and pay him a high
yearly rental provided he made the property over to
me at his death. I banked upon what seemed to
me an absolute certainty. He was drinking himself
rapidly to death, mind. He could not, 1 thought
then, last another couple of years. I might pay him
a few hundreds. Even if 1 paid for three years,
which was improbable, the place would be cheap.
Cheap for three years, mark that! I’ve paid for thir-
teen years! For ten years he’s robbed me! So
I speak the truth when I say he was a thief!"
Drew thought: “Many outspoken people might
suggest that you also were something of a thief. "
Aloud, he said: “Hard luck."
“Hard luck! I should think it was hard luck."
“Please, sir," said a servant, from the door, “a
carter has caller! he says he’s come from the resi-
dence of the late Mr. Le Renard, he's brought thir-
teen barrels of brandy.”
“What!” cried Le Galla, leaping from his chair
into the middle of the room.
“He wants to know where he's to put them "
“Put them—put them! Here, wait a minute!
Excuse me Mr. Drew.”
Le Galla dashed through the door and up the
passage with long strides.
Drew lit a cigarette and waited. Something had
gone wrong, he felt. Yet, for the life of him, he
could not help smiling.
In less than live minutes Le Galla returned. A
slight smile played about the corners of his avaricious
mouth.
“ He wasn't quite such a thief as I thought, ” he
said.
I don’t follow," replied Drew.
•' Naturally. Well. He was a dipsomaniac, and
consequently I used to send him what he liked best,
a barrel of brandy every year as an Easter offering.”
'* That was generous," remarked Drew, sarcasti-
cally.
“ No, it was business.”
" He too was businesslike, for he has sent you
back your gift untouched."
Le Galla nodded.
“ Something like Ibsen’s drunkard in ‘ The Enemy
of the People ', the sanest of them all."
“ I’ve got my brandy back ; that’s all I care. It’s
good stuff Not post-war, too weak to come out of
the bottle. You could drive a car with it. Come
along We'll drink a requiem.”
Drew followed his host down to a cellar where,
by the flickering light of a candle, Le Galla opened
one of the casks.
With a look of pleasurable anticipation, he held
two glasses to the flowing tap. He filled them
liberally and passed one to Drew.
“ Now, a warm reception to the dear departed ! "
He raised his glass and tipped the contents into
his mouth.
" Ough!" he bent forward and spat the liquid
out onto the cellar floor.
" What’s wrong? ”
"It's water!" cried Le Galla. "Water! The
old thief. Oh, the damned old thief."
Outbreaks of Fire in Kuching.
On the 17th, about 7 a. m., a fire broke out at
No. 19, Bishops Gate Street.
The alarm was given and the Fire Brigade anti
Police turned out. The engine, however, was not
needed. It appears that a small Chinese boy put a
lighted joss stick through a crack in a wall dividing
an empty room on the other side. Some loose paper
became ignited and the fire ran up the beams.
The lad was hailed before the Superintendent of
Police who severely admonished the lad and pointed
out to him the error of his stays.
The alarm was given again on the 19th at 12.30
n. in. when it was reported that part of the Kuching
Steam Saw Mill premises was on fire. The out-
break appears to have originated in a kitchen and
quickly spread. The employees of the Sawmill very
pluckily scaled the roof and tore off the leaf attaps.
The fire was eventually put out without the
assistance of the engine. We understand that the
damage is not very extensive. A party of 99
Sarawak Rangers under Lieut. Clark and some
Police under Mr. Lang proceeded to the spot by
boat to, order to render assistance if required.
Another fire was reported on the 19th about 9 p. m.
in the Government Workshops but proved to be
but the glare caused by some red hot cinders which
had been left in a tub. The Police had some,
difficulty in managing the huge crowd which assem-
bled but eventually the scare subsided.
The Supt. of Police inform us that on each occa-
sion, he found that his men turned out with great
promptitude.
NOTES.
(June.)
His Highness the Rajah returned from his
visit North on the 29th May, accompanied by
j Mr. F. A. W. Page-Turner. We regret to say\
however, that His Highness was compelled to
I obtain medical advice on arrival and later on
i went to the Grange.
His Highness attended the Government
Offices for the first time on the 19th.
MRS. H. A. Adams and Mr. K. H. Gillan have
both been at the Grange during the month
suffering from fever We are glad to say that
they are both out again by now.
Mu. C. S. Griffiths had an unfortunate acci-
dent on the 3rd whilst riding a bicycle along
the Rock Road When just past the Club his
bicycle skidded, and Mr Griffiths was thrown
into the ditch sustaining a broken collar bone-
and minor wounds on his face.
He was removed to the Grange in an-
ambulance and has made a very quick recovery.
WE are not certain to what use the late
Chinese Court is being put to at present, but
we would draw the attention of the authori-
ties to the mass of fish and other stuff which
is dried on the ground inside the railings sur-
rounding the building.
We feel sure that this land was not inten-
lied to lie a drying ground for Chinese. Even
if the building is not used, could not the gates
be locked and the grounds kept in a condition
suitable to such a building.
ON the s s. Kuching, which arrived on the
3rd were Mr A Mrs. A. E. Lawrence and child.
We  welcome Mrs. Lawrence to Sarawak
and hope that she will like Mukah, to which
station she and her husband proceeded on
the 7th by s. s. Alice Lorraine.
BY the same vessel Dr. J. G. Reed and Dr.
 E. J. O’Driscoll were passengers.
The former has been gazetted as Divisional
 Medical Officer and the latter at Lady Medi-
 cal Officer and Pathologist. At present both
 are doing duty in Kuching.
			—
His Highness the Rajah gave a garden
 party on the 23rd.
Unfortunately the rain came on but the
guests assembled in the Astana where dan-
I ring and cinematograph pictures were enjoyed
until nearly 9. p. in.
WE bear that the Land and Survey Depart-
ment have purchased the steam launch
Ringit formerly owned by the Borneo Com-
pany Limited.
THE P. W. D. has much work off hand at present. The Power Station for the electric lighting system is being erected at Sungei Gartak. We understand that work is pro¬gressing most satisfactorily.
New lines for Prison Mandores are being built close at hand whilst repairs to wharves are being effected.
THE nine remaining ponies were shipped across river on the 25th. They will be kept at the Astana Farm until early next year.
A most successful dance was given at the Grange, by Mrs. Stennit, on the 24th to some twenty guests. Dancing was kept up until 1 a. m. The ballroom was charmingly de¬corated.
NEWS reaches ns that the new Court House and Rest House in Sibu are progressing apace.
Both were badly needed. The old Court Room in Fort Brooke is being converted into offices. It would be interesting to have a his¬tory of all the events which have taken place in this room. The Fort was attacked by Lintong and Kanowit Dyaks on 13th May, 1870 and traces of hacks made on the belian sides with sharp weapons can still be seen. Un to 1914 the whole business of the Government was done in the Fort but in 1915 attached Trea¬sury offices were built. The land in front of the Fort has been fast falling away although in the last couple of years it seems to have stopped, or at least little land has been lost.
DRY rubber harvested at Sungei Tengah Estate during May amounted to 71,000 lbs.
New Wireless Telegraph Rates.
Telephone Complaints.
We publish the following notifications which arc in the Sarawak Government Gazette: this month for the benefit of the public.
From 1st July, 1922, the rate per word for all telegrams between Sarawak and Singapore will be 52 cents.
Since the early morning call has been abolished it has become difficult to locate faults, especially as the semiskilled labour employed at the Ex¬change cannot be expected to follow' methods of testing in use in other countries. The Manager would be grateful if subscribers who have any complaints at any time about their telephone in¬struments would send a chit addressed to the Tele¬graph Office as soon as possible stating nature of complaint and giving the time and date.
Kuching Races.
A meeting was held in the Resident’s Office on the 13th to discuss the preliminary arrangements in connection with the proposed Race Meeting in August.
Those present were Messrs. A. B. Ward, G. C. Gillan, C. Fenwick, W. E. Le G. Clark, J. B. Archer, P. M. Adams, R. E. Le Sueur, P. IL
1 Hayward and Datu Muda.
Mr. G. C. Gillan was voted to the chair.
After some discussion it was decided to hold a race meeting in August and to send a circular round asking those who wished to take ponies to apply for them at once.
Mr. P. M. Adams said that H. H. The Rajah had most kindly offered to allow the ponies to be sold at actual cost price and not including the expenses incurred by the purchaser in B. N. B. He said that 1 the cost would work out at $100 a head.
Mr. J. B. Archer was unanimously elected Honor¬ary Secretary and was instructed to prepare circulars at once.
The ponies would be run in classes, two or three, according to the mi inker taken and the entrance fees would be $10 a race, 'There would be two I races for each class, the first a handicap for height and the second a handicap on the form shown in the first race.
The draw’ for ponies was fixed at one week from date.
In connection with the Race Meeting there will be the usual selling sweeps. These will consist of 100 tickets on each race at $2 per ticket. The Committee of the Sarawak Club are to be asked to grant the use of the Sarawak Club for the drawing and selling of the sweeps and all owners of horses or purchasers of tickets will be admitted to the drawing which will take place the evening before the Races.
As time is so short it will not be possible to send the sweep lists round to the Outstations, but those resident outside Kuching, are requested to accept this notification, and if interested and desirous of purchasing tickets should communicate as soon as possible with Mr. F. G. Day who has kindly under¬taken to run the sweeps. There will probably lie seven races altogether.
As there appears to be sure misapprehension we now inform our readers that the race meeting this year will not be a very grand affair. There is neither the time nor opportunity to arrange a big meeting. The idea is to hold a meeting, even if the details are rather hurried, in order to get owners and others interested in the Sport and to give the ponies a chance of showing what they can du. The prizes will not be big and no one is expected to spend large sums in preparing either the ponies or the ground.
A meeting of owners will be called shortly in order to elect a Committee. If the races are a success, and we feel sure they will be if everybody helps, we hope to see a better arranged meeting next year when time will permit of serious training and proper arrangements being made.
“The Best Possible Value
tor Cash.”
We have received a catalogue from a well-known
emporium in Singapore. It is not often that we
give publicity to such literature, but on this occasion
we cannot help giving this deserving firm a little
apace in our columns. Some of the goods mentioned
in their catalogue are in many ways unique, and we
feel sure that our leaders should have an opportunity
of sampling some of these undoubted bargains.
We would recommend the excellent bedstead
which is  erected in a moment, perfectly rigid and
cannot tip up at sides or ends.” This is just the
thing we have all been looking for. Others probably,
besides ourself, have experienced those wretched bed-
steads which always contrive to tip up and deposit
oneself on the floor. We notice that there is no
mention of a non-revolving bedstead. Then again
we come across a pair of gabardine tennis trousers
which the advertisers naively remark are “ Made to
measure—made to fit” In the furniture depart-
ment we are told that we can buy “ A heavy good
looking Stair Rod with a splendid appear-
ance” for the small sum of $2.95.” With a little
Aozora rubbed in these good looking articles are fit
for any home. For those requiring toilet requisites
“ Dinkie, the Dainty Deodorant " is highly recom-
mended whilst the “ Impervus Canvas Cabin
Lidy an indispensable article for every
traveller ” will he appreciated by those going home
and is certainly exceedingly cheap at $2.25.
We cannot but admire the optimism of those
responsible for the Currency Note Case which is
made to prevent notes slipping out " You simply
open the case, lay your notes in it and close it.
They will be quite safe. "
There is a large range of pel fumes to chose from.
We feel curious about ” Courvoisier, what is it?.
Without doubt this creation is something different.
Hence its name. Pleasing odour,”—hut the“ Wangei
Sayang. The Perfume of Love ” is well known
locally:
The bairns have not beeh forgotten. We re-
commend “The Sherwood Spring, Coaster, for
the youngsters to ride HI length 3 inches, width
13 inches, height 12 inches will hold the
weight of nearly 400lbs"—We consider that $25.50
is not too much to ask for the ingenuity which promp-
ted the inventor to construct such a weight carry-
ing vehicle of so small a length. We feel sure that the
kiddies will love the "Plush Donkey a beauti-
ful grey plush animal, well stuffed.” We think,
however, that the makers have made a mistake when
they ask us to buy a rocking horse "with leather
‘reins painted in grey." A novelty, however, is a
perambulator which has a " wood body with oil-
-cloth and iron wheel,” We suppose that the price
of the oil-cloth does not permit of more than one
wheel but in these days of mono-rails this should
present no difficulty to the nursemaid.
We have given but a few examples of the many
unique articles mentioned in the catalogue but a
perusal of the catalogue, itself will soon convince
our readers that here is an opportunity not to be
missed.
Native Medicine.
Cuts and Wounds.
It is curious to note that in connection with the
simple disabilities following on external injuries,
native medicine is in many ways more primitive and
empirical than with more serious and obscure
diseases. Native are very averse to surgical mea-
sures of any kind, which again is a little remarkable,
for it is well known that a native often pays little or
no attention to a wound which would cause a Euro-
pean considerable pain and mental suffering. It
might be argued from this lack of concern for bodily
injuries that a native would readily consent to such
an operation as the opening of A painful abscess,
but, as a matter of fact, the idea of a purposive in-
jury to his body—even with the idea of relieving bis
trouble—is repulsive to him. Interesting exceptions
to this rule are found in certain ceremonial opera-
tions connected with adolescence and in connection
with the mutilation of parts of the body for personal
adornment.
It may be mentioned here that a Malay who will
refuse to undergo the most minor operation will
come and ask for a torn car-ring hole to be pared
and repaired, while Dyaks who join the Government
services will frequently bog to have their elongated
ear lobules cut away and a new lobule manufactured
in order to remove the stigma which may lie attach-
ed to them as orang hutan.
The treatment of wounds consists practically en-
tirely of the application of medicine to the wound
itself. In the event of serious haemorrhage in a
limb, however, an attempt will be made -at least by
Malays—to stop the bleeding by applying tight
bands—one over the site of the wound, and one
round the limb immediately' above. So far as I
know, mi effort is even made by the natives of this
country to suture a gaping wound. Before recount-
ing the methods of treating wounds it should be
mentioned that some races adopt prophylactic mea-
sures in order to render themselves less susceptible
to injuries.
In regard to Malays, I may here quote from the
fascinating book on the beliefs of the Peninsular
Malays by Wilkinson.
"The Malays assert that there are several ways
of securing immunity from serious wounds. In the
first place, the body can become hard enough to be
impenetrable to weapons and even impervious to
decay after death; this peculiar hardness may be
attained by any person born with a complete caul.
Secondly, protection may be secured against all but
superficial wounds if sufficient mercury is nibbed
into the body, the theory being that the pressure of
a weapon or missile against the skin will cause
the quicksilver to rush subcutaneously to the point
of impact and so prevent any deep penetration.
Again, the body can be made so slippery that any wea-
pon glides off the treacherous cuticle and leaves the
man unharmed. Finally we have the use of talismans
which disturb an enemy's aim or paralyze his arm
and shatter his missiles to fragments It is also said
that the skin can be rendered sufficiently hard by fast-
ing, meditation, and the use of appropriate prayers.
Dyaks and other natives use all manner of charms
and talismans for procuring invulnerability, such as
the material of wild pigs’ nest which is slung round
the waist, and the credulity of these people for
medicine of such repute has filled the pockets of
many a charlatan.
The following are some of the medicines used by Malays for applying to wounds:—
Paha Apong. The Malay collect the rotting stem of the Nipa which is found floating in a stream. This is dried and ground into a fine powder, and is used as such for applying to the cut.
Daun Tebal Besi, pounded and mixed with the raw white of an egg. is made into a paste and bound on to the wound.
In treating a septic wound which is accompanied by swelling, buah paku laut is wetted and rubbed on batu chanei. The liquid is applied to the wound.
In the case of a sprain, a complicated mixture called Obat Selauh is used. This contains the follow¬ing ingredients:—
Benglei.
Chekor.
Aliah Merah.
Entemu-yang.
Jintan hitam.
Bawang merah.
Daun dugang manok.
Daun sirih (bertetuu unU.)
Tahi kambing.
Buah asam kandis.
Garam.
This is prepared with a curry stone and used as a plaster In the case of a fractured limb, a young chicken is chopped up (feathers and all) and added to the mixture, while appropriate splints are made from sugar cane.
The foregoing medicines were collected and published by Mr. H. B. Crocker in connection with the Malaya-Borneo exhibition. In addition to various kinds of leaves used for anointing wounds. Malays sometimes use ordinary lilin winch is melted and painted on the cut in a liquid form. For burns, a mixture of lime and coconut oil is used.
In the case of vigorous haemorrhage, a mixture of yellow clay and water made into a liquid paste is poured into the wound. Should this not be success¬ful, the nails of the patien t may be scraped and the scrapings applied to the wound which is tightly bound up.
Milanoes use many of the Malay medicines. One of their own application is Minyak Klisap, which is a mixture made of the gall of ular tedong (cobra) and coconut oil. This is spread on the wound, and the latter is then tied up with cloth.
It is said also that a paste of sugar and soap is popular in the treatment of septic wounds. Pos¬sibly this idea has been recently acquired, however, for this mixture has a world-wide repute, and is often used by Europeans at the present day.
Sea-Dyaks and Land-Dyaks very commonly use ordinary tobacco for plugging up wounds and stop¬ping haemorrhage. The former also employ for the purpose Lumut Kayu, Damar powder and Daun Klat.
The Chinese dispensaries sell a dusty looking powder for controlling haemorrhage from wounds called Ngeh Joong. They will not reveal the nature of this preparation, and an examination of it shows that it contains some vegetable extract with no evidence of metallic or inorganic bases. Spider¬webs are also very commonly used by the Chinese for applying to wounds Chinese dispensaries, however, are now beginning to make extensive use of various European medicine such as Iodoform, which, though used in an empirical fashion, appear to be becoming increasingly popular.—(Contributed.)
Topical Tuples.
A resident of Kuching recently sent to a certain local Drug Store for some "Thermogen” (a medi¬cated cotton wool used in cases of rheumatism, sciatica, lumbago, 4c.). The messenger brought back a reply to the effect that the Store had no “Thermogen”, but could supply “Lactogen” if that would do instead. The proprietor of this Store puts half the alphaliet after his name, by the way, but only himself knows what the letters mean! Are they by chance bogus American degrees about which one hears so much?
It was a case of “all roads lead to the Race Course” every afternoon between 4 and fi tor the few days in which all the ponies were stabled there.
During those hours the more intrepid of our riders disported themselves, much to the amusement of the crowd, who flocked together in their hundreds to watch this (to many) novel performance.
The wily ice cream seller and his equally wide- awake compatriot. the food seller, were soon alive to the possibilities of the game amt their discordant cries could be heard above the thunder of hoofs and the cheers of the crowd.
Already a village of little huts is growing up alongside the course and the wise ones have staked out their claims. 
So far the ponies have successfully evaded the dog cart but we are told that one of them, rather smaller than the rest, had a narrow “ Squeak.”
Race Week .
We are authorised by His Highness the Rajah to state that Officers in the Outstations, who can he spared from their duties, may take leave to visit Kuching during Race Week, which will commence on August 14th next.
Arrangements will be made, as far as possible, for the conveyance of visitors to Kuching and notices of the sailings of Government vessels will be issued.
It is proposed to hold a Race Meeting on the afternoon of Wednesday, August 16th.
New Club.
The Honorary Secretary asks us to say that there will be a tennis tournament (handicap) in Race Week. Kuching members wishing to enter are asked to sign the notice in the Club. Partners will be drawn for on 6th July and all Kuching Matches must be played off by 31st July.
The handicappers will be chosen as follows. Will each member kindly write down the names of three individuals whom they wish to act as handicappers, fold the paper, drop it in the box provided and sign their names in the book.
“The Biter Bitten."
It was not really on account of bis slovenly dress, nor on account of his cockney accent that 1 was looking at him for a second lime. I think now as I am able to look back upon events, it was because he was English, and of such a class of Englishman, I had thought you were not likely to meet in that place. He had not accosted me, nor had he as much as taken any notice of me, but it was the fact of his being just then engaged in volubly swearing at a pass¬ing Colombian of the labouring class, that I was staring at him. He caught sight of me and he broke off his discourse with the labourer, and smiled. He swore in Spanish. One may ask how I recognised any cockney in his Spanish, but those who have met his kind in countries where that language is spoken, would remember that the Spanish is spoken m the same way by him, as is English, and for that matter, I should think any language. He came up to me, and said the usual respectful greetings.
"Gringos really can cuss in this language can't they" he remarked.
"When there is any need, they can cuss in all languages" 1 replied.
"Well its a good job too, for most foreigners I've met do need a cussing to get any work out of 'em. That fellow who 1 was reprimanding is a first class worker who suffers from the delusion that work can wait. In this world its only people who can wail - work won’t. Not if I'm boss of the job anyhow," said my stranger.
He was a stranger then, but, although he is now dead, he gave me a chance of starting a new life, and he was never sorry he did so, nor am I.
I landed in Barranquilla and decided I would land out of it after a month, when the above episode which changed my life, occurred. I say changed my life, because I cannot think that J should have - done what I did, otherwise. He was not a man I would, in my very inexperienced life to then, have chosen to make a friend of, much less be influenced by But you may gather the story best if 1 tell it from the lime I went back to ins house with him after exchanging the few words above.
“And what do you think of doing now you are out here" he asked.
"I did think of clearing out, and going further south to Brazil" I answered.
"Does it depend upon circumstances, or have you got money” asked my host.
"Neither," said 1. "I’ve got money enough to take me wherever 1 want to go, in reason. As to circumstances, 1 have no responsibilities or ties, and I can work as hard and as well as any other man. The only difficulty I have, is my not knowing the language."
He considered a moment or so, and then he asked me how much money 1 had, and if I knew anything about mining. 1 told him I had exactly £450, all with me, and all ready to put to good use. As to mining, all I knew of it was that elementary know¬ledge which every school-boy had, of dark pits and cages and so on.
"Never mind about that," lie replied. “1 have, 1 am working m a mine now, a bit of an excavation for platinum. Nothing much. As a matter of fact, the river beds about this country, hold quite a lot, but it is all spasmodically worked, just as most things are, except what the Americans do. You’ve heard about ‘em, I suppose. No? Oh, well they are working acute little game between Railways and Produce. The Railway into the Fruit district is American. The natives bring their produce in, in carts, and get a quarter what its worth, or they can
take it back, but this is only told 'em after they've unloaded it into Store. A nice game. Other games are played too, but anyway they all tend the same way. The United Produce Co.'s way. However, I don't want to take you on that kind of game. But, you talked of going to a spot where you could get going. Well, if you care about it, I'll throw in £800 and we’ll go to Bolivia, amongst the Copper and Silver doings. What say ? "
I did not know much of him, or of Bolivia, but on first impulse, I took him at his word, and reasoned anyhow, he’d not do me down.
He was just as pleased as I, when we had planned things out, so I thought.
At 6 a. m. on the first Sunday after our meeting we got on a boat for Callao, during which journey. I found he knew a lot more of Bolivia than he gave me to understand. But that was like him, he never pretended to know his world, but when it came to making arrangements for a trip here or there, or a journey into the interior of some sparsely populated tract of country, he showed his knowledge of these rough countries, anyhow. To give a few particulars of him, would perhaps, be more to the point. He was 34 years old, single, and so far as I knew, had nothing in the shape of home ties. He had come out to Monte Video, when 18; had worked as a labourer on a ranch, and become manager. He had been thrown from his horse heavily, and for a year had beer, under treatment for his injuries, which prevented him carrying on any more at the ranch business. So he bad come north to Venezuela, had done a bit in Coffee planting, then bridge building, and finally went to Colombia After a busy period there, he trekked to Bolivia, but he said nothing would induce him to do it again There he worked on mines, and Railways, and then he went back to Colombia. He liked Colombia, though goodness knows why, except that there are excellent people, and the British are popular.
Now Bolivia is a country of mountains and gorges, of sunshine and snow, of heat and cold. Eight thousand to ten thousand feet up and you get what they call there, Poona, unless of course, you have a strong constitution and good lungs. Also, if you get it, leave Bolivia, for you will never be free of it, and it gets you in the end.
We arrived at Lia Paz one morning early, and went to the English Bar, a hotel of not too savoury a kind, but also not dear. A week in this lovely valley, and away again to the old Capital of Oruro in the mountains, thence to Uyuni and Potosi. Here, we struck out for the real interior, the un¬beaten track. After many ups and downs, we struck oil or rather silver. We got what we could in the shape of tools, and we got what we could, for labour. About Iti in all, worked at that claim, and after 18 months hard going, we had sent quite a nice little lot to the Port for shipment. It was about then, that a gentleman speaking English like a native of Jerusalem, came into Bill's cabin one evening about 7 o'clock. This individual glanced about him. and then advanced on Bill, who got up and mode him welcome in the very brief manner of the up-country.
“What’ll you have to drink, whisky and water, or Beer?” asked Bill.
"Beer thanks," said the visitor.
So beer we all had. Then the newcomer recounted his almost endless journey. How he had been obliged to sleep in a sheep pen for shelter, and how he’d been followed by 3 or 4 suspicious men, who evidently were intent on robbery.
“Robbery ? Bless your heart its the' law of the
land," said Bill. “Look out—Every man for him-
self—shoot first and do your arguing after, sort of
thing here. No, those chaps would be Orinocco
Indians, lots of 'em here, and if they didn’t go for
you right away, then they weren’t out for robbery.
Only two days ago 9 of 'em came in here for grub,
and Water, and they'd be the same crowd you saw.
Have you got a peon with you? " said Bill.
“No. I don’t know much about them, but I'd sooner
not have any one than one of those chaps. P’raps
they may be alright, but you see I’m a stranger in
these parts, and to tell you the truth I’m having a go
in the backwoods holiday making, just for the
experience'’ replied our guest.
Bill was on the point of saying something, but
stopped, and just poured out more beer. As he bent
over the glasses, he winked at me. I did not know
what it was for, so merely looked at the glasses.
Bill and I had drunk a good deal of one thing and
another before mir guest arrived, and 1, certainly,
had had more than enough The stranger lifted his
glass, and 1 did the same. but again, as I took a sip, 
Bill winked, and then nodded in a negative way.
I took it then, as he meant it, and put the glass 
down. He filled the other's glass a fourth lime, and .
then suggested a drop of gin as a nightcap. The 
other accepted and Bill ladled out a stiff one.
“Are you going on, or staying here? Should ,
advise you to stay till morning anyhow" said Bill.
“Thank you. Can I? Well. I reckon you know
more about these parts than I do, and then p'raps
you’ll put me on my trad tomorrow. What time do
you turn out tomorrow?” Bill looked at me.
“Letss see, you go up to Cuenca in the morning at
10 Pat. Ah yes," he went on very quickly, “well
you’ll want, a long night then, and a good rest for
your journey. Particularly as you’ll have a bigger
load tomorrow and no escort, my dear old chap.
Well say, we turn out at 7 eh?"
1 was a bit at sea. 1 was not going Lo Cuenca 
tomorrow, and the load, which was silver, was not
ready till Friday, 4 days off, and for another reason, 
Bill was the usual traveller to Town, with 3 men. 
What was he driving at then? Our cabin had 4
rooms The guest was put in the room at the end 
of the passage, and our rooms were on the other side
of the small dining room, a rough and ready shack, 
but weatherproof. About ten minutes after we
Ear ted, Bill came into my room. The lamp was still
urning, and he brought it over to a shelf near the
bed, he was still dressed, though I was already in
bed.
“Talk quietly” he said
“Whats up?" I asked
“Everything that matters. Did you notice any 
peculiarity about that chap Pat?”
“Only he spoke English rather thickly, and--why 
yes, I was surprised be spoke English at all "
“Why were you surprised he spoke English? Lots 
of people do, out here," he answered.
“Yes, but not a man travelling alone in this place. 
Least ways, I don’t know, but it seemed queer to
hear him speak it as though it were his native longue, 
and be alone on a cross country jaunt here."
“Yes, but did you notice anything after that-— 
after he'd talked a bit?" persisted my friend. I
thought a bit at that, for I bad noticed how well
suited he seemed to his surroundings.
"Well" said I, “I thought for a man who was,
for the first time, doing a bit of holiday making in
the back-blocks, he seemed a misfit. In fact, he
looks very much at home on it.”
“Now listen. You don't remember I suppose,
hearing any sound of a horse? No. Neither do I. 
He burst in on us ns though he knew we were sure 
to be in. He told us he was a bit scared of the 
people he passed, yet he says he'd rather travel
alone. He pushed it down good and strong to us,
that he was a stranger here. He said he’d come from
Mendoza way, by the top mad, whatever that is,
and had branched off to the Tupiza road from
Cayopalca. You've never been that way. I have.
But not alone. Nor would anybody else— nor did
be. You’ve got to have puck mules and plenty "of
grub and a man alone doesn’t travel with puck
animals along the roughest country on earth, and he
certainly doesn't go through there on holiday. And
he didn’t."
He said all this in an undertone, but there was no
longer any doubt as to what he meant.
“ Well, and what is the game?" I asked.
“ The game, old chap, is as old as Bolivia, as dirty
as Mile End Road, but as deadly as you or I ever
want to have played on ns That chap is here on
business, with 5 or 6 more like him, who are at this
moment, outside this house, and whose horses are
in the rock gorge tied up to bags of grub to keep
them quiet. The gentleman who is not asleep in
the other room, but is most likely cleaning his
shooters for the coming fray, is wanted here, in
Colombia, and in the Argentine for similar work.
His name is Leon Rojas, late of the U. S. A Army,
kicked out of it because of something shady, and late
of Cuba. Hence his English Thai is why I winked
al you, hoping you'd take the lip not to overdrink,
and that is why I told him you were going at 10 to-
morrow with the load to Cuenca, and rattled on to
prevent yon contradicting me," replied Bill, without
so much as moving an eyelash.
So that was the game. Well, thought I, two can
play it. I'll go to Cuenca with the load, but I'll go
on Friday, after this shooting match. Bull thought
without Bill
“ If you knew all this, Bill, why did you tell him
anything, and why put him up tonight?” 1 asked.
•’ Why? You don’t suppose I want to turn him away
before I have time to muster up a bit of a game my-
self do you? I’ve got him safe and sound. There is
no way out for him. except past my door—and that
is open. Unless he's gone now—and I know he
hasn't, he won’t leave this house alive during the
night. My bed is opposite my door which will re-
main open, and a revolver is marking anything that
moves past my door. Now look here Pat. You go
to Cuenca tomorrow,—not al 10. but at 8. Take 6
men and leave me 8. Get there and bring back old
Jimmy M’Guire and his pack of shooters. He’ll
love it, and his 8 men who can't find enough to
quarrel over must be just spoiling for this. I’ll keep
this beauty quiet I’ll tell him you’ve gone to Town
for the supplies, and that we’ve decided to wait a
couple of weeks before dispatching the silver when
we shall have about 1,800 ounces. And anything
else I can think of. They won't want to attack here
because of the men, for they know our chaps are the
usual breed of shooters, and then there is always a
chance in a place like this, of nabbing 'em, and they
know that. This chap will stay on, if I put it to him
properly. See?" Bill tip—toed quietly to his own
room, and I listened, but not as much as a footfall
did I hear.
I got up at 6.30 next day, and looked out. It was
cold, and a wind blew across the mountains, chilling
one to the bone. I saw nobody outside, so packed
my revolver full, and put it in my pocket together
with cartridges, and some fond. My hope was, that
I should get away without being spotted, and as luck
would have it, I encounted nobody. I dared not go
to Bill’s room, for fear of creating a sound there, as
our guest would certainly lie all ears for any noise
or voices, and I knew Bill didn't want any suspicion
aroused. I knew, too, that there Was nothing we
might have to say either one way or the other. So
off-1 wept, quietly. Arrived at the men’s compound
at about 7.30 I found that only 4 of them were there,
and upon each hearing the story of the coming hold
up, they were only too anxious to get to business.
There was something in their tone, which belied
their innocent air, on hearing what I had to say.
for most of these mining men are too bluff and
straight-to-the-point kind of beings to be able to
cover up in any subterfuge. Looking back, I believe
I spotted something about them, which did not give
me the impression that they knew nothing of the
business. However, as I had to bring back supplies
and fodder, (that was the plan,) I must go in the
Buggy, so they made ready with the team of sturdy
mules. 1 waited a bit longer for the other men to
turn out, but nobody appeared. I asked where the
rest were, but a big easy -going Chileno said they
had gone to the river, 2 miles away. Well, ’it was
just after 8o’cioek and I could not wait, and we started
on our momentous journey of 12 Kilometres.
Although I had no thought of being attacked, as
Bill would be sure to tell the gang's chief that I was
empty and had gone for provisions, yet I could not
feeling that we were either followed or were going
straight into an ambush. It was silly of course, but
when any danger is impending, even if you are as-
sured that it would not happen for 2 or 3 days, you
always feel that you must expect it any minute. I
did, and I kept a sharp look-out, and told the men
to do.so. At one point, the deep gully which brought
us on to the road to Sucre over the low ridge to the
north of us. and Which was so situated as to
make it an ideal spot for Rojas and his men to rake
us clean, I was particularly certain we should be
confronted- with trouble, especially as the rocks gave
ail shelter required for his purpose, and upon which
we had to turn our backs along the road to Cuenca
which was almost due south, taking a sharp bend
from the gully. We were about 3 Kilometres away
from this gully, and each minute made me more
convinced that all was too good to be true, and that
these fellows would keep to their original plan, and
attack ns. I don’t know why, but I suddenly said
to myself, “ I am certain they are there waiting."
We could see the gully road ahead of us and about
200 feet higher. And as I looked, I saw a horse and
rider, but lost them instantly as they turned the bend.
My revolver was in my hand now, and I told each
man to be ready, as any moment may be the one to
use it. On entering the gully road, I lashed the
mules to a mad gallop.
A shot whistled past, and voices cried on us to
stop; at the same time seven men stood up, ami levelled
revolvers at us. And then the most strange thing
happened.
Shots rang out from overhead, and every shot
went home. 1 could not, however, afford to be gulled
by what may be a ruse to attract our attention, hut
certainly not one of those seven men were holding
pistols or anything, except two who held their arms
where they had been hit. We trussed these up
in the Buggy.
"And only just in time Pat” said a cheery voice
from over head. It was Bill.
“ Tell you all about it later. Get these 2 chaps on
y nr Buggy, and leave that lot where they arc for
the time. They 'll never do any more of this game
any way,” and he swung himself into his saddle.
We arrived back at the Cabin at midday.
After breakfast he told me his end of the story.
" ft occurred to me after I’d been in bed about
half an hour " said Bill “ and you probably asleep. I
took it for granted that the chap next door would be
awake, so I re-dressed as soon as the idea floated
through my mind. Putting on exactly what I've
got now, plus a couple of revolvers and shot, I made
as much noise as I thought necessary to attract his
attention. Then I knocked at his door and he
answered rather sharply. 1 replied that I was going
out to give the men a hand at weighing and boxing
the Silver, and as you would be away early tomorrow,
I told him you were leaving possibly at 8 or 9 so I
must get everything ready to night. He opened
his door, and gave himself away rather, by appearing
in his clothes except his top-boots I then said that
if he wanted a drink any time, he could help him-
self, and I should not be back until 7 in the morning.
He asked me if I was not afraid of any trouble with
my men, or of being attack en route, and I told him
1 was not. He said that of course we took an
armed party along, and 1 told him only a driver and
one other besides you. It was the chance of a life time
to get him quite unawares, for I calculate,) he would
muster his men before you were about, and get on
1 the road to the spot of attack. He dare not come
after me to the mine, because of the men and
 reckoned on his knowing we had a dozen or so.
 So I went to the men's compound, woke 'em all
up and explained the position. They were anxious
 to have all the fun of it, and accepted my invitation
 to come with me. I had to leave four for you, or
 you would have thought it queer. ”
 " I did as it was” said I. " And that also explains
 why those four gave me the impression that they
knew more about the business than 1 did. But
 what made you choose the Gully Road for a meeting
 place?”
*' Ah. said Bill, " that was hick. 1 know this
 part of Bolivia well, and 1 figured it out, that would
 lie the ideal spot for a surprise attack, and I knew
he knew the road well, too, so I gave them ample
Um to get off. I sent that long-shanked Californian
to the Gully at night—well say 4 a. m. this morning
and told him to signal us by a white rag if be spotted
them at Gully, and he being there a good deal ahead,
would be able Co hide, and still give us the tip silent-
ly a mile la-fore we came up with the Gully The
only thing 1 was afraid of was that they would hear
us coining even at that distance, but then remem-
bered the floods were on. and the river beyond us
and near them would kick up such a row, that they
 would only hear us at 200 or 300 yards off. Sam-
 pelayo the clerk, volunteered to go with the Califor-
nian, and suggested he should give ns a signal 3-
kilometres before the Gully, to tell us they had
passed so far along any way, and then join us.
It all seemed good to me. and it came off. They
 must have got away at six or so. We got word of
 that from a man I posted near the mad under the
 bank of the reservoir So we gave 'em until about
a quarter to seven to get right along. We passed
Sampelayo's signal that the. party had gone by, and
he joined soon after.
Arrived at about 1 mile from the Gully and hidden
by a sharp bend, we saw nobody about but made-
sure by looking over the banks each side. Then
one of us went ahead on foot as carefully hidden as
possible by all rocks and ditches. to see whether the
Californian had raised his signal They both of 'em
came back, and the Californian said he watched them
dismount, and tether tin- horses up to the trees
beyond the Gully, and then lake up position behind
the boulder* in the path. We made a detour on
: foot, and by all the great fortune of luck, we
found a place for live of us right above them, and
looking down right on them. The rest you know.”
" So it was a game of chance” said I.
" Not for us or for you. If they hadn't gone,
you'd have been safe, nod if they did go, we should
have certainly been there with you. The chance
 was theirs. We shall have.to report this, so I’ll write
 the Magistrate now," and he sat down to do so.
 "One thing Rill. How did you know who he
 was and all about him?" I asked.
 He looked at me steadily.
	" Did you notice anything queer about bis head.
 No? Well, he can’t turn it to the right without
 shifting his body and he has a deep scar on the neck.
I gave him that little lol. But I’ve changed a lot—
gone gray—since then, when I was only 21. He
did’nt know me again any way, and he was, to me,
unmistakable. My word, but everyone will be glad
to bear of him—dead.”—(Contributed.)
A Timely Warning.
We prim below an original article sent io us by
one of our readers. As a rule we are chary of pub-
lishing anything connected with the subject of mar-
riage. We are content to leave that to the “Daily
Mirror” Correspondents; but in this case we could
not refrain from giving our readers the benefit of
such sage advice, coupled with delicacy of feeling
and clearness of style.
Revocation.
I imagine that it is advisable to have this Love-
letter mentioned, so as to hint, and draw the atten-
tions of some young educated Sarawak Chinese
bachelors, and girls not to plunge erroneously into
“Love.” a word that often gives union, binds one to
all, and the foundation of marriage and of home.
It is also necessary to state further words, which
1 may count ns good advices because, I had ex-
perienced a romance at the period 1 was entering
manhood.
In addition to the above statement, I would say
and point in this manner. To fall in true love be-
fore marriage is of course a very good and wise
method to act upon for the future happiness of both
sexes, if he or she hunts not n coquette, or a bean.
Fallen in love to a coquettish girl is similar to, “A
rolling stone gathers no moss,” and to a beau, she
is under the same roof
To accomplish all the necessities governing this
matte . I should like to explain for the future good-
ness and remembrance, that both sexes must act
rightly in this affair during their courtship.
The principal motives which are the most essen- ’
tial in connection with the above subject, are called
Investigations: First, second, and third is to find 
out fourth is the character and
temper, and finally is to ask for the consents of both
parents.
Should one takes the pain to do us above written,
disgrace, dispute, and disgust will be saved, and
also to escape from destiny.— (Contributed.)
The blank is the writer’s.— [Ed. S. G.]
Notes from Miri.
MiRI, SARAWAK, June 12.
The annual meeting of the Gymkhana Club, Miri, was held on May 21, in the Company's Rest House, when three vacancies on the management committee were duly filled. Since the last annual meeting, the dub has proved profitable in every sense of the word.
In the near future it is proposed to hold bridge and tennis tournaments, with sealed handicaps in the case of bridge ; indeed, as I write, the list for in¬tending competitors is in circulation. New Rules have been drawn up for golf, and the present course is being re-arranged. The library, too, is to be overhauled and increased. We already have a most; catholic selection of books, but there is a certain de¬ficiency of the works of present-day writers.
Unfortunately, even the forward policy of the Gymkhana Club can do very little to increase sea¬bathing facilities. A bathing hut was provided but rarely used, most people preferring to bathe from their own or a friend's bungalow on the beach, so the hut has been demolished. The almost insuper¬able difficulties preventing any portion of the sea being enclosed are, firstly, the unstable nature of the sands and the bar of Miri River, and, secondly, the luctantes ventos tempestatesque sonoras that we have experienced here just lately.
In connection with sea-bathing here curious
phenomena are noticeable At times the sea is quite
red in colour and not at all salt. This is due to the
tide carrying the efflux of Miri River along the coast
—the redness of the water, which gives the river its
name, being due to vegetation on its banks.
The recent festival of Hari Raya was celebrated
by, among other events, a football match between a
European team and one composed of Malays.
Greatly to the joy of the latter, they won a well-con-
tested game by one goal to nil.
The Cinema has been showing a long serial during
the past few weeks—Houdini, or The Master Mys-
tery—which is certainly popular with the juniors.
The Topical Budget films are known locally as The
“ Tropical ” Budget: certainly they are as much the
one as the other*.
Just a day or two ago, Messrs. Mayer and Turner,
two members of our indefatigable orchestra, were
each presented with a silver cigarette box as a tangi-
ble token of the community's gratitude. The gifts
were the equivalents of long service medals, it is
presumed.
The ever-recurring thought to a resident of Miri
is one of wonder at its rapid growth. Indeed the
magic of Miri is this: less than fifteen years ago the
virgin jungle ran down to the water’s edge. But
this well of thought would lie too productive to start
drilling just now.
COMESTRES.
(S. T.)
To Our Readers.
The poem printed below was sent to us for pub¬lication.
The sender was possibly under the idea that, as we have included verses in our last two issues, we were making a speciality of a ’‘poets corner” in our paper.
So far the poetical efforts have been entirely origi¬nal but we are informed that this one is culled from the “Literary Digest "
We do not know what prompted our reader to send us this special poem, but we acknowledge it with thanks and publish it for the benefit of our other readers who may apply it in whatever way they like.
ORIGIN OF COUNTRY LANES.
“ One day through the primeval wood A calf walked home, as good calves should, But left a trail ail (rent askew, A crooked trail, as all calves do.
Since then three hundred years have fled, And I assume the calf is dead, But still he left behind his trail And thereby hangs my moral tale. The trail was taken up next day. By a lone dog that passed that way, And then a wise bell-wether sheep Pursued the trail o'er vale and steep And led his flock behind him, too, As good bell-wethers always do. And since that day. o’er hill and glade Through those old woods, a path was made, And many men wound in and out And bent and turned and dodged about And uttered words of righteous wrath Because ‘twos such a crooked path. But still they followed, do not laugh. The first migrations of that calf, And through that winding woodway stalked Because he wobbled when he walked.”
Arrival of Borneo Ponies.
On the 12th the p. 8. Adeli arrived with 29 Bor-
neo ponies on board in charge of Mr. P. M. Adams.
These ponies had been bought in B. N. B. by Mr.
Adams, who travelled considerable distances in order
to find good beasts and we congratulate Mr. Adams
on the success of his undertaking. The ponies
were bought at a very moderate price and seem to
be a good lot.
On arrival the ponies were tethered on the
padang near the Government Printing Office, and
later in the day they were taken out to the Race
Course where temporary stables bad been made. ,
Mr. Adams left again on the 16th and Mr. J. B.
Archer took over charge of the ponies until the 21st,
when they were drawn for on the Race Course.
20 ponies were applied for and the remaining 9
are to be sent over to the Astana farm where they ;
will be kept until next year.
The following is a complete list of the ponies together with the names of drawers.
whilst the ponies were all in the Race Course stables, most of them were ridden by a few. Euro-
pean riders but it is, of course, difficult to pick out
the best animals as yet.
We rather like the look of No. 10, however, whilst
Nos. 2 and 3 are both good beasts.
Mr. A. B. Ward has a nice looking pony in No.
15 and II. H. The Rajah has drawn a blue roan
which might make a useful animal.
Naturally the ponies are not looking their best
but we foresee a great change in the next month.
Extracts from the Yearly Reports.
Treasury Department.
The Revenue has increased $ 193,906.22
The Expenditure has decreased 20.695.09
The Farms, including the Pawn Farm paid
$537,259.63 in rent and $60,000 in dividends. Of
the former amount $78,799.63 came from the Out-
stations as against $86,116.85 the previous year.
The total increase of $32,682.78 is accounted for by
the larger dividend received. The rents are down
$7,317.22 but the dividend is larger by $40,000 as
compared with 1920.
CUSTOMS.
As compared with 1920 these shew the large de-
crease of $524,671.55. In 1920 the duties were in-
creased during a portion of that year on account of
the burden imposed on Government by the then pre-
vailing rice situation, whereas during the year under
review the duties were normal. That accounts for a
large proportion of the decreased revenue received
under this head in 1921. The prevailing slump in
the planting industry and general depression in trade
throughout the year naturally adversely affected this
branch of revenue.
MINING ROYALTIES.
The Royalty on Gold is down by $563.80. The Oil Royalty shews the satisfactory increase of $146,477.93 as compared with 1920 and is accounted for by the extension of the Miri Oilfield and the higher rale at which Royalty was paid as from 1st January 1921 in accordance with an Agreement with the Licencees,
RAILWAY.
The loss on working is more by $2,565.69 than in 1920. The stagnation in the Planting Industry ac¬counts for the increased loss as in normal times the bulk of the passenger traffic is connected with that industry.
The Investments consist of:—
Sarawak is fortunate in that she has many resources not the least of which is Sago-flour which easily held first place in dutiable exports and in steadiness of price. Commencing, in January at a little over $4 a pikul, the price rose to over $6 and closed at the end of the year at a little under the latter figure. The average for the year was about $5.20 a pikul. Gutta Jelutong which in 1920 alone brought in nearly a quarter of a million dollars in duty, dropped to not quite $35,090 last year, both quantity and value falling considerably. A study of the annexed comparative table of weights of prin¬cipal dutiable exports will show that fulling prices are responsible for decreased Customs revenue, in many cases the quantity of the export having in¬creased There was no illipe nut (-Engkabaug) crop during the year, although at one time the reports from various districts were favourable; as so often happens, however, the trees only got to the flowering stage.
Foreign Trade shows decreases as coin pared with 1920 amounting to $1,811,658 in imports and $2,744,972 in exports. Of Imports—Cotton cloth and clothing decreased in value by $410,881 ; Croc¬kery and glassware by $61,363; Dried and salted fish by $70,279; Gold leaf by $143,780: Opium (raw) by 190 chest=$ 1,039,000; Prawn refuse by nearly $46,000: Biscuits by $98,382; Flour by $79,102 (a less quantity at a lower price): Tobacco and Cigarettes in tins and Cigars by $91,338; Chinese, Java and Palembang Tobaccos by $61,090; Wines and Spirits by $39,426; and Sugar, which decreased 5,750 pikuls in quantity, by $193,629 in value. The quantity of Salt imported was also less by 4,22$) pikuls and $5,494 in value—the price being slightly higher.
Cutch shipments increased last year and reached the highest figure in the five years past, with a consequences increase in the returns of $109,187; the average price was much the same as in the previous year, if anything slightly lower.
The total tonnage of vessels from and to Foreign ports during 1921 was 172,598 and 226,796 res¬pectively. Of Coasting vessels a total of 59,354 tons entered and 59,433 tons left.
One wing of the p. s. Adeh wharf collapsed during the year and has not been rebuilt. The rest of the wharf is in fairly good condition though it has needed attention on more than one occasion owing to the stacking of heavy cargo thereon. This has now been put a stop to. Wharf accommodation down river is badly needed and I shall be glad when something can be done to relieve the situation.
The total number of postal articles in and out dealt with during 1921 was 606,217: of these 261,106 were internal and 345,111 external service.
General.—On the 1st October rates of postage to all countries abroad were raised in order to bring them into line with those in force in the Straits Settlements and elsewhere.
The work of the Departments has been carried on satisfactorily, but lack of space is a great drawback to the speedy handling of the mails The present Office was built 20 years ago or more, and the ac¬commodation is quite inadequate to the increased work. A building more than double the size of the present one would, in my opinion, be none too large to meet the present and future needs of the public.
This being probably the last report which I shall be called upon to make before my approaching re¬tirement I should like to place on record my ap¬preciation of the work of the staff and my thanks to them for their loyal co-operation in carrying out orders. Neither the Post Office nor the Customs Department are popular services as they come into direct contact with the public, and with a mixed community such as ours it is not always possible to please everyone and complaints are therefore in¬evitable at times. I am therefore pleased to state that there, has been a noticeable absence of friction, and very few complaints of any sort have been re- ceived.
Extract from Half Yearly Report.
Prison.
Nationalities of Criminals, who were imprisoned during the half year, are shown in the following table :—
The daily average of prisoners in Kuching prison was 148.
Lower Rejang.
R E J A N G.
Court. There has been a fair amount of work before both Courts, no cases of which call for particular mention.
P. IF. D.—The prison gang, averaging 23 in number, has been employed on general upkeep of the Station. A house for the Customs Inspector was completely built by prison labour during the month. The usual annual whitewashing of Govern¬ment buildings was also completed
General —By kind permission of the Manager of the Island Trading Co., I left by their motor schooner Mas Nona, which was bound for Mukah, for Matu the afternoon of the 5ch instant, Mr. C. King- Roach of the Island Trading Company, who was on short leave, accompanied me.
I returned here from Dara by boat, arriving were late in the afternoon of the 25th after a journey of' 191/2 hours. A fast motor boat would be of great use in travelling in this district.
The Government launch, when available, takes the best part of a day to travel from here to Matu.
Trade.—The foreign Trade Returns for the month are as under :—
Court.—There were very few cases before the Courts, none of which call for mention.
P IF. D.—The prison gang, averaging 3 in number, has been employed generally on the Station.
General -I arrived from Rejang by motor schoon¬er Mas Nona at midday on the Gib instant.
The new site for the Station was divided up by the Native Officer, Penghulu Abang Adeng, and myself ready for clearing and levelling by the Kam¬pong people.
On visiting Kampong Tian, it WAS found almost
impossible for a tampan to proceed up Sungei Tian
on account of being grown up with lalang Ip.
consequence I ordered the people of Kampong Tian
to clean and widen the stream. This work was
completed before I left the Station for Daro.
A few Mohomedans of. Kampong Ska'an com-
plained unit some Melanos had been using their
graveyard without permission. I, together with the
Native Officer, inspected the place and found it to
be an old Melano burial ground. From all ap-
pearances the Islam population have been using the
land as a burial ground, not knowing that it was
already in use by the Melanoes. They have only
just found this out when searching for a high piece
of land hence the complaint. A settlement has been
made which I hope will end the trouble.
In consequence of the people of Kampong Bawang
Ulu sending petitions asking for the appointment of
Hj. Sadam us Tua Kampong, I held an election on
the 16th instant. Hj. Gapor bin Bum was chosen
and with the approval of the Resident 3rd Division,
appointed Tua Kampong.
On the 19th instant, the Bazaar Police reported
that the previous evening, about 10.30 he was called
to the shop of Chop Sin Gee Eng by one Senah (f.)
He found that some person or persons had attempted
to set the dapor on fire by using a bundle of rags
and matches soaked in kerosine oil and placed in a
•cocoanut shell close to the walling. Luckily this
very inflamable material had not been ignited
by the culprit. It is probable that he was disturbed
by the woman, Senah, who went to lock up the
back premises of the shop and found a strong smell
-of kerosine coming from the dapor. No trace of
the culprit has been found.
I left for Daro by boat early morning of the 22nd
instant.
Trade.—The Trude Returns for the month are as
follows:—
DARO.
Court. -There were few cases before the Courts,
but as usual they included the usual large pro-
portion of land disputes and debt cases.
P. W. D.—The prison gang, averaging 2 in num-
ber, has been engaged on the usual upkeep of the
Station.
General.— I arrived by boat from Matu in the
afternoon of the 22nd instant On the evening of
the 24th I returned by boat to Rejang.
The Court Writer informs me that on the 26th one Kaw Geok was reported to have absconded under advances to Sibu taking with him one bedar and 10 catties of rubber belonging to his Towkay, Tan Ju Tuck.
Trade.—The Trade Returns for the month are as .follows:
R. D. ST. J. HORTON,
Officer-in-Charge.
Sibu.
April.
Court - Fong Ng was sentenced to 6 months for forging a document and attempting to pass it through the Court. Eight Chinese were fined $20 each for gambling at Seduan and Bukit Lima, and the bribes of $25 and $30 paid by each man to the Police confiscated. Chan Boh and Chin Joo sen¬tenced to 12 and 9 months each for defrauding Chop "Soon Seng of a large sum of money. Nong, an old
offender, sentenced to 12 months for theft and failing
TO leave the District as ordered by the Court. A
number of eases of minor importance were also before
the Courts.
Public Works — A bridge near the Mohamedan
graveyard collapsed and was rebuilt by the prison
gang and carpenters. The prisoners have been
engaged on the general upkeep of the station and
in whitewashing the buildings. This last named
work had nut been completed at the end of the
month. The gang also prepared the site for the new
Court House.
The Tamil gang assisted in the whitewashing and
tarring and built a new path to the Chinese launch
landing stage. They also weeded roads and cleared
ditches where necessary.
General.—Owing to the breaking of a hand hole '
door in the boiler, the s. I. Mermaid was lying up
during the early part of the month A new door
was promptly made and sent up from Kuching
Workshop.
I left for Matu. with Mr. Horton, in the s. 1.
Chamois on the 4th when I arranged the site for
the new station. 1 visited Bruit, Daro and Rejang
and returned to Sibu on the 10th Outstanding
appeal cases in Lower Rejang were all settled during
the visit.
The s. s. Alice Lorraine arrived with a cargo of
coal on the 11th sailing again for Kuching two days
later
H. H. the Rajah arrived unexpectedly from San- 
tubong in H. H. Y Zahora on the evening of the 16th,
, with a party consisting of Mr. and Mrs. H. A. Adams
and child, Mr. and Mrs. K. H. Gillan and child, and
Mr F. A. W. Page-Turner. His Highness left for
the North on the morning of the 18th.
The s. s Chamois was sent to Kuching on the
22ml with the Revd. Father Van den Bergh who
was seriously ill She returned again on the 26th.
The Mohamedan fast month commencing at I! p.m.
on the 27th, the usual salute of seven guns was fired
at 5 p. m. on that day.
Communication with Singapore was regularly kept,
up every week by the s s. Flevo and Ban Siong Bee.
The s s. Sarawak made two trips to and from
Kuching.
Trade has not been quite so good. Jelutong fell
considerably in price as also did gutta percha and a.
large shipment of this latter was brought back again
from Singapore owing to the heavy fail in price.
Application was made by the shippers for a return
of the duty ($25 a pi kill) and the application was
forwarded to the Superintendent of Customs
Kuching The gutta is of comparatively poor'
quality and the price low, the export duty being
exceedingly high.
 Para rubber rose slightly and large quantities were t,
consequently exported. Speculators who bought
heavily at 18 cents a kati a short time ago made
a respectable profit. Sago flour also improved in
price considerably.
Pepper is reported a failure in some gardens and
a good crop in others	’ :
The padi crop is all harvested and is reported a
good one everywhere. The padi mill is consequently
very busy
The weather has been intensely 'hot since the
middle of the month, the rainfall of 7.32 inches being
all recorded in the early part Rain only fell on
eleven days, the greater part of the total falling on
4 days only.
May.
Court.—Four Dyaks of Penghulu Abas were sent
to gaol for stealing tools from a Chinese sawmill •
downriver. The Penghulu settled the case by im-
posing small fines which were returned, the Penghulu
being cautioned that if he does it again he will get
into trouble. Two Dyaks stole a large quantity of
property from houses at Ngmah and sold and
paw tied it. Two others stole a large quantity of padi
from a langko at Binatang at night. All four were
also sentenced to imprisonment. A Chinaman's
house at Sarikei was cleared of its contents by Dyaks
who took the stuff away and hid it in the jungle.
Some of it was, however, found in the Dyak’s posses-
sion and two of them were sent to gaol A few '
other cases were before the Courts but the number
was exceptionally small.
Public Works.—The prison gang prepared the site 
for the new* Court House and the Best House. They 
also completed the whitewashing of the majority of 
the Government buildings and took a cargo of coal
out of the s. s. Alice Lorraine for Government use. 
They carried a quantity of timber for the Court 
House and also did various odds and ends of work
connected with the upkeep of the Station. Work
on the new Court House was commenced and the
heavy frame work was up by the end of the month.
The site for the new Best House was cleared and
prepared and work on this will commence immediate-
ly. The road to 8. Aup has been completed and the
work has been well done. The bridges are being
put in by prison carpenters and the toad will be
open to traffic early in June.
General.—Mr. Aplin, accompanied by Abang En-
jab, visited the Kanowit and Julau during the month
and a number of land disputes and other cases were
settled.
Thefts downriver have been frequent of late. A
Foochow left his bouse for a fortnight and on his
return found that not only the contents but the
whole of the floor and wall planks had been removed.
Penghulu Abas had his box containing his papers,
flag, jewellery and all his cash taken out of his house
at night. As he employed Chinese coolies to tap
his rubber one of whom has been living in his house f
for some months he deserved the loss. The theft
was obviously committed by someone living in the
house and the coolie has now left.
The s. s. Alice Lorraine brought a cargo of coal
for Government from Sadong on the 6th leaving
again on the 8th. The s. s. Flevo made two trips
and the s. s. Lan Siong Lee one from Singapore.
This latter vessel has now been taken off the run
temporarily.
Mr. A. E. Lawrence arrived from Mukah in the
s. 1. Chamois, with the Rev. Father A. Mulder and
Brother Simon on the 13th, and left for Kuching in
the p. s. Adeh on the 17th.
The p. s. Adeh arrived from Limbang on that day
and after discharging 11 buffaloes and taking in
bunkers sailed for Kuching at midday The s. s.
Sarawak made two trips from Kuching during the
month returning via Dalat on each occasion. The 
s s. Alice Lorraine arrived with a cargo of coal from
Sadong on the 22nd and passengers Miss J. Harvey
and Dr. Clark P. M. O.
Hari Kaya falling on a Sunday, the following day
the 29th was observed as a Public Holiday. The
usual salute of 14 guns was fired on Sunday morning.
The 24lh being the anniversary of the Proclam-
ation of His Highness as Rajah was observed as a
Public Holiday.
The s. s. Alice Lon nine returned to Kuching on 
the 24th with Dr. Clark P. M. O.
A small Chinese girl belonging to the Methodist 
Mission fell off the floating stage on the 11th and was 
drowned. The body was recovered 3 days Inter in 
the Igan river.
A letter was received from the Civil Commandant at
Long Nawang suggesting November 15th as a con-
venient dale to discuss the proposed peace making
between Kenyahs and Ulu Ai Dyaks at Belaga.
The Penghulus with a number of Dyaks do not appear
willing to have anything to do with a peace making
unless they, the Dyaks, are allowed to work gutta
over the Border and this, I understand, the Kenyahs
are unwilling to allow as the trees there ate looked
upon as their own property However, the matter
can be settled in November when the possibilities of
a peace making will be discussed. No preparations
for a peace making will be made until the ideas
of both parties have been heard.
The rainfall for the month amounted to 6 42
inches.
DONALD A. OWEN,
Resident 3rd Division.
BARAM.
April.
The party of Rayans and Kenyahs who had been
to Singapore to attend the visit of H. K H. the
Prince of "Wales and the Malaya-Borneo Exhibition,
returned to the District. They were, all of them,
suffering from fever and septic sores, the atter-
effects of vaccination. It was extraordinary how
quickly they recovered after a few days at Claude-
 town They all seemed very pleased with their
 plunge into civilization and returned up country on
 the 20th. I regret to say that two of the party
died- one on the steamer crossing from Singapore
 and the other on arrival at Claudetown. These
 men were both Kenyahs.
 The Resident of the 4th Division arrived on 17th
to await His Highness" visit, which later on was
deferred to next month.
There were few cases of importance in the Courts.
The Probate Court and Court of Requests were
fairly busy.
The contractor finished the erection of the Hos-
pital and dresser’s quarters. These form, with
kitchen and offices, a neat little collection of build-
ings on the hill at the back of the Fort. AH that
remains to be done is to concrete the floor, make
drains and provide a good water supply.
The prisoners finished whitewashing the Govern-
ment buildings. A gang cleaned out the ditches on
the roads round the station and repaired same. The
road in front of the back Bazaar, and its con-
nections, were completed.
The Dyaks finished bin vesting operations and
seemed satisfied with the results. Those Dyaks
who are moving up the Baram River started to get
out their omens. Kalang of S. Poyut WAS warned
that he would be punished if he and his village
moved without permission from Government.
The LelaK house at Long Tru was accidentally
burnt to the ground on 5th., the occupants losing
all their property with the exception of their padi,
which they luckily keep in huts away from the
house.
The s. 1. Lucile made several trips to Miri with
mails and also up-country. The s. s. Gladys made
two trips here on 2nd and 20th taking away full
cargoes on each occasion.
The health of the District has been good and the
rainfall amounted to 10’87 inches.
R. S. DOUGLAS,
Resident 4th Division.
LIMBANG.
April.
General.— His Highness the Rajah arrived at
Brooketon on the evening of the 23rd, in the Yacht
Zahora. from Miri. Accompanying His Highness
were Mi and Mis. Adams and child, Mr. and Mrs.
K. H. Gillan and child and Mr. F. A. W. Page-
Turner. I was at Brooketon to meet His Highness.
I returned to Limbang on the 25th with Mr. and
Mrs. Adams in the s. s. L' Aubaine.
Early in the month instructions received from H. H.
the Rajah were forwarded on to Mr. P. M. Adams
ordering him to proceed to British North Borneo,
with a view to purchasing ponies for Sarawak. Mr.
Adams left Labuan for Jesselton by the first avai-
lable steamer.
Dr. Cleverton, Medical Officer Labuan, called in
for an hour on the 13th en route for Brunei.
Juak, the Dyak lunatic, who disappeared last
mouth from the Rangers Barracks and wandered 
back to his house in the Lubai was fetched down 
again. He once more tried to escape by attempting 
to swim the river but was quickly captured. Juak 
has now been sent to the asylum in Kuching.
Court.—There have been more cases than usual, 
mostly of a trivial nature. A charge of criminal
assault brought by one Limah (f.) against Sabtu 
was dismissed.
Public Works.—The prisoners have been chiefly
employed in the annual whitewashing and tarring 
of Government buildings.
Shipping.—The p. s. Adeh and s. s L' Aubaine 
each called in once this month and the launches 
Adele and Peter Duff, made four and two trips 5respectively.
Thirty buffaloes were shipped to Kuching.
The Trade Returns are as under:—
The rainfall for the month was 13'40 inches on 13 •days.
May.
His Highness the Rajah who had beer, in resi¬dence at his bungalow in Brooketon the greater part of the month paid an official visit to Limbang from the 3rd to the 6th.
On the 4th His Highness met the Native Officers and principal inhabitants of the District in the Court House, and again on the 5th he had a personal interview with nil the chiefs.
His Highness made a thorough inspection of the new Resiliency Bungalow and ail other Government buildings. He was pleased to express his satisfaction at the former. He has condemned the Junior Officers quarters, and the Rangers Barracks, and has sanctioned the building of an outside jail and certain structural alterations to the interior of the ground floor in the present Court House. All those works will Ire put in hand, in rotation, as quickly as possible.
His Highness, who deeply realises the necessity for some sort of medical staff and equipment for the 5th Division, has expressed bis intention of open¬ing dispensaries and appointing dressers at certain centres in the near future.
Whilst in the neighbourhood His Highness paid an official visit to Lawns, he also called on H. II. •the Suhail at Brunei and paid unofficial visits to
Jesselton and Labuan. On each occasion His
Highness was accompanied by Mr. Page-Turner
and myself.
Court.—For breach of buffalo aidman regulations
one Sait of Talahak was lined. Serudin, a Malay,
was fined for divorce, and Intinggang, a Dyak, for
tunggoh tinggal. Ah Choi alias Bong Choi and Ah
Hok were each sentenced to a term of imprison-
ment for burglary, and Ah Guan, for aiding and
abetting the offence, was fined.
Ah Hok escaped on the 14th and to date has not been
recaptured. lie has been traced as far as Temburong.
His Highness the Rajah has been pleased to
direct that the sentence of 7 years imprisonment
passed on one Ujan, a Dyak, in April 1919 for man-
slaughter, be commuted to a term of three and a
half years from that date.
Obituary.—I regret to report the deaths of Inchi
Ahmat, Tua Kampong of Pengkalan Tamp, and
Lantang Tua Kampong of the Bisayahs, at Danau.
Inchi Ahmat also held the post of khatib for Limbang,
and bad only been appointed Tua Kampong last
March, Lantang had been in office many years.
General.—Mr. H. Calvert, the Government Au-
ditor, arrived at Limbang on the 27th to audit the
accounts in the 5th Division. He started with this
station on the 29th.
There has been a great deal of sickness during the
month, particularly in Kampong Pengkalan Tarap,
where dysentery has again broken out in a virulent
form. On this account the Hari Raya festivities
and illuminations were fewer than last year.
Mr. end Mrs. Adams and child returned to
Brooketon on the 2nd, Mr. and Mrs. K. H. Gillan
and F. A. W. Page-Turner were here from the 3rd
to the 6th.
Shipping.—The p. a. Adeh made only one trip
this month, the s. s. L' Aubaine called in four times,
the m. l. Adele live and the s. I. Peter Duff twice.
Thirty head of buffalo were shipped to Kuching.
The Trade Returns are as below :—
The rainfall record is 12'85 inches for 15 days.
F. F. BOULT,
Resident 5th Division

