The Sarawak Gazette.
Wednesday, FEBRUARY 1,1922.
Agriculture in Sarawak.
In our December number we published a letter
on the above subject from Orang Tua and this
issue contains a letter signed Orang Muda in con-
nection therewith.
The importance of the subject must be our ex-
cuse for the following remarks on this corres-
pondence.
It has always been the policy of the Rajahs of
Sarawak to uphold the rights of the natives of the
country. The suggestion of Orang Muda that the
natives of Sarawak should be deprived of these
rights to make room for foreigners, who should be
encouraged to exploit the country', cannot be al-
lowed to pass without comment.
It is true that the late Rajah never ceased to
advocate the cultivation of the soil, but it was to
the natives of the country to whom this advice
was given in order that they should not be depen-
dent on others for their food. This very idea of
foreign capitalists exploiting the country' and de-
pricing the natives of their birth right was the late
Rajah’s chief anxiety, which, throughout his life,
he struggled to prevent.
In what way the country would have benefitted
if the 'half-hearted attempts” to make a road
to Penrissen and a railway to the Ulu Sadong
had been accomplished, Orang Muda does not
explain: but, in the absence of any proof that these
schemes would have been beneficial, one may' as-
sume that it was good policy to drop them.
The suggestion that no encouragement is offered
to the Chinese to open plantations in Sarawak is
misleading, as, outside the 3rd. Division, there are
at present no land taxes except the charge of $1
for a planting permit, and a small tax on the pro-
duce of the garden when in bearing. Nor are
there any' restrictions regarding localities provided
that the prior rights of others are not infringed.
But it is true the Chinese are discouraged from
depriving the natives of their lands by usury
We might even suggest to Orang Muda putting
himself in the native's place with the protection
shewn to his rights in Sarawak in contrast to his
parlous state under the scheme for the agricultural
development of the country advocated in his letter.
There is any amount of land suitable for padi,
but it would seem the imported agriculturist has
not kept to what he was imported for. How
many thousands debt owing by such have had to
be written off by the Government in the past?
Comparisons are truly invidious, but as Orang
Muda himself makes a great point of these in
his arguments, does he mean that he would like
to see Sarawak in the condition of the F. M. S. and
B N B. since the rubber slump, and can he say
that the native inhabitants of the F. M. S. or
B. N. B. are any better off than those of Sarawak?
There is still so much land available by the
hanks of the numerous rivers in Sarawak that
the necessity for the making of roads to open up
land for planting does not at present arise.
There would surely be no demand for land in the
interior so long as equally good land could be
obtained on the river bank.
From the point of view of improving communications even, the necessity for roads does not appear vital. Sarawak is singularly well-provided
with numerous rivers at no great distances apart,
all of which provide excellent ways for water-borne
traffic. This is not the case in the F. M. S or B.
N. B. with the exception of the Kinabatangan,
and water-borne transport is admittedly the most
economical form of any. It is time enough to
make roads when they are necessary to develop
lands that would otherwise not be available for
cultivation. Even then use would naturally be
made of the unoccupied land by the coast before
attempting to open up the interior, and the first
development on those lines would be the linking
up by roads of navigable points in one river to
another.
Orang Muda says coconuts do splendidly in-
land—where? We also note that Orang Muda
gives even the natives of Sarawak credit for suffi-
cient acumen in that the reason they do not plant
more padi is because it does not pay them to do
so.
Though Orang Tua might by some be thought
unduly pessimistic regarding the agricultural
future’ of this country, we cannot but admire
Orang Muda's enthusiasm regarding the planting
of tobacco, tea, and sugar in the face of the
evidence he adduces to prove that none of these
can be cultivated successfully in Sarawak, but
we must admit we should hesitate to invest money
in any such venture even though undertaken
“whole-heartedly" by Orang Muda himself.
In continuation of the article in our August
issue, we publish elsewhere in this number an
account on the working of the Agricultural
Banks or Rural Credit System, which has been
established in the Philippines for about 4 years.
It has been mooted more than once that a similar
scheme might be instituted in Sarawak, and the
difficulties, which would be met with here in
working this, do not appear very different from
those which are being most successfully over-
come elsewhere. 
NOTES.
(January.)
THEIR Highnesses the Rajah and Ranee 1
gave । most enjoyable dance at Astana on I
New Year’s Eve. Some sixty guests sat
down to supper. The New Year was seen in
with the customary celebrations before the
party broke up.
WE me indebted to the Rev. .J. M. Hoover, at present on a visit from Sarawak, for a suggestion which might prove useful to our public and private libraries. He had with him a small book, covered with rubber. It defies damp, has no favour with the many insects which prey upon our literary treasures, and is pliable and tough. In fact it seems to. have all the qualities of leather add a good many more and it is capable of being made as hand¬some as anything moulding machinery will produce. The cry is for new uses, and book¬binding should not be overlooked. — ( 8. T. )
TUB possibilities are being discussed of esta-
blishing a nipa palm industry in Borneo. It
is estimated that at least 300,000 acres exist
at very accessible points throughout British
Borneo. Laboratory experiments carried out
at the Bureau of Science, Manila, indicate that
there would be at least 12 per cent of recover¬able sugar in the sap, and the average annual yield of 4,000 gallons of sap per acre of nipa. under management should produce about 4,000 lbs. of sugar. Although the production of sugar from nipa sap has not as yet progressed beyond the experimental stage, the manufacture of alcohol is a well-established industry in the Philippines. Experts maintain that a well- organised plant operating near well-man¬aged and concentrated areas of the palm can produce alcohol at a cost of 14 cents or less per gallon.
It may be pointed out that in the West Indies both alcohol and sugar are obtainable very cheaply from palm trees. For com¬mercial production on a large scale it is necessary to have pure stands over extensive areas of a species of palm giving a high yield. The nipa palm answers to these require¬ments —( L. rf C. E. )
THE pirates who recently attacked Ponti-
anak and several points on the coast of Dutch
Borneo and who were captured by the torpedo
boat “Lynx,” have been sentenced at Macas-
sar to terms of from 1-5 to 20 years’ penal
servitude. It was at first thought that they
came from British North Borneo, but it was
subsequently found out that they came from
the Philippine Islands.—( M. T. )
SURELY there must be something seriously
wrong with the system of training and employ-
ing Chinese Cadets in the Straits Civil Service.
The proportion who become nervous subjects,
eccentric or worse is really appallingly high
and it seems to get higher as time goes on
perhaps because the world generally is becom-
ing more neurotic. This is a painful topic
and not pleasant or easy to touch on in print,
but although cases must be known to all our
readers it is to be feared that unless attention
is drawn to the matter no steps at all will be
taken. The young men who come out here
from the varsities cheery, natural and possess-
ing sound minds in sound bodies may in time
become a little narrow-minded and warped in
their out-look but they usually remain perfectly
normal and healthy from the doctor's point
of view if they take up. Malay or Tamil and
ordinary administrative work. But ten or
fifteen years of the Protectorate and its allied
departments seem to be too much for any but
the most robust mental constitution. Certainly
no one with any knowledge or experience
would advise the budding Civil Servant to
choose the Protectorate for a career, for that
Very reason. And, from the lowest and most
mercenary point of view, it can hardly pay the
Government to continue a system which is
so costly because of the wastage of capable
officers it involves. —( S. E.)
A CORRESPONDENT sends us the following
cutting from the Nation.
Here is a practical comment rm the report of the
Departmental Committee on the teaching of English
in our schools. It is extracted from letters actually
written by soldiers' wives to regimental paymasters
regarding arrears of pay and allowances. All of
them, I understand, are genuine: —
“I have not received ho pay since my hus-
band has gone away, from Nowhere."
“My Husband has been away from the
Crystal Palace and got four days furlong, and
has i ow gone away to mind sweepers.”
"We have received your letter. I am his
Grandfather and his Grandmother. He was born
in tins house and brought up in answer to your
letter."
“In accordance with instructions or ring
paper, I have given birth to a daughter on April
1st "
“My Bill has been put in charge of a spitoon
shall I get any more money."
"Unless I receive my husband's money as
soon as possible, 1 shall be compelled to lend an
immortal life.”
“Just a few lines owing to your delay in
sending my money we have not a morsel of
food in the house. Hoping you are the same "
“If you do not come at once 1 shall have to
send for another.”
“I enclose certificate and six child ten.
There were seven, but one died you only send
six her name was Fanny she was baptized on
half it sheet of paper by the Reverend Thomas
and oblige.”
“Please send my extra money as baby is a
bottled baby."
THE Rev. A P. Strugnell having been trans-
ferred from British North Borneo, is appointed
chaplain of Negri Sembilan.
A FORMER Hongkong man named Mr. C. E.
Macfarlane has been murdered in North Bor-
neo where he was engaged as manager on a
rubber estate, states a Hongkong paper. The
late Mr. Macfarlane was formerly attached to
the R. G. A. at Lyemoon and on completion
of his military service joined the Naval Yard
Police Force. He left Hongkong in 1911,
during the rubber boom, and commenced work
on a rubber estate as an assistant.
AT the Methodist Mission Conference held in Singapore during the past month, the Rev. J. M. Hoover then gave his report for his dis¬trict, British East Borneo, (?) and said that on returning from his furlough last year, his experience was something in the order of the experience of Job. When he went on furlough, rubber was selling in Sibu at $130 a pikul. When he returned it was $10 to $12 a pikul. When the price began to drop, peo¬ple, thinking that it was only a passing de- ! pression, borrowed money and held their rubber for better prices, until they were compelled to sell at a figure that did not pay for labour and rice. In reference to his various stations he said that Serekei was developing into an im-portant place. There were two churches in the settlement, and another was in course of | erection. At Binatang anew rice mill, a saw 1 mill, and rubber factory were being erected. I
This place promises to become an important
town in the near future They were planning
to build a new girls’ school at Sibu next year,
and to turn the old school-house into an insti-
tutional church with preacher's quarters.
The attendance at each church has been good.
There is hardly one that is not crowded when
services are held. One new church was built
during the year, and they were planning for
extension as soon as circumstances permit.
Bishop Bickley visited them in May, and
through his help, and the help of other friends,
they had been able to pay preachers and
teachers full salaries. They looked forward
to the new year with confidence, and hoped
that next year they would be able to report
further progress. - (S. T.)
WITH reference to the times given in our
last issue for two of the long-boat races, the
first should he for the Farms Directors Cup
for 30 men boats, not for H. H. the Rajah’s
Cup
This shews that the 30 men boats have no
chance again to those with unlimited crews,
the Dayang Mas Diah taking more than 31/2
minutes longer over the course than the Sri
Melawan. But one would think it has been
proved conclusively by the victories of the Sri
Kendawang and Sri Belalang that building
longer boats carrying crews of over 55 men
does not increase the speed, witness the easy
wins by these boats in the past over the pre-
vious champion Dayang Houri with 76 paddles,
the Putri Kemala 74, and Sri Putri 76, and
the hopeless failure of the Ayeshah in 1918
with a crew of 99
We were indebted to Mr. C. 8. Griffiths for
the times quoted.
NEW stamps of 30 cents denomination are
on sale at the Post Office, also other new values,
five and six cents, should be out by the end
of this mouth.
THE attention of our readers is drawn to the alterations in the rates of postage for letters and parcels, also the new registration fee as notified lately in the Government Gazettes.
OWING to pressure of other work, the indices for last year’s Gazettes have not been com¬pleted, and volumes sent in to the Printing Office for binding cannot be attended to in the meantime.
MR. F. L. Chapman, Manager of the Island Trading Company’s Works at Selalang, was married on the 3rd. December, to Ivy May, only daughter of Mr. and Mrs. A. E. Osborne of Westcliff-on-sea. Mr. and Mrs. Chapman leave for Sarawak via Rangoon on the 6th. January.
ON the afternoon of Friday the 20th. in-
stant, a fatal accident occurred at the Upper
Drift of the New Mines, Sadong, in which
Chong Shooi Siew, a Chinese miner, was
instantaneously killed by a fall of roof, and
Chong Chow, his partner, was injured and
conveyed to Hospital. Two hours later an-
other accident occurred at the Upper Seam
mine in which Lee Tet sustained a compound
fracture of the leg by a landslide of earth and
shale while at work on the south-west crop
of the coal seam.
MR. H. E. Cutfield has been transferred to
Simanggang, and Mr. R. E. Le Sueur gazetted
to the Kuching Police in his place, as from the
14th. January.
THEIR Highnesses the Rajah and Ranee
gave a garden party in the afternoon of the
26th. The Sarawak Rangers Band was in
attendance, and later there was dancing in the
Astana.
Mu. W. F. Dick returned from three months Eastern leave on the 29th. and left for Simanggang via Lingga on the 31st. Mr. Hallett was a passenger by the s. s. Alice Lorraine at the same time to Sibu, where he is to relieve Mr. Stooke, who is' being transferred from the Forest Department for duty in Kuching.
AMONGST visitors to Kuching during the month have been Major W. L. Huntingford, Naval Intelligence Officer in Singapore, and Mr. G. E. Cubitt, Conservator of Forest, S. S. and F. M. S.
WE learn that three submarines belonging to the China Station are expected to visit Ku¬ching about the middle of February. This will be the first time such craft have been in Sarawak waters.
Departure of Iler Highness the Ranee.
Her Highness the Ranee leaves by the s. s. Ku¬ching to-morrow. An “At Home’’ is being given at Astana this afternoon in order that all may be able to bid Her Highness farewell, as the steamer leaves very early in the morning. The Ranee has not been at all well during her present stay in this country, and we voice the wish of all in Sarawak when we say that it is hoped we may very soon again have the pleasure of welcoming Her Highness back amongst us completely restored to health.
Kuching, Sanitary and Municipal Advisors Board.
The first meeting of the Board was held on
Friday, 6th. January at 2 p.m. in the Clock Tower,
Government Offices.
Members present were: —
Mr. K. H. Gillan (Chairman), Captain C. P.
Lowe, Messrs. E. Parnell, C. Fenwick, Kou
Eng Law, Tan Sum Guan, Lam Chin Gee,
Lau Chin Hian, and Salleh Marican.
Members absent were: —
Mr. W. E. Le Gros Clark, F. R. o. s. ENG., and
Haji Hassim bin Haji Mohamad Arip.
The Chairman in opening the meeting said it was
gratifying to see so many members present on such
an historical occasion as the first meeting of the
Sanitary and Municipal Advisory Board.
After reading the notice calling the meeting, the
Chairman then read the proposal standing in his
name for the consideration of the Board and sub-
mission to His Highness the Rajah, viz: —
"That the permanent constitution and powers
for the Kuching Sanitary and Municipal Advisory
Board Ire based on the Singapore Municipal and
F. M S. Sanitary Board Ordinances with such modifi-
cations tiny s as may be necessary to suit the local con-
stitution and conditions."
In moving the adoption of this proposal the
Chairman stated that in the past the work of the
Municipal Department had been greatly hampered
by several circumstances, lack of co-operation be-
tween any of the Departments interested in Muni-
cipal work and between these Departments and the
ratepayers through insufficient regulations and by
the absence of effective machinery to see that even
such orders as existed were ever carried out.
By the adoption of a definite constitution for the
Board and adequate regulations for its guidance and
that of the public, a considerable improvement in
local conditions should ultimately take place.
He then asked for a seconder for his proposal.
Mr. E. Parnell seconded, and, on the proposal
being put to the vote of the meeting, it was un-
animously approved.
On the suggestion of Mr. E. Parnell, the meeting
was then adjourned until Friday 13th. instant at
2 p. in., for the purpose of considering the first three
1 parts of the proposed Order on the above basis.
At the adjourned meeting of the Board held as
I above, when a full attendance of members was
present, the first three parts of the suggested
Municipal Order were fully discussed, and after
certain amendments had been made it was un-
animously approved on the proposal of the Chair-
man seconded by Mr. Tan Sum Guan that the first
three parts of the proposed Municipal Order should
be submitted for the kind consideration of His
Highness the Rajah, along with the proposal rela-
tive to the suggested permanent basis for the Board
I approved at the meeting of 6th. January, 1922.
This was carried unanimously and the meeting then
I terminated.
Christmas and New Yaer at Sibu.
Christmas week at Sibu began with a lantern procession of over two hundred, organised bv the; Catholic Mission, which marched round the Island headed by the Sibu brass band on Christmas Eve. This was followed on Boxing Day. by a Chinese lion dance on the football ground executed by a picked band of performers whose ardour was in no way damped by the sharp fall of rain that took place half way through the proceedings which the large crowd of spectators seemed to throughly enjoy.
The school children of the various Chinese schools gave an interesting exhibition of drill on the golf links. The boys some of whom were tiny tots, were all in uniform and all did exceedingly well shewing that they had careful training. The | boys of the Sibu school in particular executed i their various evolutions and physical drill in a most commendable manner Most of the squads were armed with toy-guns, and were put through firing exercises and drill like a Cadet Corps In one case the teacher had evidently been through a course of military training in China.
Two teams of the bigger boys from one of the schools shewed the large crowd how the game of basket ball was played, but the game did not arouse the enthusiasm usually shewn at an ordinary game of football.
The football matches. fur which a number of
teams entered, were played off during the week.
The final took place on the 3rd. when the Sibu
Maleng team proved easy winners, playing a fast
and steady game and shewing good combination.
Intense interest was shewn in the various matches,
the roads round the ground and the numerous
huts that had been erected for the occasion being
packed with spectators who cheered loudly when
each goal was scored.
A most successful regatta and sports were held
on the 2nd., a large concourse of Dyaks, Malays,
Milanoes. and Chinese from every part of the
District having assembled for the occasion. The
weather was threatening, but the light rain that
fell early in the day did no harm and the day
was cool and pleasant.
The regatta started at 8 a m. and all the events
were keenly contested. Naturally the greatest
interest was taken in the races for the long boats,
big temois paddled by Go to 80 men over a five
mile course. For this race there were 11 entries,
but only 17 actually started The Dyaks were
hopelessly beaten by the Milanoes, and Kanowits
who took 1st. and 2nd. prizes easily, and a Dyak
crew only won the consolation race in which men
of no other tribe happened to take part. The race
for the Government Departments, was won by the
Police Court, after an exciting pull. With one
exception all the 8 boats kept well together over
the whole course and finished close together.
Two greasy booms kept a large crowd amused
throughout the morning. The racing lasted till
after 1 p in. when tiffin was served in the Fort to
some 200 Europeans, Dyaks, Malays, and Chinese,
after which the land sports were held on the foot-
ball ground till 6 p. m. the Sibu brass band play-
ing selections during the afternoon.
Dyaks as usual took the keenest interest in the
sports and entered for the various events in large
numbers, thoroughly enjoying themselves. The
football ground on which the sports took place
hail been used every day of the preceding week
for football, often in heavy rain and sometimes
flooded, so its condition can be better imagined than described. In places it resembled a buffalo wallow, being a foot deep in liquid mud, and the two teams of twenty Dyaks a side that played a match at 5 p. m. caused intense amusement to the huge crowd. They were allowed to pick up and run with or kick the ball, or do anything they liked to get it through the posts, and a faster or more exciting game it would be difficult to imagine.
The mud flew in sheets but the Dyaks kept up the pace to the end, when two goals had been scored by one of the teams against one by the other.
Despite the miscellaneous collection of natives taking part in the games, everything was con¬tested in the most friendly manner and the services of those responsible for the keeping of law and order were at no time required. The crowd that dispersed after the playing of the National Anthem had obviously thoroughly enjoyed the festivities.
The results of the regatta and football were: —
Kuching Electric Lighting Scheme.
IT has been common knowledge for some time
past that the Electric Lighting of Kuching is in
process of preparation.
We are indebted to Mr. J. R. Barnes, Manager
of the Sarawak Government Wireless Telegraphs
and Telephones Department, for some information
concerning the progress of the scheme up to date.
At the beginning of 1920, Mr. Barnes suggested
a lighting scheme, the capital to be raised amongst the
Chinese, with the option of the Government taking
a half share, and a meeting was arranged with the
Towkays to discuss matters. The motion was carri-
ed, and Mr. Barnes then approached Mr. Ong Tiling
Swee, and suggested that if the Chinese required
information and a certain return on their outlay it
would be better to approach the Officer-in-charge
of the Municipal Department, and see it a committee
of half Government officials and half Chinese could 
be elected in order that the Government could have
a control in the working.
After another meeting it was intimated that the 
Government were not able to consider the matter 
at the time, and matters were held over for a while.
Considering the lighting of Kuching must be 
accomplished somehow, it was decided to approach 
the General Electric Company, London, and put
forward a complete proposal that had been worked
out, presenting them with a plan of Kuching and all
information, tenders being obtained front them for
the following schemes
Fire-tube and Water-tube Boilers using coal and 
liquid fuel, for supplying reciprocating compound 
and triple expansion high speed engines, direct
couplet! to Direct Current and Alternating Current 
Generators in one and also two units, together with
a smaller engine and generator for day and small
loads.
Steam turbines in one and two units supplied
from the above boilers direct coupled and also gear
coupled to D. C. and A. C. generators.
Heavy liquid fuel Diesel engines direct coupled
to above type generators.
Light fuel oil engines with above generators.
Producer gas plants comprising gas engines with
direct and belt driven dynamos.
Combined Steam engine, dynamo and storage
battery plants for varying loads.
Water power turbines and Alternating Current
long distance transmission.
The above were the chief schemes considered; on
working out the running costs of all these it was de-
cided that the most convenient and efficient for a
place like Kuching, which is able to obtain good coal
from the Government mines, was coal-fired water
tube boilers driving vertical compound engines
direct coupled to Direct Current generators. Com-
plete tenders were however obtained for all the
above schemes with the exception of the producer
gas and water power. The latter could not he
worked out because of there being' no available' re-
cords during past years of water supplies and falls
in Sarawak. This requires most careful consideration
and it would not have been worth the risk of in-
stalling water driven machinery on insufficient data.
Messrs. The Borneo Company having to close
down their Bau Works and there being three sets
of steam-driven A. C. Generators for disposal it was
considered advisable to approach them, and if the
plant could be used for lighting purposes, to advise
the Government to make an offer. By these means
a generating station could be installed at less capital
cost than a new plant which would further have a
disadvantage of uncertain delivery. Matters were
concluded with the Borneo Company recently when
the offer made by them was accepted ; this comprises
two coal fired Babcock and Wilcox Boilers driving two
triple expension vertical engines each direct coupled
to a three phase alternating current generator of
500 volts, this latter will be reduced by suitable
transformers for the lighting of the town. Tenders
are now being invited from the chief electrical Eng-
lish firms represented in Singapore for the complete
wiring of the town. The Superintendent of the
Public Works Department has kindly offered to
erect the Power Station, the most suitable site be-
ing on the green near Khoo Hun Yeang Street occupied some years ago by the Government Sawmill.
Kuching Market Price last at the end
of January. 1922.
Report on the Sarawak Library
and Reading Room for 1921.
A Statement shewing the Receipts and Expendi-
ture for 1921 is attached.
AS will be noted, there in a balance carried for-
ward of $270.42; but. it- must be remembered that
as no further subscriptions are due until April 1st.,
the Librarian’s salary for three months ($51) and
the yearly rent ($24) has to be paid from the balance.
The Library is indebted to the Government
printing Office $100 for printing new catalogues,
and so fur $34 has been recovered from sales.
Thirteen new subscribers joined during 1921.
New books are ordered in accordance with lists
supplied by subscribers, that are finally approved by
the Permanent Committee.
To show the lack of interest displayed in new
literature, it may he remarked that, although lists
were culled for at the beginning of November and
could have been sent in up to the end of December,
only one list of suggested books was received and
that from a Chinese subscriber.
Although funds do not permit of extravagant out-
lay on the most up-to-date and sensational novels,
it would be easier for the Committee to provide
books required by subscribers if they would only
intimate to the Honorary Secretary their preferences,
for it is no desire of the Committee that the Li briny
should become an “early Victorian well of gloom."
LOGIE DANSON. Bishop of Labuan
and Sarawak.
Committee
A. B. WARD
GEORGE C. GILLAN.
C. FENWICK.
Sarawak Library and Beading Boom
Statement of Receipts and Expenditure for 1921.
Retirement of Mr. Wee Hoek Kee. A valued Government employee, Wee Hock Kee.
Cashier, Government Treasury, terminated his active
connection with Government on the 24th. January.
In consideration of his long service, he has been
granted a terra of leave on the expiration of which he
will retire on pension. Wee Hock Kee joined the
Treasury Department as a clerk on 10th. June 1880,
and in May 1882 was appointed cashier, in which
capacity he has since acted. He hits throughout
the long period of his service—nearly forty-two
years—carried out his onerous duties faithfully and
well. His many friends, and all who have been
associated with him in his work, wish him happi-
ness in his retirement.
Malaya-Borneo Exhibition
Planning and Lay-out.
The large scale on which the Malaya-Borneo
Exhibition, which is to be held in April, has been
arranged, as regards the variety of the exhibits
and the collecting together of arts and crafts,
industries and trades of all nationalities, is of
necessity occasioning a great deal of work on the
part of those engaged in the planning and lay-out
of the site in Robinson Road. The area of the
site is 68 acres. It extends from Telok Ayer
Market to Mount Palmer, a distance of 900 yards.
The width to be covered by the exhibition between
Anson Road and the sea is 530 yards, and between
the main entrance opposite McCallum Street and
the sea 270 yards. These dimensions are on an
equality with the dimensions of international
exhibitions. Although much of the ground ap-
peared open and easy for free planning, in actu-
ality there were many deciding and limiting
factors. For example, the massive concrete floor-
ing which had been used for the Goliath cranes
and the making of caissons for the reclamation
work, is an immovable fixture, altogether 900 feet
in length and 65 feet in width. This has been
utilised for large exhibition plots, the buildings on
which will form one side of the main avenue.
Then again, a group of concrete cylinders have
been turned to advantage, for they have been
surrounded with granite stones and filled up with
earth and are now in process of being converted
into a picturesque rock garden.
The many details of the planning might lead
one at first to imagine that it is a garden city that
is in course of construction rather than a trade
exhibition, for numerous picturesque features are
being arranged. A number of pleasant trees not
far from Telok Ayer have been “planned in" so’
as to form an attractive oval filled with foliage,
anti in the centre, of which will be erected a band-
stand This is in the centre of the Borneo and
Dayak groups. It was essential also, to have a
large padang or stadium and the choice of site
was limited to some area in the centre of the ex-
hibition, to be non-interfering with the general
flow of traffic, to be drainable and fairly level,
and also, so placed as to be a striking feature of
the general plan. The stadium as planned, and
now in course of preparation, will be a grass
elipse surrounded by a 60 feet circular road,
There will thus be provision for a full-sized
1 football ground on which football matches will be
played. On one side will be erected a grand-stand,
about 140 feet long, facing east towards the main
avenue, so as to avoid spectators being troubled
by the afternoon sun; while on tile opposite side
of the stadium will be an enclosure for the band-
movable platform is being provided for the
centre of the stadium, so that, without discomfort,
some five thousand people will be able to witness
the Dayak and other native dances which will be
given there. The tea gardens are to be an attrac-
tive feature of this part of the exhibition.
With regard to the trade exhibition itself, every endeavour is being made to allocate to each nationality and group of exhibitors equally effec¬tive sites. What might be called the national groups, each having its own focussed grouping of building, are as follow: Malay. Chinese. Arabian, Indian, Japanese. European shops, Dayaks, Bornean shops.
The main entrance will be in Robinson Road, the approach place from the road being over 100 yards wide. On entering the Exhibition one will look down a long avenue terminating in a triumphal arch through which the distant sea will
be visible. To the left the main avenue, bordered
by exhibits will lead to the Telok Ayer market,
and on the right to the stadium, tea gardens,
Chinese and Arabian sections, and the wayang and
theatre ground around Mount Palmer. Here there
will be numerous native side-shows, a circus and
merry-go rounds, so that this part of the Exhibi-
tion will no doubt be a very lively one. The other
attractions will include two cinemas, the one to
be devoted to corned}’ productions, and the other to
official pictures.
Road making has been a great problem but
rikishas will be able to traverse the two miles of
roads which will have been constructed. The
Exhibition will be brilliantly illuminated and lit
electrically from the Harbour Board's power sta-
tion, and on the highest point an illuminated
fountain will play every evening. There will also
be firework displays ever}’ evening on the stadium.
The ground is being supplied with hydrants for
use in the case of fire, and there will be stationed
in the Exhibition a Fire Brigade and Ambulance
and Police Stations.
Special arrangements are being made for the
sea sports to be held along the South Pier and
Quay. A special pagoda or stand will be provided
there for the accommodation of His Royal High-
ness. The land sports, in addition to the usual
flat races, will include fencing, wrestling and
boxing.
Agric-HorticulturaI Section.
In connection with the forthcoming Malaya-
Borneo Exhibition, the Agric-Horticultural Sec-
tion will consist of an Agric-Horticultural Show,
in which agricultural products may be entered
for competition from ever}’ part of the Malayan
peninsula and from Borneo, Sarawak, Brunei and
Labuan.
One section will tie devoted to horticulture and
will be also competitive.
Information and provisional catalogues, giving
details of the nature of the exhibits required, have
been sent to the various states and districts and
local exhibitors can obtain all necessary informa-
tion from the District Officers, who are assisting I
in the collection and selection of exhibits. The
formation of local Committees has been left to
the discretion of the District Officers.
Planters, who wish to exhibit samples of rub-
ber, can also obtain information from the District
Officers or from the Hon: Secretary, Agric-Horti-
cultural Section Malaya-Borneo Exhibition, c/o the
Department of Agriculture, F.M.S. and S.S. Kuala
Lumpur.
The final catalogues of exhibits containing rules
and information in respect of prizes, etc., are
available and have been sent to District Officers
and to the various District Planters’ Associations.
The following constitute the Committees for the
Section: —
AGRICULTURAL SECTION COMMITTEE. Capt. B.J.
Eaton, O. B. E.; I. H. Burkill, F. de la Mare Norris
(Hon: Secy). D. H. Grist and J. N. Milsum.
AGRICULTURAL SHOW SUB COMMITTEE—I. 11
Burkill. D. H. Grist- (Hon: Secretary’), F. W.
South. J. N. Milsunrand R. Napier Hendrie.
The organisation and preliminary arrange-
ments have been worked out by the Committee
and considerable progress has been made already.
A home paper evidently believes that our arts I
and crafts have suffered in quality as well as
quantity, when it writes. There is, fortunately,
already some improvement to be noted in the
conditions of trade in Singapore and Malaya
generally, as the result of the small recovery in
the price of rubber. It is to be hoped that by the
time that the Prince of Wales opens the Exhibition in Singapore in March next, some further return towards the usual prosperity will be able to be registered. The exhibition itself should afford the opportunity to Malaya and Borneo to bring their products and wares more before the public. Some of the arts and crafts are in a bad way as the result of the general “slump," and the ease with which a living was made from rubber. Hard times may have had the effect of compelling work.
We have received a copy of the schedule and
prize list of the Agri-Horticultural Show to be
held in connection with the Malaya-Borneo Exhi-
bition during the Prince of Wales’s visit. There
are nine classes for rubber, exhibits for which will
only be received in Singapore for the larger sam-
ples. Programmes and entry forms and any other
. particulars may be obtained on application to Mr.
D. 11. Grist, Honorary Secretary, Kuala Lumpur.
Or in Singapore at the office of the Exhibition,
Old Post Office Buildings.
Report of Progress.
A meeting of the General Committer of the
 Malaya-Borneo Exhibition was held in Singapore.
on the 25th., when the Colonial Secretary, the
hon'ble Mr. F S. James, who presided over a large
attendance of members of the sub-committees. re-
ported the progress which had been made in the
arrangements.
 The Chairman, having referred to the lay-out
of the Exhibition ground, stated that the Singa-
pore end would be utilised for the erection of
stands, kiosks and shops for commercial exhibits.
Then came the Stadium and beyond this at the
Tanjong Pagar end. behind the Union Jack Club,
were six large godowns, for which they were
allowing the F. M S. Government 840.000 off their
contribution to the cost of the Exhibition, and
which would house the important Agricultural,
Forestry, Mines, Arts and Crafts Section. On the
vacant spaces near these it was hoped to have side
shows rather above the usual circus standard.
There will also be entertainments of local origin
and a cinema in one of the godowns. The main
entrance will be in Robinson road, with another
one for pedestrians from Raffles Quay; and the
main exit would be near the Union Jack Club.
WORK or SUB COMMITTEES.
Reference to the work performed by the various
sub-committees was made. In the Forestry Sec-
tions, of which Dr. Foxworthy has charge, some of
the most striking features will be timber, samples
of rattan and rattan work: exhibit of oils, gums
and resins for commercial use. fibres and pulp.
Malayan Matches Limited are showing two ma-
chines in operation, and the F. M. S. Railways
will display a buffet coach, and a section of a
sleeping coach.
Agricultural and Horticultural exhibits are in-
cluded in the Agricultural section, and the Com-
mittee, under Mr. B. J. Eaton expect to collect
some 10,000 exhibits, of which cereals, food pro-
ducts, fruit and rubber will form the chief bulk.
Sarawak and British North Borneo are sending
sago factories. The Horticultural side will dis-
play amateur and professional exhibits separately.
Special films are being prepared at a cost of $5,060
to illustrate such subjects as Mouldy Rot disease
of rubber; pink disease of rubber; African oil
palm; and Roselle fibre plant; and these films
will be available for propaganda or educational
uses after the Exhibition. There will also be a
poultry’ show, which had designs on the Govern-
ment sheep sheds, and he hoped a suitable ar-
rangement could be arrived at to accommodate
the sheep outside and the poultry inside
The Arts and Crafts Committee under Mr. H. C.
Robinson, has drawn up an extensive schedule in
which weapons, hunting materials, fabrics and 
jewellery are the prominent features. A Malay 
and a Dyak house, and it was hoped y Murut
house, will be built in the grounds. A tobacco
leaf wrapper from British North Borneo will make 
a display of his work
COMMERCIAL SECTION.
The Commercial Section under the Chairman- 
ship of Mr. W. P. W. Kerr was mainly concerned
with imported articles, and over a hundred plots, 
kiosks and shops had been taken up. The Singa-
pore Cha uber of Commerce had thowed its sup- 
port by a handsome donation of 82,000, followed 
by the Chinese Chamber of Commerce with $1,000 
towards the cost of the Commerce Section. He 
thought the Majority of go-a-head firms realised 
that the Exhibition would provide rather an ex-
ceptional opportunity for advertisement and
pushing their goods, and he was confident that it
would do much to stimulate trade. He was glad 
to see that Australia were to take part in the Ex- 
hibition and he hoped it would be a large part. .
Lord Northcliffe. during his visit here did his ut-
most by cabling home to encourage the people 
there to take a part
In the Foreign Section, the Japanese were taking 
the opportunity to make a good display of their
goods and they had taken 50 shops; American,
Dutch, France and Danish friends had shewn con- 
siderablc interest. Singapore was a great trade
centre and it was only right that in an. Exhibition
of this kind, the cosmopolitan trade of Singapore 
should be well represented
The Mines Sections of a country like this did 
not lend itself naturally to a very interesting ex- 
hibit. but what with models, samples, diagrams 
and photos, he gathered that quite an attractive 
show would be made. Mr. Scrivenor of Batu 
Gajah was in charge of the Section A working
model mine would be erected, and the new 
industry of the F. M. S., china clay and pottery,
will be shown m this section.
WILD ANIMALS.
These five sections were the mainstay of the
Exhibition. They hoped to have an interesting 
collection of wild animals, a selection of which 
His Royal Highness had notified them he would 
be pleased to accept for presentation to the 
London Zoo. This section was in charge of Mr.
H. C. Robinson of F. M. S Museums The valu- 
able specimens included a long-nosed monkey 
from Brunei. The latter belonged to a species 
which no-one had yet succeeded in taking alive to 
England, and if the Prince succeeded in doing so 
his popularity would be greater even than it was 
now.
In the the Zoo section of the Exhibition has
anybody thought of it except the officials? — there 
will be a specimen of the rare Long-nosed Monkey
if his majesty condescends to live so long. For 
this particular form of monkey is only found in 
Borneo. It is difficult to keep in captivity and
no one has ever succeeded in getting one home 
alive, though they have gone as far west as Giza 
Egypt) and have lived. a short time in the Zoo
there. Major Moulton has had three in Singapore 
and kept them alive for two months, hut they
caught cold and died. If Mrs. Allen (wife of the
Resident Brunei; manages to get her capture to
Singapore, and thence to London, zoologists will 
look with satifaction on the visit of H. R II. to 
Singapore.
The specimen was caught at Berbuan Island and
there were thirty men in pursuit, who succeeded
finally in capturing it as it tried to escape by swim-
ming the river. The long flat pendulous nose gives
the monkey a most extraordinary appearance. It,
has strong limbs and a long tail. If anyone has
had experience in keeping a specimen alive, Mr.s
Allen would be grateful for any hints. She has had
it for three weeks. It will not eat bananas or mon-
key nuts or food such as other monkeys take, but
lives on fresh shoots and jungle fruits and for the
first two days it would touch nothing. But it is
getting quite tame and took some buah simpul
quite readily out of Mrs. Allen’s hands recently.
VARIED ENTERTAINMENTS.
The Chairman then proceeded to give particu-
lars of the arrangements in progress for a variety
of entertainments, and sports. In connection with
the latter there will be an inter-State league for
Malays which Mr. Sherwood is arranging They
hoped to have displays and competitions in native
games for which a small committee under Dr.
Winstedt is arranging details. The Singapore
Automobile Association had undertaken to get up
a decorated motor car parade on one afternoon
but it was contigent on getting not less than 50
entries. The Polo Club had agreed to get up a
gymkhana for another, probably the last afternoon.
Messrs. Bradbourne, Elphick and Harston Have
kindly consented to get up a dog show.
The work of the auxiliary committees was also
reviewed by Mr. James, who stated that it was
hoped to make $20.01x1 from gate money. The
offer of some 7oroomsin lor d hotels and boarding
houses had been obtained by the Accommoda-
tion Committee, and they were offering accom-
modation on the ground for 3,000 exhibitors and
competitors from Malaya and 500 from Borneo.
These people would be able to buy their food
from approved contractors on the ground.
One of the features of the Exhibition will be
the stadium, which is placed towards the western
end of the grounds. It is about 130 yards long,
surrounded by a thirty foot road, and is now being
carefully turfed under Mr. Burkill’s men Any ill-
feeling about wet weather will assuredly be ass-
uaged when it is known that plenty of rain
wanted for this feature of the Exhibition. It
will be used for the Dayak sports, dances, AC. and
a Grand Stand is being erected at the west side.
The Director in Chief of Amusements is arrang-
ing for a football competition limited to Malay
teams. Each Malav Stale and each Settlement is
being asked to send a team of Malays. So far
Singapore, Kedah' Penang and Kelantan have
promised teams.
EXHIBITION MEDAL.
For prizes a special Exhibition Medal is being
struck at Calcutta, bearing on one side the Prince
of Wales' head and on the reverse an attractive
Malayan scene designed by Mr. San try Besides
these,' diplomas and about $9,000 in cash prizes
are being offered. The Chairman referred to the
able services rendered by the Publicity Committee
under Mr. Makepeace.
The finances of the Exhibition, the Chairman
stated, were in the capable hands of Mr. Ezechiel.
The expenditure is controlled by the General
Committee who work by estimates approved by
him. He had the painful duty of cutting down the
original figures by $100,000. It was estimated the
total cost would be $240,000. towards which the
nine participating Governments had guaranteed
their proportionate share. Rents for shops, plots
and kiosks have already yielded $30,000. Gate
receipts, profits on sale of refreshments, advertise-
ment rights-on the hoarding and in the Exhibition'
Guide, sale of material after the Exhibition
ought to realise another $80,000 or $ 100.000. The
proposal to have special Exhibition stamps had
been turned down. Another idea which had had
to be turned down was a big tottery.
THE PROGRAMME.
The proposed programme for the Exhibition
was submitted to the meeting as follows:
Friday, March 31st.—3 p. m., Exhibition opened
by H. R. H. 3 4 p. m. Inspection of exhibits by
H. R. H. 4-5 p. m. Yacht Club Regatta off Exhibi
tion Ground and tea for H. R. H. in Yacht Club
enclosure.
Saturday: to-12 noon. Men of war regatta and
native boats. io a. m. Exhibition opens. 11-2
p. in. Commerce Section reception (when all
concealed in Section exhibits will be present to
explain same). 4 6 pr. in. Preliminary ties, football
competition Stadum. 6 p. m. Exhibition closes.
Sunday: 11-2 p m. Agricultural Section Recep-
tion 4-6 p. m Malay football competition.
Monday: 11 • 2 p.m. Forestry and Mines Section
Reception. 2-6 p.m. Land Sports. 12 5 p.m. Dog
Show. 4-6 p m. Reception by Clubs.
Tuesday; 11-2 Arts and Crafts Section Recep-
tion. 3-5 30 p.m. Decorated motorcars parade.
4-5 p.m. Malay football.
Wednesday; Children’s Day. 4-6 p.m. Native
games and competitions in Stadium 7-8 p.m.
Torchlight tattoo by Boy Scouts and Gymnastic
Display.
• Thursday: 2-6 p in. Sea Sports. 4-6 p.m. Recep-
tion by for Foreign Sections.
Friday: 4-6 p in. Photographic and Western
Arts Sections Reception. 5-6 p.m. Football final.
Saturday: 4.30-6 p.m. Polo Club Gymkhana.
Except on April 1st. the Exhibition will remain
open to 11 p.m. and there will be side-shows and
cinema, and fireworks each evening
In the course of the discussion which followed,
it was staled that ample provision has been made I
to deal with fires. A force of 300 police will also I
be stationed on the ground throughout the Exhi
bition. The Chairman stated that Friday. March
31st, Saturday and Monday were holidays.
Amateur Photographic Section.
The Photographic Section was divided into two
parts, amateur under Mr. F. de. la Mare Norris, of
Kuala Lumpur, and professional under Mr. Koller
of Singapore. Akin to this Section will be another
styled "Western Art", as distinct from Malayan
and Bornean Arts and Crafts, and under the
guidance of Lt.-Col. Tyte. Exhibits will consist
of paintings, drawings, etchings and applied arts
such as embroidery, metal-work, fretwork and
carving. Dr. Brooke has a small Section illustrat-
ing modern hygienic methods and appliances.
Entries for exhibits must be sent in before
March 17th. These must be actually taken by
the Exhibitor either in the Malay Peninsula or
Borneo and be the original work of the exhibitor.
Exhibits will be received by Mr. H. T. White,
Robinson and Co. Singapore, or Mr. de la Mare
Noris c o dept, of Agriculture, Kula Lumpur, from
whom entry forms and the conditions of the ex-
hibiting may be obtained.
Section.
Preparations for the Minerals Section of the
Malaya Borneo Exhibition are proceeding apace.
The most interesting exhibit will be a Chinese
open cast mine and a Chinese shaft in operation
on the Exhibition grounds. These are being pre
pared by the Chinese Sub-committee, who are
rendering very valuable service for the success of
the Exhibition. They will also exhibit a number
of working models of mining appliances.
Arrangements are being made for a display of
large photographs of mines and is hoped that
photos will be on sale of models exhibited by
European and Chinese miners.
Among the models exhibited by Europeans,
there will be one of an hydraulic mine in opera-
tion, with monitors throwing their jets of water
under pressure, and an hydraulic elevator. An-
other will be a model of one of the large French
mines in Perak. It will be operated by electricity.
It is hoped that two working models of dredges
will be exhibited.
The chief exhibit from Borneo will be a large
model of the Sarawak oil fields property at Miri
Suggestions from the public for further in-
teresting exhibits will be welcomed.
The Sarawak Government Wireless.
Extracts from the 1921 Report by Mr. J. R.
Barnes, Manager of the Telegraphs and Tele-
phones Department.
During the present year the Kuching, Miri. Sibu,
Sadong and Goebilt stations have worked satis-
factorily. Lightning has damaged a few instru-
ments occasionally, but these have been repaired
and replaced.
The operating room in Kuching was provided
with a Marconi Fleming valve for receiving pur-
poses and also two magnifying valves with so
much success that Miri, Sibu and Sadong were
able to transmit with less power than formerly,
sets were then ordered for these stations and were
! fixed in place in June, July and August. By
! these means Miri was transmitted to from Kuching
1 with about half of the previous power used and
Sibu and Sadong were worked from Kuching
solely by a transmitting apparatus constructed in
Kuching Station previously for working Goebilt.
The Goebilt Station was constructed in Kuching
and erected 25th. August. 1920, since when it has
given no trouble.
Because of the direct value of the valve ampli-
fiers Reuters telegrams sent by Jesselton daily
were received direct in Kuching and by the cour-
tesy of the Postmaster-General of British North
Borneo a fee of $5 per month only was charged;
an amount sufficient* to cover the expenses of
issuing press news being collected from Subscri-
bers in Kuching. Signals were exchanged with
Cape St. James on the 11th. March. During April
weather reports were received from Mython and
Hanoi Radios in Cochin China. As Hanoi’s sig-
nals were of good strength opportunity was taken
of testing our day range and communication was
effected with Hanoi who reported that our signals
were easily read
Balik Papan In Dutch Borneo was communi-
cated with successfully on November 24th., a
special apparatus having been constructed in
Kuching Station in order to utilise wavelengths
of 2800 and 3200 metres for transmitting, this is for
the prevention of jamming with other stations on
the normal wave—this not being desirable from
Balik Papan's point of view. Regular communi-
cation will be commenced with this station later
when arrangments have been made.
The receiving tuner made previously in Kuching
has proved its efficiency and midyear other appara -
tus was made and fitted to it to enable long and
continuous waves to be received with the result
that Moscow, Constantinople and Berlin were
read. The latter sends out press but in German, it
is therefore not published in our daily news.
When in England, Mr. Barnes obtained tenders
from the Marconi Company for new stations and
additions to existing stations in view of increasing
the wireless communication of this country since
it has proved of great benefit and less costly to
upkeep than the uncertain telephone lines It is
not worth while doing anything in the matter yet
because a wireless telephone set is on order and
on arrival will be tried out in various localities to
ascertain its value before deciding on the most
suitable system for the conditions of this country.
The H. it. s. Zahora was fitted with a complete
wireless portable gear made in Kuching early in
1920 and tested successfully, but has since been
made more compact and was tried out on the 19th.
November with satisfactory results.
Kuching station has been in communication
with Singapore, Miri, Sibu, Sadong, Goebilt,
Penang, Jesselton, Kudat, Hanoi, Mython, Sitoe-
bondo, Balik Papan, Rangoon and Cape St. James.
Impressions of Old Sarawak.
(Continued.)
Being Extracts from “ Ten Years in
Sarawak” 1853—by His late Highness
Rajah Sir Charles Brooke. G. C. M. G., etc.
Lingga, August. 1855.- I was surprised one day,
while living in my very quite bungalow, to see a
small schooner make her appearance at the mouth
of the river and by her I received instructions to
proceed to Mukah, for the purpose of strengthen-
ing the Rajah's force when he called there on his
way from Brunei. Mukah was in a sad state of
anarchy and confusion. Disturbances were of
weekly occurrence. With a strong fair breeze we
arrived there in two days, and were received with
all honours, and a salute. This place is under the
government of Brunei, which is equivalent to no
government, or even worse than none at all.
Their aim was aggrandizement, and their means
simple rascality A tragedy had lately been com-
mitted in this place, and as Mukah has much to
do with my future operations. I will relate how it
occurred. The acknowledged head man of the the
place was Pangeran Arsat, who was Brunei to the
back bone, and supported all demands of officials
coming from His Highness the Sultan's dominion.
He levied taxes and inflicted other oppressive
measures upon the Mukah people who were a
hard-working set but far behind the Dyaks in
intelligence and advancement. Besides this Brunei
Pangeran, there was one named Pangeran Mathu-
sein, who had been broughtup among the Mukah 
people, his mother being one of the Bumi or work- 
ing class, and his relations were very numerous.
A feud had long been existing between these two
Pangerans, both of whose houses were partially
fortified, though heretofore they had never come
to an open rupture.
Mathusein was an honest man and did not
countenance the exorbitant demands made on the
population, but supported the latter against such
injustice. On one occasion as Pangeran Mathu-
sein was returning from the mouth, while going
by Pangeran Arsat's house, some of the latter’s
relations and followers were brandishing arms and
spears, and in other ways mocking Mathusein. He
was impetuous and hot-headed, and he said, “I
felt my head in a blaze." He forthwith rushed
up to the house, cutting down Pangeran Arsat,
wounding one other man, and in the promiscuous
onslaught killed one of Arsat's daughters, and
wounded another, lie then returned, no one
daring to oppose him, as he was noted for his
strength, and was acknowledged to be the best
swordsman by far in the whole country. On
reaching his house he strengthened his fortifica-
tions, and prepared for an attack. In the course
of a month a large force had assembled in Mukah
to avenge the death of Pangeran Arsat. The
leader of it was Sherip Mashor, who had called
out the Dyaks of Kanowit and Saribas. They
numbered more than a thousand, exclusive of
Malays. They remained before Pangeran Mathu-
sein’s fortifications for many days, during which
time the party were playing sad havoc with the pro-
perty of the inhabitants, who gave whatever was
asked, and allowed their fruit-trees to be. cut down
without a word. The opposing forces frequently
entered into conversation from the walls of their
fortifications, and one day a promise was made by
the Sherip Mashor that, if Mathusein would open
his portals and come out, he and all his followers
should go unmolested, be treated as friends and
relations, and they would live together amicably.
'This was promised with the most binding oaths.
Mathusein demurred for some time, but finally
yielded to the entreaties of his own followers,
and allowed the gates to be opened, and the
people, men, women and children, to march out
and surrender themselves. He was to leave the
house on the following morning. In the course
of the night, one daring fellow from Sherip Mas-
hor’s party made his way secretly into the presence
of Mathusein. and urged him to fly immediately,
as the next morning it would be too late every-
thing being prepared for his execution. The
Pangeran buckled on his sword, and with six
followers set off under the cloak of darkness, and
made his way up into the Kayan country, whence
he proceeded to Sarawak, and there found safety.
The unfortunate captives, who expected an
immediate release. were bound hand and foot,
put on board some large boats, and on a grass
plot near the mouth of Mukah river were most
inhumanly butchered in cold blood. The whole
were in number forty-five, and were mostly
women ; their heads were given to the Dyaks,
who at that tune were our enemies A short time
after this tragedy I entered Mukah, and the scene
where the murders look place was then fresh with
the r-arks of Ilie slaughtered wretches Their torn
clothes, the traces of blood and tracks of fret, were
plainly visible on the ground In pulling up
through the Mukah village, most of the houses
were burnt down, and the graveyards pillaged
by Dyaks. The cocoanuts too were heartless and
dying. The poorer of the working inhabitants
suffered most. First of all they lost their favourite
leader and relation. Pangeran Mathusein ; then
they lost their property ; and now I could judge by
their tone, that it was their express desire that a
white man should hold the government of the
place, as they ceased to trust in the faith of Brunei
chiefs who were continually bringing fire, sword,
and desolation upon their town.
Sarawak Club.
Tennis Tournament
for H. H. the Rajah’s Cups.
THE results of this tournament. which had to be postponed from Race Week owing to bad weather, an- as follows : —
1st. Round
Some excellent matches were witnessed, especially the one in the 2nd. round between Messrs. Fenwick and Baird and H. H. the Rajah and Mr. Bates. In the first set Blind’s excellent volleying secured a win. though m the second set he misjudged many strokes. The Rajah and Fenwick on opposite sides both played a solid game throughout. Tinies has a good style and put up a good game, but 1 am afraid his lack of practice told towards the end.
It was unfortunate that, after the first round Messrs. Ward and Gillan should have been obliged to scratch owing to the latter being down with influenza, as it was expected by many that they would reach the final. — (Contributed.)
Land Banks.
The Chief of the Rural Credit Division of the
Bureau of Agriculture, has prepared a summary of
the most important features of the Rural Credit
Associations and their future needs in the Phi-
lippines for the Philippine Review. This move-
ment has attracted favourable notice in Java,
Hawaii, India, Italy, England and America. It is
one of the most hopeful and constructive agencies
as yet undertaken by the Government and pro-
mises to popularise banking throughout the
Archipelago. There are 535 rural credit associa-
tions incorporated so far. They have a total of
over two million pesos loaned out among their
90,000 members. The capital comprises value
paid in share capital, deposits, money borrowed
by associations and interest earned.
The purpose is: “to accumulate funds by means
of co-operation in order to extend to their mem-
bers credit on reasonable terms for exclusively
agricultural operations and to encourage thrift,
activity and punctuality in meeting obligations
among said members”
Only one association is permitted to organise in
a municipality to avoid factions and rivalry.
The business that may be transacted is specified
(a) Extend credit to members for agricultural pur-
poses (b) open credits in current account with the
members, (c) purchase agricultural implements,
etc., to sell same to members and (d) contract loans
and receive deposits in order to increase their
working and circulating capital. Current ac-
counts have not been opened yet but will when
associations have advanced enough to employ a
person to take the clerical work off the hands of
the Municipal Treasurer who is by law appointed
treasurer of the association without additional
remuneration.
The organisation is by incorporation under a
modified form the Philippine Corporation law.
The supervision is by the Director of Agriculture
and his deputies (there is a Rural Credit Division
with a Chief, Assist. Chief, and 20 Agents).
The auditing of the accounts is by the Insular
Auditor or his deputies.
The membership is composed of men or women
over 18 years of age who are laborious and of good
reputation in the community.
The funds are in the custody of the municipal
treasurer, who is appointed as ex-officio treasurer
of the association in his municipality. Money is
only paid on a voucher of the board of directors,
three of whom must vote in favour of a loan
before it can he granted.
The loans are made for one year, with authority
for the directors to renew the loan for another year
if necessary, but renewal must not exceed four
years.
The interest charged is limited by law to 10 per
cent. No loans can be made without sufficient
security, which may consist of mortgage, pig-
natorial or personal. If personal it must be the
signature of two or more persons of recognised
solvency in the community. Personal security
is used exclusively as the loans of association are
usually from P50 to P200 (the maximum that may
be loaned is fixed by the by-laws of each associa-
tion).
The directors are held responsible jointly and
severally tor all loans or expenditures contrary to
the by-laws or rules, unless a protest is entered at
the time of granting.
To develop a strong Surplus Fund, in addition
to the share capital, the associations are urged to
declare only 8 per cent dividend on the share
capital and not pay any secretarial expenses until
the volume of their capital and the work compel
them to do so, and to carry all the earnings from
deposits, money borrowed, etc , into this Surplus
Fund. (The law compels at least 20 per cent of
net earnings to be set aside in a Reserve Fund).
No individual can own more than P500 in shares. This is to prevent a monopoly. No association is permitted to have more than Pro,000 shares capita) (this may be amended to P20,000).
It is absolutely impossible for the members them-selves to supply all the needed capital by their associations- they are borrowers, not investors— they have no surplus funds. It is very necessary that the members invest all they can, and also to deposit as much as possible out of their crop in¬come for their own advancement. But there must be a source provided from which the associa¬tion can borrow additional funds to meet the agricultural needs of their members, giving as gua¬rantee the paid in capital of the association, also, the property of the directors, and of the members borrowing this money, if more security is required for money borrowed by the associations.
In Europe and also in India the need of access to outside capital by the primary associations was recognised and Central Banks were organised by well to do persons in large centres where money exists with a substantial paid in capital. They attract considerable deposits. The margin, between what they pay depositors and what they charge the associations, pays their working ex¬penses and a travelling inspector who examines the stabilitv of the associations that apply for loans, and leaves a fair dividend to be divided  among the share holders of the Central Bank, in India they are frequently "Book Banks.” that is, they deposit all their funds in a substantial, ex¬isting bank and draw against it, their only ma¬chinery being a manager to carry out the resolu¬tions of the board of directors, a clerk, and an inspector, until their business warrants more.
In India at the end of 1915 there were 28 central banks and 2,175 primary associations. There were also 5 Provincial Banks. These were found necessary for the efficient ’supervision, support, and control of the finances of the central banks.
The Government of India, after ten years opera¬tion of co operative credit, appointed a committee of eight leading officials to thoroughly investigate its working and usefulness and make' recommen¬dations. The movement was heartily endorsed and a report of 180 pages, mostly recommen¬dations, was submitted. Concerning Apex Banks it states: "It is therefore in our opinion necessary to provide in each of the major provinces an apex bank which will co-ordinate and control the workings of central banks, forcast and arrange for the provincial requirements as a whole, and be the co-operative centre of the province."
It appears to be desirable to bring the Philip¬pine rural credit work up to a higher standard of united effort instead of each association remaining an isolated unit to do the best it can alone.
The Philippine National Bank will be the Apex Bank for all the Archipelago. With a Central Bank in each of the principal provinces or in a group of the smaller provinces. Then with the Primary Associations as the units in the Muni¬cipalities.
These would each be required to attain a cer¬tain reasonable standard before they would be considered worthy of loans from the institution next above it, thus by constant supervision they would be kept up to a high standard, The moral training in honest banking would be worth as ' much, or more, than the money help they would receive. The deposits which the primary associa¬tions would attract by their reliability and the endorsement by the Central Banks would be con¬siderable. The Central Banks, if run on the standard required by the Apex Bank, would at¬tract large deposits from the large land-owners. Funds would thus be available to meet calls when the capital was all out in loans to each in¬stitution by their mutual co-operation.
The Rural Credit is still in “swaddling clothes" but it is a healthy movement and if a worthy object to work up to is set before the associations
they will by encouraged to work up to the attain¬ments required. Until now all that could be done was to urge each association to do its best with what it has. Central Banks and the Apex Bank are not yet established.
It has been found that in each one of the 535 associations there was a period after organization when they did not understand themselves or the plan. Then progress began, rapid in some, slow in others. The twenty rural credit agents keep doing their best to advise the associations in their districts wisely and to maintain enthusiasm when the capital is small and the applications for loans are many here are 20 associations which have or are nearing, P10,000 paid in capital; be¬sides the deposits, and money borrowed, which makes the total working capital of each  P20,000 or over. There are another 100 associations whose total working capital is over P5,000 each. The others are on the way Their progress depending on their own effort, community spirit, and desire to advance.
The Rural Credit movement is the only solution of banking for the provinces. The associations know their member s standing which no outside agency can possibly know Applications for small loans cannot be attended to owing to the cost of inspection, collection, etc. This is all possi¬ble by the association in the town where the appli¬cant lives. Co-operative Central Banks in provin¬cial centres would solve the problem of agencies or branches of Banks in the provinces where there is a desire to reach the small fanner and not enough business to warrant the establishment of a branch The National Bank could do this by insisting on certain conditions being met by the Central Banks and primary associations which would enable banking help to be safely and wisely extended to the 85 per cent of the farmers who are now inaccessible owing to their small business to any banking agency except the Co-opera¬tive Rural Credit movement.
The New Club
Regatta Sweepstakes.
We are asked to publish the following results of the draw in the Sweepstakes, got up by Captain Cunynghame in the New Club, on H. H. the Rajah's Cup and the Champion Cup Races at the New Year Regatta in Kuching.
British North Borneo.
A Notification by the Right Honourable the President of the British North Borneo Chartered Company, published in a State of North Borneo Official Gazette Extraordinary dated 9th. January, is to the effect that His Excellency A.C. Pearson, C.M.G., retires from the post of Governor on the expiration of the term of office, which is six years, but in his case has been extended to seven years as a  token of the Court of Directors appreciation of his valuable  services during an exceptionally strenuous time, The Court of Directors intend to avail themselves of His Excellency’s long experience and great ability in an important post in London.
The Court of Directors, subject to the approval of : the Secretary of State for the Colonies, have nominated as his successor Major-General Sir William Rycroft, K. c B., K. C. M. G., etc. with effect from November next.
Major General Sir William Rycroft's  services are described in ‘’Who’s Who" as follows:—
RYCROFT. Maj. Gen. sir William Henry, K. C. B., er. 1919, K. G.M.G. er. I9I8; C.M.G. 1915; C.B. 1910; 2nd. s. of late Sir Nelson Rycroft 4th. Bart, Kempshott Park. Basingstoke; in. 1887, Grace Ronald, o. e. of late F. N. Menzies of Menzies; one s. one d. Edne Eton; Sandhurst. Joined 71st. H. L. I. 1879; served in Nile Expedition (including desert march to Metemmeli). 1884-85 (medal and clasp and bronze star; with Egyptian Army, 1886-87; action of Sarras; (despatches, 4th. Class Medjidie); promoted into 7th. • Dragon Guards 1888; Staff College, 1891-92; D.A.A.G. York. 1895-96; promoted into 11th. Hussars, 1896; commanded 11th. Hussars 1904-8; Staff South Africa, 1911-12; A.Q.M.G., Southern Command. 1913-11; service, North-West Frontier of India, 1897-98: (medal and clasp); D.A.A.G., Cairo, 1898-99; served in S. Africa on Staff, 1899- 1900; (despatches, medal and two clasps); Somaliland. 1902-3 (despatches, medal with clasp); Euro¬pean War, 1911 18 (despatches 7 times, c.M.ci., prom. Major-General. K.C.M.G., Knight of Grace, St. John of Jerusalem, Legion of Honour, Croix de Commandeur, Orders of White Eagle of Serbia, Redeemer of Grace, Star of Rumania). Recreations:  hunting, shooting. Address: Rosebank. Perth.
Clubs: Naval and Military; New, Edinburgh.
Sarawak Fifty Years
[Extracts from the Gazettes of 1872.)
OYA.
Specimens of Cinnabar of very pure quality have been found in Oya, supposed to have been washed down from the mountains in the interior, at a distance of 12 days’ journey up the river. This would be the country of the Bakatans, the aboriginal tribe, who live principally on what they can kill with the blow-pipe, and seldom occupy one habitation for many months together.
The Oya Company are erecting steam ma¬chinery to work sago in that river, and during the N. E. monsoon their small steamer “Bertha" is plying between Sibu and Sarawak carry ing pro¬duce (gutta. india rubber, rattans, &c.) which is brought in considerable quantities by the Dyaks in consequence of their being badly off for rice. The scarcity of this commodity leads to some, good results in making the people work jungle produce.
BINTULU
Some Brunei men brought news that Pangerans Matallam and Pamancha of Brunei are quarrelling as to the ownership of Sibuti, Miri, and Baleit. Pangeran Matallam produces a document given to him by his father before his death, stating that those rivers were only under Pangeran Pamancha so long as he (Pangeran Matallam) was a minor Pangeran Pamancha now asserts that the rivers are his, and that the document is a forgery. The case has been settled in favour of Pangeran Matal-
lam, but Pangeran Pamancha refuses to allow the
decision. In the mean time, they are quarrelling
for the power and produce in these rivers
SADONG.
A Chinese party have engaged to work coal at
Simunjan and to bring it to the landing place
and deliver it to Government at 4 dollars a ton
There is reported to be a large quantity which may 
be had by opening out the seam round the hill. 
and it is expected that the supply will last for a 
considerable time; but of course without any 
European to superintend, it will not be worked on 
scientific principles.
BATANG LUPAR RESIDENCY.
Two suspicious parties of Dyaks were waylaid
towards the latter part of last month in the Undup
country. One party contained four men fully [
armed who were at once seen to be enemies and
were summarily attacked and killed by the
Undups; they are said to have come over-land
from the Kapar a tributary of Suriang Lake and
the abode of our enemies. The other party num-
bering six were apprehended and brought to the
fort.
(The 'Editor is not responsible for the opinions of
Correspondents.)
Agriculture in Sarawak.
24th. December, 1921.
The Editor.
Sarawak Gazette,
Kuching.
SIR,
In his letter in your issue of the 1st. November  "Orang Tua” States that in his opinion Sarawak will never become an agricultural country but will derive its future prosperity from its minerals. Fur¬ther he is of opinion that owing to the sparseness of the population the excellence of the waterways and the impossibility of the country ever becoming agricultural roads of any description are and will be unnecessary and useless.
I would beg, Sir. some of four valuable space for a few remarks on his letter.
At present sago, rubber and pepper are the only ’ products of the soil grown in any quantity. Padi is grown by Dyaks, Milanoes and Kayan and also by the Chinese, but not in sufficient quantity to render the country self-supporting. But with these exceptions has any serious effort been made to plant anything else?
Coconuts. — A few gardens along the coast planted and mismanaged by natives and a few Chinese who in most Cases purchased them from the natives. Co¬conuts grow splendidly inland but no serious effort has ever been made to grow them
Tobacco —A futile attempt on a small scale at Lundu many many years ago is the only record of any attempt being made in this direction. This WAS mismanaged and failed. B. N. F.- makes a large revenue out of Tobacco—why should not Sarawak? We have the land and more of it than B. N. B. but, as I will shew Inter on, under existing conditions it is impossible
Tea and Coffee. —These have been tried at an elevation of 1.000 ft. by the Government on Matang mountain. The tea was reported to be of good quality and is still being picked but no other plan¬tations exist.
Rice. —Of course can be grown, but suitable land for the production of rice on a large scale does not exist. But supposing it did, no one will plant rice rm a large scale if it does not pay to do so. The Foochow colony in the Rejang planted it until other forms of agriculture paid better, when they dropped it.
The natives of rice-producing countries such as Burmah find rice planting pays them best—in Sarawak it does not, and this is also the case in the F. M. S. and B N. B. The Foocbows in the Rejang now plant sufficient padi for their own needs, but this even they will not continue to do if rubber rises in price and imported rice is again cheap and stocks easy of access in the various bazaars.
As for the so-called "disastrous results” of the Government’s importation of Foochows to the Rejang—this Orang Tua himself contradicts later on in his letter when he refers to the increasing prosperity of the 3rd. Division, this prosperity being almost entirely due to the Foochow colony which started 20 odd years ago, the natives in that time  having added scarcely one jot to the prosperity of the district, the exceptions being the production of cutch and jelutong which are worked by natives, the former due however to European enterprise.
Sago.—The area under sago will never be en-
larged by the natives, who do not even now keen up
what they have. The area under sago is not in-
creasing. If Chinese were encouraged to take it up. a
large area would probably be planted where land is
i suitable.
True, Sarawak is sparsely populated and will re-
main so, as the scattered native population hold up
areas of land entirely out of proportion to the area
which they can cultivate, and intending Chinese
colonists will find themselves stopped by native
rights whenever they settle. Many have obtained
land only by encroaching and purchasing the native,
rights, and so long as such a huge country as this is
held up by a small native population who are not
agriculturalists, and never will be, so long will it fail
to become an agricultural country.
Under existing conditions roads would connect up
the rivers which are numerous and are good water-
ways, but at present no such connections exist. But
were immigration encouraged and land available
roads would be an absolute necessity. No Stations
are connected except by sea at present and it would
be useless making roads through land which is held
up by natives who cannot develop it themselves and
would not allow anyone to do so.
At present no roads in Sarawak leads to anywhere —
the Rock Road never reached Penrissen as was
originally intended, the rail-road never reached Sa-
dong the trouble is that whatever scheme is started
is never finished and half-heartedness is responsible
for numerous failures The coal was never properly
developed, tea, sugar mid tobacco planting never got
beyond feeble experiments and so on.
As for the mineral wealth of Sarawak—oil has been
found in quantity and so has coal, but the working
of this latter has never been developed. There may
be more gold, antimony, cinnabar and diamonds but
where are they? If the future prosperity of Sarawak
depends on its mineral resources the sooner they are
found the better.
Compare the F. M. S. or B. N. B. with Sarawak.
Tin no doubt was the beginning of the prosperity of
the F. M.S. but to what extent does that country rely
on minerals for its prosperity? And B. N, B., with
the exception of the Tawao coal, has also no mi-
nerals. To what extent do either of these States rely
on their native population for their agriculture? It
is nearly all due to imported labour So will it Ire
with Sarawak, which will become an agricultural
country only when energetic agricultural colonists
settle in it and this will only take place when the
small and widely scattered native population cease to
hold up the very large area of land which could then
be developed agriculturally by incoming colonists.
So long us the country is held by the natives agri-
culture will never bring prosperity to Sarawak
Orang Tua need not come to the conclusion that
agriculture in Sarawak will never succeed because
a few half-hearted experiments have failed. We
have never tried it as have adjoining States and until
we do I shall continue to have faith in the ofc stated
belief of the late Rajah that the future of Sarawak
depends on agriculture,
I am, dear Sir,
Tours faithfully,
ORANG MUDA.
Rambling.
The Editor.	
4th. December, 1931.
Sarawak Gazette,
Kuching,
Sarawak.
DEAR Sir,
1 wonder if you ever see a little periodical en-
titled “The Chronicle”.
Well, if not, it ought to have a more general cir- .
culation in your country, as it hugely concerns 
Sarawak, in fact the October number, which I have .
before me as I write, is about nothing else, and 
might interest many of your readers.
To one who has spent several years in Sarawak, 
it was of much interest to read the following: —
“ We went-along what w called a road in Sani-
teak, but what people at home would call a very
rough path. It is so very narrow that we can only
walk in single file. On	this particular
occasion our road went first of all across two high
hills, right up the face of each, along the top and
down the oilier side. Between each
- hill there is naturally a stream, which we had to
cross on a tree trunk, cut down and laid across the
waler. These so-called bridges, which are often 
very slender and have no hand-rail, are not very
easy for Europeans to negotiate	 We
started on our walk in the heat of the afternoon, but
it was rather a shock to find that here the only road
possible was a stream, up which we had to walk-; in
places it reached only up to our ankles, in others, 
up to our knees. When the stream wound round 
corners and we took short cuts, we plunged through 
mud. So we went on for two hours, when we at 
last saw the house which we were making for. But 
it proved to be on the other side of a river, across 
which there was no bridge. So we finished a some-
what stiff walk by wading across the river, up in
our thighs in water, holding our breath, lest some of
the coolies should slip, and all our dry clothes be
soaked. I have given you a description of an average
walk in Sarawak, and when I mention that we
walked from anyplace to another, that is the sort of
thing that I mean. Some roads are worse than that
which I have described, and some are better, but
this was an average one.”
The italics are mine, Mr. Editor, and I would
have called that “road” a jungle track, such a path ns
one might experience through parts of Wales and
in the Highlands off the beaten track; and also I
would have called that “river" a stream and that “tree-
trunk" only a tree-trunk But then that might have
spoilt the impression of the ever-strenuous life it may
have been intended to convey.
I seem to remember some forty to fifty miles of
metalled roads varying from twelve to twenty two
feet in width around Kuching. What can have
happened to these now? And the outstations
used all to have several miles of un-metalled roads
and paths around them, on which it used to be
possible to walk in more than single file. Can it lie
possible that even these no longer exist?
Again it interested me to read a little later on: —
“On June 5th. we went further on in a boat to
a place called Nanga Gamang, where there is a rich
dyak called Jeti, who is a very keen Christian. He
has built a school in his place, and has about a
dozen boys. Since my last visit to his
house he has built a church of bilian. the iron wood
of Borneo, and has made u good job of it	
deli gave a great feast in the evening in honour of
the occasion	 Mr	and I were very
much amused at Jeti's costume. To celebrate the
-day he had purchsed a blue single-breasted frock-
coat in Kuching, end turned out in this and in a
double felt terai hat with a blue puggaree: he had a
tennis shirt with a soft collar, a striped tie, khaki
trousers and bare feet. The combination was most
effective! As his stature is small, his general ap-
pearance can be better imagined than described."
I remember Jeti well. He gave $60 to the Red
Cross on Kuching "Our Day”. Perhaps, if he had
 been less keen a Christian he would have turned out
in his best “Sirat” and "Labong"—and looked the
man he is. But, perhaps if you were to shew him
this little “Chronicle”, even he might relish having
caused so much amusement
In spite of all this, it was good to read in another
part of this interesting paper that: —
"They (the Dyak) are most ashamed
of their beliefs in their heart, and don't care to talk
much about them."
Good Old Pagan Dayak! How many of us feel
like that!
Yours Sincerely.
D. M G.
Answers to Correspondents,
The Editor is not responsible for anything
Owing to his delinquencies, one of which we
noted in our last issue, the Head of our Corres-
pondence Bureau has received one month's notice
to quit, and after March this Department will be
under totally new management.
As the gentleman who is leaving us may' feel
rather sore about things, we must again disclaim
any responsibility for anything at anytime anywhere
in these columns.—Ed.
THE INFANT—Thanks to the untiring efforts of our
staff, we are still where we were when we
started.
O. N.—Perhaps just a little lower than the angels.
C. & H.—We learn that the gentleman who was
hit on the head by a quit during a quiet
game of bridge is slowly recovering. But
you do see life.
JAMES BOLTON—Come into the office.
COMFORTER—The gentlemen suffered from boils,
not the slump in rubber, as it would seem.
OLIVER TWIST—(1) Three suppers are enough, (2)
I should call it, a Craft rather than an Art.
WOUNDED -The obvious remedy is to canalise the
cut.
G. B. W.. P. d' E , C. B. H„ ETC.,—No, 1 tried
too, but it has been out ever since. A few
more like that and it might get quite
popular. Try “ Natgould" for gloomy
wells.
M. M. G.—I think we all agree about that too.
MONTHLY REPORTS.
SADONG.
December, 1921.
Abang Bujang Native Officer at Sebangan, who
has been seriously ill, reported his return to duty on
the 6th.
The s. s. Sarawak and s. s. Alice Lorraine arrived
on the 7th. to load coal. The latter brought Major
Bullis of the Philippine Islands Government on a
visit to the district.
In the early morning of the 12th. I received a telephone massage from the Manager of the colliery stating that a Chinese coolie named Yow Teck Fait had been found murdered outride Tanjong Batu Kongsi and another coolie named Man Kuai Pan was missing. I at once proceeded to the colliery to investigate. After inspecting the acene of the murder and viewing the body, which had a stab wound in the abdomen, I held an enquiry and arrested four coolie.s At the same time I offered a reward for the capture of Man Kuai Pan, of whom no trace could be found.
The s. s. A bee Lorraine arrived from Sibu on the 14th. to load coal, with passenger Mr. S. V. Down en route for Kuching.
The same night there was trouble in the bazaar, the Malays complaining that no rice or padi was obtainable; on enquiry I found that the Chinese traders had sent all their padi to Kuching, and had issued all their rice to Dyaks working jelutong, before fresh supplies could arrive from Kuching.
Man Kuai Pan. who was wanted in connection with the murder of Yow Teck Fatt was found starv¬ing and badly wounded in the jungle by some collie¬ry Malays on the 16th. On his arrest he made a full confession, saying he had stabbed Yow Teck Fatt in self-defence. I empanelled a jury on the 21st. and tried Man Kuai Pan on the capital charge. The Jury unanimously brought in a verdict of culpable homicide not amounting to murder.
I sent the minutes of this case, together with Man Kuai Pan and witnesses, to Kuching for the final decision of the Supreme Court.
The s. s. Alice Lorraine arrived from Kuching on the 23rd. His Highness the Rajah having kindly granted me leave, I left for Kuching the same day to attend the Christmas and New Year festivities
Christmas day falling on a Sunday, the following ■day was observed a public holiday.
The s. s. Sri Sadong arrived on the 27th. for coal, and Mr. D. Evans took passage in her to Kuching the same day.
In the Courts.— Tang Jap a Colliery coolie was sentenced to a term of imprisonment for stealing a mandor's chop, and falsifying the figures on food coupons.
Lee Chom, Lee Ah Phai, Lee Ah Jee and Matjapar bin Bakar were all fined for brawling in the Bazaar.
Lim Jong a Colliery Coolie was sentence to six months H. L. and 12 cuts with the rotan for threatening to murder other coolies just after the Teck Fat murder took place.
Kok Sang was imprisoned for perjury in connection ■with the Teck Fat murder case. Choo Ho was fined for trading without a License, Oui bin Haji Daud was lined for breaches of the Customs, Port, and Licensing regulations. Laga a Dayak was fined for arriving without a Pass, and Rapak, Chief of the Marbow Dayaks, Milikin, was fined for hardouring Sea-Dayaks among his people,
An apparent Lunatic, named Galan bin Penglima Daud, was sent to Kuching for Medical observation.
Mahtar, Forest Guard, inspected jelutong tapping at Ensingai and found several trees damaged by Dayak tappers. The usual fines were imposed.
During the month Dayaks from the 2nd. and 3rd. Divisions arrived in large numbers to work jelutong. This caused the local people to complain bitterly that these Dayaks were seizing their Paths and ruining the trees while they were away on their padi farms.
W. D.—A Contract was signed and work commenced on Quarters for the Hospital Dresser.
These will be erected about 150 yards from the Hospital.
The Manager of the Colliery has kindly laid out the site and arranged to supply all the timber required.
The prison gang, averaging 26 men. was employed the greater part of the month cleaning the Hospital grounds and white-washing the Hospital and its kitchen inside and out.
Five steamers and five schooners cleared with cargoes of coal during the month.
The trade returns are as follows :—
SADONG COLLIERY.
December, 1921.
The gross out-put of coal produced by the mines
during the month was 2,108 05 tons; 465 tons of
this were consumed by our boilers, and the balance
of 1,643.05 tons delivered to the wharf for export.
The shipments for the month were :—
The balance stock of coal on the wharf at the end of the month was 2,268.09 tons.
The out-put of the upper seam mine fell off du¬ring the latter half of the month, on account of the roof, immediately overlying the coal seam, being so brittle and difficult to support.
The lower seam in No. 8 mine was very thin throughout upper face-line panel on the west side, but improved again during the latter half of the month. The coal seam in No. 9 mine contained a large quantity of clod and rubbish as usual.
The new mine drivages were good, and the thick conglomerate rock-bed, which the Adit struck in August, has been driven through.
The wharf coal-yard and railway sidings had sunk over a foot below high-tide level. This was raised and filled in with over a thousand tons of shale and refuse material from the mines. The river-bank was wearing away rapidly with the strong currents, and, in order to relieve the pressure, 11,279 lengths of small “Barn" piles were driven promiscuously into the bank with good results.
The shipping clerk's quarters, which had become too small to accommodate his family comfortably were extended and repaired, and the ground on which they stood was raised, drained, and fenced in.
The general labour force was employed on the railway, filling in the swampy ground opposite the Ngili stream from the bazaar, draining, raising, and remetalling roads and paths around and approach¬ing the hospital, the cemetery, and the Manager's bungalow grounds.
The site, which the District Officer and myself had selected for the new dresser's quarters, was levelled and drained, and the stone boulders broken up with dynamite. The material for the budding was supplied by the Collieries, on the same principle as the hospital had been previously built. (1918 1919), the Station paying the cost of erection.
Work on the new cattleshed was commenced, and roof leakages and minor repairs were made by the
carpenters at the Malay and Chinese lines.
During the early hours of the morning of the 12th.
a fight took place in the Tanjong Batu Chinese
quarters resulting in the death of Yew Tak Fatt, a
young miner, who expired in a ravine at the back of
the line with a deep wound in the abdomen. His
adversary, also a young miner by name Man Kwai
Pan, fled to the jungle, and was found four days
later behind the old cattleshed in an exhausted
condition and suffering agony from the arm and leg
wounds he had received while fighting with deceased.
This case is now being considered by the Courts.
Jit Sang, a pensioner who was the oldest under-
ground mandor here and a very faithful servant,
died on the 2nd. at the local hospital.
Major Bulls of the Philippine Service paid a
visit to the Collieries early in the month.
Mr. David Evans, the Assistant Manager, left for
Kuching by the Sri Sadong mi the 27th., and was
away at the end of the month.
The rainfall for the month was 141/2 inches.
The buffaloes. 5 head, which were taken over from
the District Officer in November, are doing well.
I regret having omitted this item to His Highness
in the report for that mouth.
J.W. EVANS
Manager.
REJANG.
December, 1921.
Court. —There has been the usual amount of work
before the Courts.
THU Ah Hong and Ang Kow Watt were found
guilty of the theft of opium, etc., from a boat owned
by Chop Soon Hock of Rejang at San. The case 
was referred to the Resident 3rd. Division for sen-
tence. These men were sentenced to one year and
eighteen months imprisonment respectively.
The remainder of the cases before the Courts were
the usual disputes.
P- W. D.—The prison gang averaging 21 in number 
has been employed on general up-keep of the station, 
The boatshed was completed by prison labour 
under the supervision of the Government carpenter, 
A portion of the flooring of the Government
bungalow had to be replaced, the old planking being
rotten.
General. —The registration of pepper gardens at
Sari was completed by the 2nd. of the month.
S. L. Mermaid arrived here on the 5th. and I left
by her the next morning for Main and Daro. I 
returned here again on the 12th.
Mr. E. O. Bruce arrived here by s. I. Chamois on 
the 18th. and left the next evening for the North by
p. s. Adeh.
H. H. S. Zahora passed through on the 20th.,
returning again to Kuching on the 24th.
About 9 a. in. on the 21st, I was called to the
kampong to see a Malay Bakir bin Ahmat Laweng
who had attempted suicide by cutting his throat with
a razor. Having bandaged him up, I sent for the
island Trading Company’s dresser, who arrived about
6.30 p. tn. Although the wound was only about two
inches long he bad to insert 12 stiches. 1 made
several attempts to send Bakir to Sibu for treatment
but was unsuccessful, as he flatly refused to be
moved. It appears that about half an hour before
I was called, Bakir borrowed a razor from his
younger brother, saying he wished to shave. About
a quarter of an hour after his sister heard a noise
upstairs, and went to find out what it was. She
found Bakir lying in a long chair with his throat cut
and still holding the razor. There is no motive for
his attempting to take his life other than temporary
insanity due to a slight attack of fever from which
he was suffering at the time. The Government
dresser came down to fetch tins man on the 22nd.r
but was unsuccessful, Bakir still being obstinate.
He has now partly recovered from his wounds
Gani, juragan of schooner, Gustia.-reported that
on the afternoon of the 22nd. he picked up across
river from Jerijih Point a sampan Kotak, No. 404,
containing one man This man informed Gani that
his name was Smail and that he had left Palo Pan-
jang some 8 days previously for Pulo Temalan, and
had been blown out of his course He asked for a.
tow to Kuching. Gani anchored in Sungei Jerijih
for the night with Smail’s bout tied on after Smail
refused to either eat or sb*ep on board the schooner.
Next morning the man was missing from his boat.
He was last seen about 9 p. m. by one of the sailors,
who had been carrying on a conversation with him.
This man informed the sailor that his name was Haji
Drahman. The story he told to Gani is rather thin,
as it is absolutely impossible during the landas for
one man to manage the boat used. It is possible that
he had absconded from Dutch Territory and gradually
worked his way round the coast. I am informed by
Malays that the clothing he was wearing was not as
usually worn by people from Pulo Panjang. No fur-
ther trace of this man has been found.
I left by motor launch for Selalang on the after¬noon of the 24th., having been invited to spend Christmas and the New Year with Mr. Robarts.
General Manager of the Island Trading Co. Ltd. was still absent from the station at the end of the
month.
The trade returns for the month are as follows: —
Matu. —I arrived from Rejang bn the 6th., having
left s. l. Mermaid at Tanjong Jul on account of
rough weather.
There were rather a large number of eases before
the Courts, including the usual number of land cases.
There were no cases of particular note to report.
The place was flooded during my visit.
I left for Daro early on the 10th.
Kotak No. 26 was found washed ashore at Bruan on
the 10th. There was no trace of the owner. It is
presumed that the boat capsized and the occupant
was drowned.
The prison gang averaging 6 in number has been
generally employed
The trade returns for the month are as under: —
Daro. — I arrived from Matu together with Peng—
hulu Abang Adeng on the 10th. after rather a rough
journey.
There were few cases before the Courts. There
are still a number of land cases awaiting settlement
owing to the surveys not being completed. Penghulu
Abang Adeng has been ordered to carry them out
before my next visit.
Metrang alias Trang was sentenced to imprison-
ment for theft of padi from his grandfather. He
was previously imprisoned for a similar offence. Ba-
har was fined for gross contempt of Court and for
insulting the Native Officer, Haji Brahim.
The prisoners 2 in number have been employed
on general work.
The trade returns for the month are as follows:—
R. D. St. J. HORTON.
Officer-in-Charge.
SIBU.
December, 1921.
Court. - -The number of cases before the Courts
was less than usual, and but few were of tiny im-
portance
Cheng Seng Choi was sentenced to 6 months for
illtreating a child. The little girl had been taken
by him as a prospective daughter-in-law, and was in
a terrible condition through neglect. The Methodist
Mission kindly consented to take charge of the child
for the future.
Ab Bah and Yong Lak Lak were sentenced to
9 and 3 months respectively for theft.
Law Jee Thai was sentenced to 6 months -for
breach of the Money Lenders Order. Large sums
of money had been advanced by him to Chinese and
Malays on mortgage, and in practically every case
the interest had been added to the capital when the
deed was drawn up, and interest at 48% per annum
charged on the combined capital and interest.
These dealings have caused considerable hardship
to the planters who borrowed from him and all these
deeds are being looked into and put into proper
order
Nglambai was lined 2 piculs for causing hurt to a
small boy by setting a pig trap in his fruit grove.
The boy had a narrow escape from death
P. W. D.—The rentis for the remainder of the I
new road from the Island road to the Cross road has
been cut and lined out. The first portion from the
wharf to Island road has been completed and partly
gravelled.
The new floating stage to replace the wharf has |
been completed and placed in position, and the |
approaches completed and fixe i. The stage is 100
feet long, and so long as it is anchored securely will
serve its purpose. A heavy chain fixed to a sunken
boiler or some similar form of anchor will be needed
to hold it in the heavy freshets so common in this
river.
Considerable repairs have been effected to the padi
mill building and ice machine.
The Fort doors were completed and placed in
position Several of the posts of the Fort were ।
found to be very rotten, and one had begun to I
collapse. These posts have been replaced by new
ones. Four have been replaced this mouth, and |
two more will be taken in hand next month.
Roads and path have been kept in the usual order,
and gravel laid where necessary.
The telephone to the Coast has been working
very satisfactorily since the early part of the month.
Heavy rain has interfered considerably with out-
door work.
General. Mr. Aplin returned from Binatang and
Sankei on the 3rd.
The s. s. Alice Lorraine brought a cargo of
coal on the 11th., and 14 long sentence prisoners to
serve their term at Kapit.
Mr. Bruce proceeded on short leave by the p. s.
Adeh leaving Rejang on the 20th.
S S. Flevo made only one trip during the month,
arriving on the 16th, and could only ship a portion
of the cargo which was awaiting shipment at Sibu.
She consequently took none from Beradong, where
large quantities of sago flour have collected. En-
deavours to procure another steamer from Singapore
failed, and both traders and Government suffer from
the lack of steamers. Two steamers will however
be on the run in January which will improve matters.
S. S. Sarawak made two trips from Kuching on
the 16th., and 22nd., and the Motor Sch. Chin Teck
Lee one mi the 26th.
The Rev. J. M. Hoover left for Singapore by the
s. s Gladys from Rejang on the 28th.
H. H. S. Zahora arrived from Kuching on the
20th., with Messrs. Sherwood and Gifford, who went
up to Kapit in her next morning, returning to Ku-
ching on the 23rd.
Mr. A. E. Lawrence arrived from Mukah on the
23rd.
A line specimen of male orang utan was shot near
Pulau Kladi just above Sibu on the 29tb., and
brought to the Fort. The stretch of his arms was
8 feet 3 inches, and he stood 4 feet 10 inches high.
Those animals are numerous in the vicinity.
Mr. Stooke returned from Belaga on the 18th.
He reports the Kayans are in difficulties regarding
food supplies, and no native rice is obtainable above
Kapit.
Everywhere down-river the padi is excellent, and
a good crop is a practical certainty. Up-river it is
not so good.
Large numbers of Dyaks and Milanoes collected
at Sibu towards the end of the month for the regatta,
and the bazaar was crowded.
The local Fortmen st Kapit and Kanowit have
been withdrawn and incorporated in the Police
Force. These men were formerly in the Rangers,
but they have been long at the Outstation growing
less efficient every year. They had no proper uni-
form or status, and practically useless as they
were. They have now been brought down to Sibu
to he trained, and have been replaced by Sibu Police
who ate all now armed and drilled. With possibly
two or three exceptions these men may prove quite
useful members of the Force.
Mr. O. E. Schroter came over from Singapore by
the s. s. Flevo to enquire into the possibilities of
trading here, in malacca canes. Large quantities of
these canes have been and are still being worked,
but it has been impossible to export them all owing
to the lack of steamers.
Practically all rubber gardens are being tapped,
and trade generally is in a much better state than it
has been for some time past.
There has been heavy rain up-river which came
down in flood towards the end of the month, mid the
land round Sibu was under water.
The rainfall amounted to 9 66 inches.
The trade returns for the month are: —
DONALD A. OWEN,
Resident 3rd. Division.
OYA.
December, 1921.
Court. —No cases of importance came tip for
settlement during the month.
Junit was sentenced to imprisonment for swind-
ling, Mat for gross Contempt of Court, and Isa in
default of fine.
P. W. D.— The unusually small prison gang has
been employed with the upkeep of roads, ditches and
ornamental grounds.
Temporary repairs have been effected on the
bridges along the coast over small rivers which have
been considerably swollen owing to heavy rains,
Erection of the new Forest Guard Station and.
Police Barracks at Dalat has been somewhat delayed
owing to the contractor reporting sick with fever.
Seven schooners entered and cleared the port.
General. — There is a distinct decrease in the
demand for imported rice Ex-Government stocks
still in hand. 892 gantangs were sold.
On the 9th. the 2nd. Native Officer was granted
2 weeks leave to attend to private affairs on account
of the illness of his daughter.
Ab Peng the dresser arrived from Mukah to at-
tend to various persons.
Permission having been granted to spend Christ-
mas week in the North, I left the station via Sibu
and Rejang to meet the p. s. Adeh due there on the
15th., and was away at the end of the month.
Mr. A. E. Lawrence, District Officer, arrived from
Mukah on the 21st. en route to Sibu.
Monday, the 26th., was observed as the Christmas
day holiday and all offices were closed.
The local Police were duly informed of the new
Regulations and Scale of Pay inaugurated on the
1st. instant.
All desired to continue in the service.
E. O. BRUCE,
Officer-in-Charge.
BINTULU.
December, 1921.
On the 9th. I left for Pandan and Tubau, accom-panied by Native Officer Abang Naga.
There was a fair amount of Court work at Pandan. Two Dyaks were fined for adulterating getah jangkar and selling to one Ah Yok, who in turn was heavily fined for imposing a fine of five piculs of jelutong on these two Dyaks.
Permission was granted to Chinese to build three new shop houses. The sites for these were marked out and instructions given concerning the style of buildings to be erected
Tama Jaw, the Punan Tua Kampong, was ordered to demolish what is left of the old Police quarters, and to rebuild them on a new site, which was chosen.
The so-called Fort is very rotten, and this also will be repaired by the Punans at a later date.
There was not much work at Labang. The few Malays living there are very much exercised over the entry of Penghulu Merdan and forty doors of Dyaks into the Sungei Labang, and are already complaining about fruit trees that the Dyaks are said to have felled, or are about to fell. I called Penghulu Merdan, and eventually the Malays ad¬mitted that no damage had yet been done, but they were afraid there would be. I have arranged that the owners of fruit groves shall go and point these out to the penghulu, and that they shall then be recorded. Only fruit that can be proved to have been planted, or cared for by the natives will be con¬sidered, and after this the Dyaks will be responsible for any damage done.
At Tubau I stayed three days, but there was very little work. Certain Penans who have been gra¬dually moving further and further up-river have
been ordered to return to their original kampongs after this harvest. There is no excuse for these people becoming so inaccessible, as there is plenty of farming land further down river They are very nomadic and like to split up into small parties, and I think that this should be discouraged.
All the reports on the growth of the padi crops were good. Prices in the shops seemed very high. Blachu was $1 per depa, rice $1. and salt 70 cents per gantang.
The Kayans complained that they only get the same price for 4" belian attaps as they did for 3".
During this trip the registration of weights and
measures ill this part of the district was completed.
I returned to Bintulu on the 18th.
The Bintulu pawn farm was re-let to Tek Soon
for three years at a 50% increase. The Tatau pawn
farm, for which a bid of $5 was made last year, has
been let for the coming year for the sum of $12.
The tanjong opposite the Fort has been cleared
by kampong people.
Mails were received by s. s. Gladys on 4th., Pce.
Siti Jaoyah on 17th., and p. s. Adeh on 22nd
HENRY H. KORTRIGHT,
District Officer.
MIRI.
November,, 1921.
On the 2nd. I returned from Kuching and resumed,
my duties.
From the 3rd. to the 16th. exceptional rough wea-
ther was experienced. It was impossible to cross
the bar to attend to shipping lying outside, with the
result that three lighters belonging to Messrs. Sara-
wak Oilfields Limited and the Miri Maru were
driven ashore not far from Lutong.
The Zahora was due from Kuching on the 8th. with Mr. Moffat as passenger, and some anxiety was felt as to her safety. It was not until the 12th. that news was received that the vessel was safe and sheltering at Brooketon.
The revolving light at Baram point ceased work¬ing, so I proceeded as near to the point as possible by motor car by the courtesy of Messrs. Sarawak Oilfields Ltd., and made temporary repairs, return¬ing again later and replacing bolts which bad become brittle through amalgamation with mercury spilt from the float hath.
On the 11th , Armistice day, a two minutes silence was observed in commemoration.
On the I7th. the sea had completely calmed down, and the p. s. Adeh arrived from the North and dis¬charged all her over-carried cargo. Mr. and Mrs. Service were passengers, and came ashore for a short while.
On the 18lh., the Miri Maru was refloated and towed into the river for repairs.
The Resident of Brunei, Mr. Altec, accompanied by Mrs. Alien, who were passengers on the s. s. Kajang. came ashore for a few hours on the 20th. instant.
On the 24th a report was received from Pujut that a Kadayan named Ahmat had disappeared under extraordinary conditions, and it is suspected that he had committed suicide, though up to the time of writing no trace of his body has been found.
Mr. Palfreman arrived from Baram along the tele-
phone track on the 28th., and returned by the
s. 1. La Follette the next day in company with the
Resident and Mrs. Douglas.
The s. s. Deli of the Straits Steamship Co. was
unable to communicate here on account or the heavy
weather, and in turning to proceed to Labuan was
struck by a heavy sea which carried overboard four
deck passengers and a lot of cargo,
The prisoners were engaged in laying the new
water m in. and in general up-keep of roads.
Eight vessels called for oil, and a total of 1*2,487.40
tons was shipped.
The trade returns inclusive show as follows: —
December, 1921.
Revd. T C. Alexander arrived by the s s. Gladys
on the 4th., and proceeded to Sandakan by the s. s.
Dell on the 6th.
Mr. Bruce by the Adeh on the 16th. proceeded to
Jesselton via Labuan on the s. s. Penang the same
evening.
The new Thornycroft engine for the m. I, Helen
arrived from Kuching and was installed with very
little difficulty, and a trial run gave satisfaction in
every way. The old Van Blerk engine is being
packed up, and will be sent down to Kuching by first
opportunity.
Owing to frequent reports of tool boxes in outly-
ing derricks having been broken open and hammers,
axes, and chisels being stolen, I decided to
search the " Slabits” of the next batch of Dayaks
about to return to their country. A search was
made on a batch of 29 just prepared to embark
for Simanggang, and it was found that each man
was in possession of new hammers, files, chisels,
axes and innumerable other tools, and also each had
a bundle of steel rails cut to approximately two feet
lengths and up to about 50 lbs. weight, all stolen
from the Oil Company.
The entire batch were forwarded to Baram for
punishment by the Divisional Resident.
A very deliberate murder was committed on the
30th. instant, when one Tam Ming killed one Chan
Fook by cutting him down with an axe. Full
details are being forwarded under separate cover.
Tam Ming gave himself up immediately after tire
crime.
Christmas Day falling on Sunday, the next day
was observed as a general holiday.
Sir West Ridgeway, G. c. B., G. C. M. G., K. C. S. I.,
Chairman of the British North Borneo Company, was
a passenger aboard the s. s. Selangor, which vessel
called for a few hours only on her way North.
The prisoners completed laying the new water
main and its brunches, and now the bar racks and
bazaar have a good and adequate supply of water.
The Miri Maru was hauled up dry for repairs.
The Straits Steamships Co. vessels called as
usual, and 7 tankers loaded and cleared with a total of 31,667 78 tons of oil.
F. H. KORTRIGHT,
District Officer.
BARAM.
December, 1921.
The District Officer Mr. C. D. Adams was still
away visiting the Tutau Kalabits at the beginning
of the month and returned to the station on the 9th.
He reported having met all the Kalabits in the
Seridan District and appointed at their request
Lapong Bala as their chief, in place of Ballang Ketu,
deceased. He also met the Punan chiefs Tama
Treng and Oyau Amat at Long Mutan. Having
collected all outstanding fines and tax he returned.
On his way up-river he visited the Long Pata
village and confirmed the election of Oyau Malang,
son of the late O. K. Temonggong, as Penghulu of
the tribes living in the Lower Tutau
I had arrived on a visit at the end of last month
and returned again to Miri on 15th. inst. Mr. Adams
was granted 6 weeks local leave from 17th. instant,
so I came back here again on the 19th.
There have been a good number of cases in the
Courts. The principal were: —
Randi vs Bandar. Theft of $200. Defendant
sentenced to imprisonment.
Subai vs Ah Meng. Theft. Defendant sentenced
to 6 months R. I.
Peng Chiang received 3 months imprisonment for
conspiracy in connection with the above case.
Government vs- Ann Ho. Fined for breach of
Stamp Duties Order.
Sarawak Oilfields Ltd. vs Apau and 28 other
Dayaks. Theft Defendants imprisoned for 3 months
each, and to pay $20 each damages to the Company.
Penghulu Lanting and Imbi went up to S. Baong
to inspect the bind there which has been allotted to
them. In the usual Dayak-like manner they do not
approve of what has been apportioned to them and
demand land elsewhere. They were informed that
they could have that land or else stay where they
were.
Several of the local firms made representation to
me as regards their debts in Kuching, saying that it
was impossible for them to pay up judgments in the
Courts as there was no cash in the bazaar, but that
if their creditors would wait until the end of the
N. E. monsoon they would guarantee to pay up the
sums owing in produce. I have reported on this
matter to the Magistrate, Court of Requests, Ku-
ching.
Large rafts of rattans have been arriving and a
shipment of birds-nests and damar was made direct
to Singapore via Miri.
The schooner Kim Seng Guan arrived at Claude-
town in tow of s. I. La Follette on 8th. instant, and
left again on 19th. with a cargo for Kuching. Tins
was the boat which was blown over Baram bar
during the stormy weather in November. She was
refitted at Baram mouth.
Mr. St. V. B. Down of Rubber Patents Ltd.
arrived on 29th. instant, and met all the Chinese
towkays with the idea of starting the Dyera process
of working jelutong. He reported being very satis-
fied with his prospects.
The trade returns for the month were :—
The prisoners have been employed in repairing
the kampong road. A small gang was detailed off
to assist the carpenters in repairing H. H. the Rajah’s
bungalow, whilst the chain-gang have mown the
ornamental grounds and roads.
The weather during the month has been hot
and rainy. The temperature having reached 90° in
the shade, whilst the rainfall amounted to 6'39 inches. The health of the District has been good.
All reports both up and down-river point to a good harvest, and, if the river does not rise, there should lie no anxiety as to the padi.
Owners of rubber gardens have started clearing their gardens owing to the rumour of the rise in price of para rubber. At present the price is 30cents a katty in the bazaar.
Christmas Day was kept as usual and, as it fell on a Sunday, the offices were closed the following day ns well.	e
R. S. DOUGLAS, Resident 4th. Division.
BROOKETON COLLIERY.
November, 1931.
Tile gross out-put of coal was 1,973.5 tons; of this 721 tons were consumed by our boilers, and the balance 1,2521 tons sent to wharf.
Shipments to Labuan by s. I. L’Aubaine and Lighters amounted to 1,138 tons; 89 tons bunkers | were taken by H. H. S. Y. Zahora and local launches.
Balance of coal in stock at the end of the month was 224.5 tons.
Coal sold at Labuan totalled 1,029 tons, of which 996 tons were taken by Messrs. the Straits Steam¬ship Company’s steamers, and the balance by local launches.
Everything went well in all departments. The out-put of saleable coal is still low, owing to some of the old shallow workings having been closed down in consequence of having been worked to their, limit, We hope however to have some new places turning out coal early in the new year, when our out-put should be back to normal again.
H. H. S. Y. Zahora arrived here on the 10th., having put in for shelter and coal, and left for Ku¬ching via Labuan on the 14th.
The p. s. Adeh arrived here on the 12th. with Mr. and Mrs. Service on board. A very rough passage was experienced on the way up and some damage done to the Adeh, which necessitated repairs at Brooketon before she could proceed to Limbang. This, with the surveying of the s. l. L'Aubaine, kept Mr. Service fully occupied the four days he was at Brooketon.
The s. 1. L'Aubaine was beached and surveyed on the 13th. and 14th., and was again beached on the 29th. when a new bush was put in.
The s. 1. L'Aubaine broke down off Pulompong point while returning from Labuan on the 18th. with an empty lighter in low. The cause of the accident was the breaking of the plunger of the circulating pump, the rocking shaft being badly twisted. Thanks io the Resident 5th. Division, who very kindly placed his launch at our disposal, we were able to send out assistance quickly. With a little difficulty the L’Aubaine and lighter were brought safely in by 4 a. m the following morning. The L’Aubaine was under repairs till the 22nd.
The rainfall at Brooketon mine was 11 inches.
December, 1921.
The gross out-put of coal amounted to 2,007 tons, of which 797 tons were consumed by our boilers, and the balance 1,210 tons, sent to wharf.
Coal shipped to Labuan by the s. I. L'Aubaine and lighters, amounted to 192 tons. P. S. Adeh, a. s. Alice. Lorraine, and local launches were supplied with a total of 78 tons bunker coal.
The amount of coal in stock at end of the month was 864 5 tons.
Coal sold at Labuan amounted to 667 tons; 563 of this was taken by the Mail steamers, 73 tons by the R. s. Sumatra, and the balance of 81 tons, by local launches.
Fire caused some trouble in the underground workings of the West Slant; two of the levels having to be sealed off before the fire was overcome. Most of the old pillars met with in this mine are found to be very badly crushed, and so, very liable to. spontaneous combustion.
Everything went smoothly in the Mechanical 'Department, the usual work of cleaning boilers and overhauling machinery being done at the-commence- ment of the month.
The s. l. L'Aubaine. was under repairs, ami having her boiler cleaned etc., from the 11th. to the 16th. inclusive.
Mr. Harris, having been sanctioned short leave, proceeded to Singapore on the 11th., returning on the 27th.
The fall in the Buang Tawar oil level had been practically cleared by the end of the month, and a passage made for the oil to flow out. Barembang oil in stock at Buang Tawar was 1,200 gallons.
The total rainfall at Brooketon Mines was 13'02. inches.
J. O. MADDOCKS,
Manager.
LIMBANG.
October, 1921.
General.—The fanning season being in full swing Court work has been very light.
1 went over to Lawas on the 5th. returning on the 801.
At Lawas, Kilat, a Tagal, who had been detained since May on suspicion of having murdered one Tagang, also a Tagal, was released, the evidence not being sufficient to bring a case.
An application from Messrs. Vanscolina & Co., Labuan, for a timber concession in the Lawas District was handed to the Conservator of Forests.
Mr. P. M. Adams returned to Lawas on the 2nd. He came over again on the 10th. to catch the boat for Kuching.
On the 12th. 1 left for Kuching with Mrs. Boult, Messrs. Adams and Daubeny, and the members of the Council Negri from the 5th. Division We were all absent until the 27th.
Nothing of importance occurred whilst we were away, except that there would appear to have been a great deal of sickness about.
The prisoners have practically rebuilt the boat¬shed. The old galvanised iron roofing was again used, it still being in very good condition.
The p. s. Adeh called in twice, the m. 1. Adele five times, and the s. I. Peter Duff once.
The trade returns for the month are: —
November, 1921.
Court. —Kandau and seven other Dayaks were fined for felling and burning engkabang and gutta rian trees.
Lapan, a Kling, was sentenced to imprisonment for living with Bisayahs, it being his second offence of this nature. Mukai, an absconding Javanese coolie from Temburong. was sentenced to im¬prisonment for travelling without a pass, and also Assan, a Kling, for a similar offence.
The Supreme Court, Kuching, granted Bachee a divorce from his wife, Tumbir, on account of her misconduct with Nio Joo.
Datu Kalam brought down Lanchar, a Kadayan, an escaped prisoner from Brunei. On arrival of an escort he will be handed over.
Travelling. — I was away at Brooketon from the ]8tb. to i he 25th.
Messrs. Daubeny and Humphery went up to Danau on the 27th. and were still in that neighbourhood at the end of the month, checking the exemption tax book.
General —Mr. Eric Humphery, Cadet, arrived by the Adeh on the 15lh., having been appointed to do duty in this District.
Mr. Doughty, Manager of the Island Trading Co. Ltd., called in by request on the 8th., to discuss the question of firewood worked for his company in this Division.
The Dumit is once more in commission again. Mr. Harris brought her over on her trial trip from Brooketon on the 27th. He returned the next day by the Nancy, which vessel was en route for Lawas, her charter with the Government being completed.
The plans of the proposed new launch for this District were kindly "sent up by His Highness the Rajah. J edging from these she would appear to lie a very suitable type of boat for the work required of her. Although larger in every way than the present one, her draft will only be 2 ft 3 in.
The p. s. Adeh only mane one trip this month, and was delayed two days at Brooketon repaying the damage she sustained during her rough passage •on the way tip.
The m. I. Adele called in seven times
The trade returns for the month are:
'The rainfall recorded was 8’65 inches on 19 days.
December, 1921.
Court.— There has been a wave of buffalo steal¬ing through the district; for this offence Langit, Arip, Kalang, Kerduit and Kipur were all sentenced to various terms of imprisonment, ranging from six months to two years.
Nyukit, a Dyak, and Ludin, a Brunei, were each fined for failing to report the death from drowning of Nyukit's foster-mother, Bindu. It would appear that all three were on their way to the bazaar in a small boat, when, owing to the heavy fresh at the mouth of the Labang stream, the boat was swamped, and the occupants precipitated into the water. Bindu, who could not swim, soon succumbed. The Lubai Dyaks, who had not been informed of the accident, became suspicious and thought there had been foul play, as Nyukit was known to have quarrelled with Bindu as to who should inherit her property. The enquiry instituted, Satisfied the Government that Bindu met her death by misadventure., -
Lau Cha, Chin Chit, and Ah Yong were each fined for being concerned in the theft of an opium pipe. Apong for stealing a boat, from a Dyak was sentenced to six months R. I. This was not his first offence. For burglary Ah Kee received a similar sentence, and Ah Chok was fined for trespass.
General.—Nyuk Poh, the second clerk, went over to Labuan on the 2nd. for medical advice, and re¬mained in hospital until the 28th.
Messrs. Daubeny and Humphrey returned from up-river on the 2nd.
I was away in Labuan with Mrs. Boult from the 45th. to the 9tb., and at Brooketon from the 17th. to the 20th.
Mr. P M. Adams, A I) O. Lawas and Trusan,
and Mr. C. J. Cook of Marapok came over on the
24th. Mr. C. D. Adams. D. O. Baram, arrived from
Miri, by the p. s. Adeh on the 25th., and that same
afternoon Mr. and Mrs. Maddocks came over in the
s. s L'Aubaine. Mr. and Mrs. Maddocks returned to
Brooketon the next day by the same vessel, which
took back a full cargo of timber for the Brooketon
Colliery.
The Rev. A. P. Strugnell arrived from Labuan on
the 2nth„ and went on to Brunei the following
afternoon. That same evening the s. I. Mac Arthur
came in from Brunei, bringing Dr. Brooke, Chief
Health Officer of the Straits Settlements, with Mrs.
Brooke and Dr. Cleverton, Medical Officer, Labuan.
The two doctors returned to Labuan on the 29th.,
and Mrs. Brooke remained.
P. IF. D.—The road coolies have been employed in
levelling off a site for a kitchen for the new bungalow.
Worn on the new bungalow is progressing very
slowly but surely. The hold-up for timber, due to
the drought a few months back, is the chief cause of
the delay. The contractor agreed to finish the
building at the end of this month, but this he has,
through on fault of his own, failed to do. I should
say there is at least two or three months work before
the building can be completed. 
The prisoners have cleaned out the ditches on the
golf course, and those on the road leading to the five
mile round.
Shipping The p. s. Adeh and s. s. Alice Lorraine
each made one trip from Kuching. The s. 1. Peter
Duff called in once from Labuan. and the m. I. Adele
four times, whilst the s. s. 1/Aubaine made one trip
from Brooketon.
Seventy-one head of buffalo were exported to
Kuching.
The trade returns are as under:—
F. F. BOULT,
Resident 5th. Division.
LAWAS AND TERUSAN.
November, 1921.
Lawas. Court.—The usual number of cases were heard, none of which were of importance. The । pawn farmer’s agent did not appear to be aware of the order relating to the auctioning of unredeemed pledges. This has been explained to him.
I visited Merapok from the 16th. to 18th. Two Chinese were fined for going inland to trade. These people literally scramble for jungle produce, and unless they are prevented from visiting the Tagal villages, it is feared someone will get hurt. Bangau, a Tagal, was imprisoned for adulterating jangkar.
The Chinese were told to make out documents when advancing money to Tagals, which will be witnessed by the policeman and sent to Lawas for translation and stamping. It is hoped by this means to force the Chinese to pay a fair price for the produce.
Chop Hiap Seng was summonsed by Chop Leong Chuan of Labuan for $747. The parties came to an arrangement out of court.
General.—I arranged with Tagals to collect speci¬mens of their arts and crafts. Mr. Cook, with whom
I stayed during my visit try Merapok, has about 40 
tons of sawn timber awaiting shipment. Mr. Cook
twice visited Lawns, the second time accompanied
by Mr. Coghill of Brunei, on the s. I. Datu.
P. W. D,—Several minor repairs were carried out
in the Foil, which were badly needed, I arranged
with Muruts to work timber for the new bridges.
The prisoners were employed in clearing the hill
behind the cattle-shed, and cleaning ditches.
Trusan.— I walked over on the 7th., and measured
all the bridges, allowing two planks to every foot.
1,200 planks and 100 posts will be required. The
total cost including carpenter's wages, will be rough-
ly $650.
Court.—The. Bijam, S. R , deserted but Was cap-
tured the next day. He subsequently escaped cus-
tody by removing a plank from his cell, but was
again caught. A Murut woman, who was partly
responsible for his desertion, also escaped from jail
and so far is still at large. Pte. Bijam has several 
charges against him, including an attempt to open
the belian safe. As the new squad of Rangers had
arrived, the minutes of his cases were sent to the
District Court Martial for decision. Several cases
of minor importance were settled.
General. — I drew up a list of timber lo be worked
for the new bridges, giving the greater part of the
work to the Malays, as they are seldom called upon.
The Chinese will contribute towards this project.
A Chinese carpenter has undertaken to make a
model of the Trusan bazaar, and various other people
to collect models and animals for the exhibition,
Sundar. —I visited Sundar from 11th. to 13th.,
and settled various matters.
The resignation of Omar, T. K., was accepted and
a new man elected. As several Malays are living as
many as four and five families in one small house,
and applied for land to make houses of their own on
buffalo land, I met them all, including the buffalo
owners, and marked out land for them on the under-
standing that, if the health of the buffaloes became
affected by the restricted area, they would have to
rebuild their houses elsewhere, and no compensation
would be given. They all agreed to this.
P. W. D.-—The Trusan Fort is in a bad state of
repair, especially the prison cells
I took four prisoners with me to Trusan, and
cleared round the edge of the ornamental grounds.
I went to Labuan on the 19th., and from there to
Brooketon to meet the Divisional Resident, return-
ing to Lawas via Limbang on the 25th.
The trade returns were:
Rainfall, Lawas 14’95 inches. Trusan. 12’52 inches.
P. M. ADAMS, Assistant District Officer.
