The Sarawak Gazette.
MONDAY, OCTOBER 2, 1922.
MANY INVENTIONS.
With reference to August notes in our last issue, wherein we informed our readers that there were rumours of a flying vessel passing over Kapit Fort, we have received the following telegram from the Resident 3rd Division :—
“Java Post confirms flying boat visited Borneo going north near Pemangkat then east inland to Kapuas 500 Kilometres plainly seen close Belaga Fort fired Verey light over Belaga 8 p. in. returning east.
It is satisfactory to know that the report given by a Native Officer has been verified, and the occurrence is, indeed, a remarkable one for Sarawak.
People at home are so used to seeing airships; and aeroplanes flying overhead that Europeans in this country’ may find it difficult at first to realise what a novelty it must be for natives.
Not long ago the people of Kuching were given
an opportunity’ of seeing submarines, vessels that
go under the water, and now the Belaga natives
have seen a vessel which flies over land and water.
It is true that many of the more intelligent
natives have read of flying vessels, and probably
some have seen them depicted on the films, but to
those who were at all sceptical, and we believe
there were many so, it is now proved without a
doubt that the orang puteh can build ships that fly’
through the air.
There have been rumours of a hydroplane having
been purchased which will be running soon on one
of the big rivers, and it is certain that before
many years have elapsed flying vessels of various
sorts will be seen, if not constantly, at least from
time to time, in Sarawak.
'Die last ten years have seen many changes and
innovations in this Country. 1 he 'wireless tele-
graph astonished- many and now we have the
wireless telephone. The big oil workings at Miri.
the railway’ in Kuching, the d..ck and now sub-
marines and airships. We are informed that six
motor cars were imported into Kuching since last
July, and this number of the Gazette contains, for
the first time in Sarawak, an advertisement for
cars on hire.
It has often been remarked that natives take all
modern inventions which are shown to them as a
matter of course that is to say’ they do not express
extreme astonishment at the novelty ; but is not
rather that the native is not given to expressing
his surprise in loud tones.
We imagine, of course, that to some of the natives these wonders of modern ingenuity do not convey anything to their minds—they are unable to take it all in but undoubtedly’ many do feel the greatest astonishment and admiration for the things which they are shown and which are new to them. If they do not always give vent to their feelings yet all the same we do think that they often marvel at these inventions and per chance, in the quietness of their homes, feel a cer¬tain amount of awe and sometimes fear at the things which they have seen. Naturally the mind of the native is gradually changing; steams engines, motors, and electric currents have no terrors for many whilst most Europeans are. astonished at the way’ in which many of their native, assistants pick up the elementary ideas of engineering, forestry, surveying and such like and speak its jargon too.
Those who live in Sarawak, however, will know that, in spite of all these improvements and in¬novations, the great majority of the natives still continue to live, as far as it is possible, the simple life of their forefathers. They are becoming modernised slowly but, in our opinion, it will be many a year before they entirely lose their old ideas and give up the life which has suited them so well in the past
ON 17th September, the wife of ABANG ADENG, Sibu, of a son.
NOTES.
September. 
AMONGST the passengers by the s. s. Kuching which arrived from Singapore on the 8th September was Mr. E. G. Walker of United Engineers Ltd., who came over in connection with the electric lighting installation in Kuching. He returned by the same trip.
Ma. E. J. Humphery returned to Limbang by the Adeh sailing on the 7th September.
THERE were many passengers on the s. s. Kuching which sailed for Singapore on the 12th September. Amongst these were Mr. "R. E. Le Sueur, Bishop and Mrs. Bickley. Mr. and Mrs. Barraclough and Mr. J. C. Smith.
THE Sarawak Government Gazette of the 15th September contains another instalment of Order No. Ill, 1922, known as the Kuching Municipal Order.
There are no less than three pages of streets regulations and over two pages of By-Laws governing general conservancy, cleansing of streets, prevention of nuisances, regulations of traffic in the streets and removal of nightsoil. These orders and regulations are very minutely set down. Tn a notification in the same issue of the Government Gazette it is notified, amongst other new regulations, that horses and ponies are to be taxed at §5 a year per head.
A correspondent from Sadong i informs us that during the early hours of Monday morn-ing, the 4th September, a fire broke out in Heng Ah Lak’s smoke-house in his rubber garden, which completely destroyed the build-ing. Three years output of rubber, valued at nearly $2,000, was lost.
On the 3rd a violent gale blow from the S. W. which caused damage to local building and gardens.
IN our last issue we forget to mention that His Highness The Rajah presented prizes for the best Costumes worn by ladies at the fancy dress ball at the Astana in Race Week. The selection was in the hands of the men who voted for their special fancy. The results were as follows:—
1st Mrs. Adams 
Mrs. Nelson Tie
2nd Mrs. Douglas
3rd  Mrs. Ker
Mrs. Butcher Tie
RECENT Gazettings are Captain E. V. Andreini to do duty at Mukah, Mr. F. G. Carpenter to do duty at Baram and Mr. A. O. Thomas to be Electrical Engineer. P. W. D.
Mr. R. L. Daubeny has been appointed an Officer of Class IV and Mr. J. A. H. Hardie has been granted an extension of 3 months furlough on half pay.
FROM the Singapore Free Press.—
It was a bad mistake on the part of the Sub-Editor of the Sarawak Gazette, after having given a long description of the gorgeous dresses worn at a fete there, to follow it up with a paragraph saying “We would draw our readers’ attention to the appeal made for old clothing.	”
Peccavimus!!!
WE would draw our readers’ attention to a book entitled “People and Places, a Life in Five Continents” by Arthur Keyser—and published by Messrs. John Murray.
This work has been lengthily quoted and praised by “The Times.” “Times Literary Supplement,” “Daily Telegraph,” “Morning Post,” “Scotsman” and “Irish Times.”
The book contains a chapter on Sarawak as well as many appreciative references to the late Rajah.
Mr. Keyser will be remembered by some of our readers as British Consul for Brunei and Sarawak in 1899—1900. During his term of service he paid several visits to Kuching. He is now, we understand, British Consul at Tangier Morocco.
Below we print a few. extracts from a most excellent review of the book published in “ The Times Literary Supplement.’’ Speaking of the author the reviewer says:—
“ We can say of him definitely that he became grey in his country's service, for the red hair to which he refers frequently in his early pages had all the colour taken out of it by poison administered in Borneo by Rajas who disliked his attitude towards their extortions ”
The reviewer then goes on to recount some of the author’s experiences in Sarawak. The following story is strange to us, perhaps some of our readers may be able to corroborate it.
“ He was required by the Government to request Raja Brooke of Sarawak to desist from an attack on the Sultan of Brunei; the Raja was not accustomed to have his actions questioned and said so, but re¬lented to the extent of adding that as he would only put a shot or two through the Palace, there would not be much harm done. '* Par worse than that will happen. Raja," said the diplomatist, adding to the inquiry thus provoked. “ I shall get the sack." “ By jove and so you will." quoth the genial Monarch, and forbore."
Finally we read—
“This was but one of many adventures in Malay¬sia, and it is his experiences there which make the best reading in the book. He has his own way of dealing with the different races he encountered there
Malays, Dutch, Sikhs, Chinese, and Japanese and though he often had a tussle to begin with, he ended by getting on with them all. What struck him most sharply in the Dutch East Indies was that the natives crouched low in the road when Europeans passed; but this is not, as one might suppose, a sign of oppression. Java, though to our ideas much governed is well governed; exaggerated obeisances are in the traditional etiquette of Java, and the Dutch do no more than claim for Europeans the same outward signs of respect as are accorded to native chiefs. In these days of excessive nationalism one expedient that recommended Itself to Eastern wisdom is worth nothing; in some of the Malay States the people, with nepotism in their minds, invite a Raja from another country to rule over them ; similarly, and even more suggestive, “the Mahomedan priest is always selected from another nation¬ality.” The writer’s Malay servants were devoted to him; they accompanied him both to Somaliland— where they pined until he had to send them home- - and to England, where their adventures would make a-book of themselves. One of them might "have walked out of the pages of a pirate story" and into a conveticle. He refused to go a second time to the Alhambra, giving as his reason. "I do not like to see so much naked." Another, Usoof, while with his master in Java, sought and found the mother from whom he had been parted at the age of two. His relations made much of him, and it was suggested that he might prefer to stay in his ancestral home, the name of which when the search began had escaped
him. “It does not matter, Tuan,” he replied, “ aa . they are all coming to stay with us in Jelebu later.” ' They did; and the story suggests how the writer , came to get his way with the native races he was [ sent to control."
A total eclipse of the sun occurred on the 21st September.
This was partly visible in Kuching and to-wards noon a gradual darkness was expe-rienced. The day, however, was dull and this was therefore not as noticeable its it might have been.
IT is interesting to note that the value of Exports from this country for January to July 1922 (inclusive) was $5,241,526 as against $4,812,235 for the same period of last year.
The Imports for the same 7 months are valued at $4,918,561 as compared with $4,490,237 last year.
Mus. Stennitt, who for the last, six months has been Acting Matron of the Government European Hospital, returned to Singapore on the 22nd by the s. s. Kuching, on the expiration of her agreement. Many of her friends gathered on the ship to say good-bye.
Mrs. Stennitt has been most popular during her short stay in Sarawak and we wish her the best of luck in Taiping where she goes to re-join her husband who is Manager of an estate in that neighbourhood.
MB. A. Sharples, Government Mycologist S. S. and F. M. S. arrived by the s. s. Kuching on 19th September and intends investigating the pepper diseases in Upper Sarawak.
DRY rubber harvested at Sungei Ten gab Estate amounted to 76,000 lbs. for the month of August.
MB. R. V. Palfreman arrived on the 19th from Baram by s. 8. Gladys. He is at present doing temporary duty in the Police in Kuching.
A Perilous Mistake.
An American scientist nearly hanged himself on the bedpost by means of his braces' It is Relieved that in a fit of absent mindedness he mistook himself for his trousers.
Birthday of His Highness The Rajah.
CEREMONIAL PARADE OF SARAWAK RANGERS
AND POLICE.
The forty-eighth Anniversary of His Highness
The Rajah’s birthday was officially celebrated in
Kuching by a ceremonial parade of the Sarawak
Rangers and Police on the Police parade ground.
The troops, under the command of Lieut. Clark,
S. R., arrived on the parade ground a little after
8.30a. m. and were drawn up facing the saluting
point behind which a temporary shelter had been
erected for the convenience of onlookers, The
ground was surrounded by an interested crowd,
whilst most of the Europeans in Kuching and the
Chiefs of the Malay and Chinese communities were
assembled round about the saluting point.
The Resident, accompanied by Mr. H. A. Adams,
Acting Superintendent of Police, proceeded to
inspect the lines; the troops on parade were three
companies of Sarawak Rangers on the right and
two companies of Police on the left. At 9 o’clock
the buglers sounded the Royal Salute, the Rajah s
flag was broken from a flag staff in the middle of
•the ground and the National Anthem played ; in
the meanwhile a salute of 21 guns was fired from
the Fort. The troops then marched past the
Standard in column of companies and returned in
quarter column, they then advanced in review
order and gave the Royal Salute and finally gave
three cheers for His Highness.
The troops showed remarkable steadiness and
precision in all their movements, the march past
of the Rangers being especially smart. The Police,
considering their limited opportunities for drill,
gave a splendid display and the whole turn out
evoked the admiration of all.
The natives were shown an example of what
discipline and obedience to orders can produce and
the Officers of both forces must have shown great
patience in being able to turn out such smart
men.
After the review the Europeans. Malay Chiefs
and the Chief Chinese Towkays repaired to the
Government Printing Office, where the Resident
proposed His Highness' health which was drunk
by all present.
The day was observed as a holiday and flags
were flown on many of the buildings in the town.
The weather kept fine the whole day. In the
evening Mr. A. B. Ward and Mr. G. C. Gillan gave
a dance at the Sarawak Club. The building had
been most tastefully dec irate 1 with palms and
bunting and the forty o Id guest; spent a very en-
joyable evening. The band of the Sarawak Ran-
gers was present and dancing was kept up until
the early hours.
The Trustees of Posterity.
Lord Beaconsfield says, in his fascinating tale of
Sybil:—
We live in an age when to be young and to be indifferent
can lie us longer synonymous. We must prepare for
the coming hour. The claims of the Future are repre-
sented by suffering millions, and the Youth of a Nation
are the Trustees of Posterity.
If these words were true in 1845, they are doubly
and trebly true to-day. “The Trustees of
Posterity"—mark the phrase. 1 propose to enquire
what characteristics should distinguish the young
citizen who takes his citizenship and its possibilities
seriously, and aims at becoming, as Lord Beacons-
field-said, a Trustee of Posterity.
For my own part, 1 have not the slightest doubt
about the characteristic which I should place in the
forefront. The young citizen must be, first and
foremost, a lover of Freedom—Heaven’s best gift to
the individual and to society. The liberty, which
Milton loved, “to know, to utter, and to argue
freely"—the liberty to act in things secular and
sacred, in public and in private, according to one’s
own conviction of what is right—is the one incom-
parable good of life, the one priceless possession for
which no earthly equivalent can be found, no con-
ceivable boon be taken in exchange. And of this
liberty the young citizen must accept only one
limitation, and that is that the exercise of his own
freedom shall not infringe the freedom of another,
in that single, simple condition he recognizes the
law which regulates, while it. sanctions, the awful
though glorious prerogative of Free Will. That one
restriction the young citizen must admit as belong-
ing to the very nature of liberty and to the elemen-
 tary necessities of human society He admits this
one, but he will admit no more. Loving liberty
 himself, he desires to see it “in widest commonalty
spread" among all his fellow-men, irrespective of
race, colour, or creed.
Second only to Love of Freedom, we place in this
ideal portraiture Faith in Progress. To believe
that the world is going from bad to worse; that
each age and each year loses some old good and
brings some fresh evil: that every change in life, in
thought, in society, is a deterioration ; that novelity
is synonymous with mischief; and that all apparent
progress is essential retrogression—this may be a
suitable creed for the aged and the timid, for jaun-
diced visions, and failing health, and waning, intel-
lect; but surely it is no gospel for young and vigorous
and aspiring minds, for resolute wills and hopeful
hearts, and natures which believe in and long to
prove their own ’nigh capacities.
To believe that “the great mundane movement.’’
as Matthew- Arnold called it, is on the whole towards
good ; that Christianity is not a colossal failure; that
civilization is not a heartless sham ; that, under the
influence of both, the world is gradually but surely
passing on towards a better age, and that we, in
1 mir several degrees and stations, can do something
। to accelerate its progress—This is a sentiment
which ennobles human existence. This answers the
question ; “Is life worth living?" This, more than
any other principle, except, perhaps,- the kindred
passion for freedom, has characterized in every age
the gallnut and generous souls who have led the
great onward march of redeemed humanity.
We have spoken of Freedom and of Progress.
 There is something which is indispensable to both.
A Trustee Posterity must lie a disciple of Order.
He knows that, without order, the liberty of the
stronger will inevitably and fatally over ride the
liberty of the weaker and thereby set at naught his
primary canon—that one man's freedom must not
infringe the freedom of bis brother-man. He knows
that, without order, the progress in which he longs
to assist will be, not a rhythmic march, but a
riotous hustle, in which the weakest must go to the
wall. Order is it condition precedent both to liberty
and to progress.
Closely allied to the Love of Order is the Spirit of
Reverence. To a generous nature, nature is as
natural as the passion for freedom or the impulse of
progress. Our young citizen must be always on his
guard against that miserable vanity which attempts
to magnify itself by depreciating all that has hitherto
claimed the homage and the admiration of mankind.
He knows that there is much, even for the youngest
and cleverest of us, to learn from what “larger
minds have thought out in calmer ages'' —from “the 
long result of time.”—from the general tendency and 
drift of human thought mid experience. He reveres 
all human excellence. He recognizes the sign-manual
of Heaven in human intellect. He sees the line- 
aments of a diviner nature than his own in hum in
goodness. Industry, and energy, and courage, and 
patience, independence of character, freedom of
judgment, gentleness, self-control, self-sacrifice—the '
flogged labour which gives a lifetime to an abscure 
but beneficent work; the flash of genius which, in
n sudden moment, lights the path to fame—these 
are the qualities, these the attributes, which attract
the homage of the young citizen. But, with his 
whole heart, he spurns and scorns the false gods of
this world which cry aloud for his worship. Helms 
no homage for wealth, except as a proof of industry 
nor for rank, except as the guinea-stamp of superior 
merit. He has no reverence for man-made dogmas, 
foisted by pious fraud on ignorance and credulity, 
He has no respect for pretention* self-assertion, he 
will not bow the knee to any reputation however 
high its pedestal in the world’s temple, unless he is 
persuaded that it has a moral title to stand where it 
is. He claims the light to judge, by his own con- 
science and reason, every demand which is made
upon his reverence. But, when once that judgment is
satisfied. he has reverence in abundant store for the
object which is found worthy to receive it. He
knows that hero-worship is the most graceful pri-
vilege of youth, and he enjoys it unsparingly. He
“lives by admiration,” its well as " by hope and
love.” 
Love of freedom, contempt for false pretensions,
worship of intellect-these combine to produce belief
in Equality. The human soul, made in the image
of God, is the one real object of reasonable reverence.
This reverence the young citizen pays. He hates
all artificial barriers between class and class, the
spirit of caste, the deification of selfishness. He
loves his brothers and sisters in the human family.
He aims at Social Service. And the ideal of social
service is, first, to lighten the load of existence for
those thronging millions whose one experience of
life is a protracted suffering; and then, as Words-
worth says. "to add sunshine to daylight by making
the happy happier.” However humble his station,
however circumscribed his opportunities, the young
citizen can always find some sort of social service
ready to his hand. The poor, the weak, the hungry,
the untaught, the overworked—nil these send up
their bitter cry, “ How long?” and. in ministering to
them, the smug citizen knows that he is making
bis definite, though perhaps unnoticed, contribution ;
to the social redemption of humanity. Truly said
George Eloit—“The growing good of the world is
partly dependent on unhistoric acts : and that things
are not so ill with you and me as they might have ,
been is hull owing to the number who lived faith-
fully a hidden life and rest in unvisited tombs.”
And here let me remark in bussing that there is
one clear, easy and obvious department of social
service. Sanitary reform is the first step towards
securing happiness and health and length of days for
those who, by their daily labour of hand or head,
principally maintain the pre-eminence of the race.
The young citizen—the Trustee of Posterity is im-
patient of a state of society in which healthy dwell-
ings, and unadulterated food, and pure water, and
fresh air, are the monopolies of the rich; and be can
never rest till he sees, in the neglected village or the
squalid back-settlements of the town in which he
lives his own efforts contributing, however feebly,
to this form of special service. He must do his
part towards abolishing filth and eradicating disease,
and giving free scope to those beneficent laws of
Nature, which, ‘ though they were not revealed
amid the thunders of Sinai, are not less the com-
mandments of God.”
'This conviction of the sacredness of human life—
this belief that to maintain his own life and the lives
of others in health and vigour is a paramount duty
—'naturally leads our young citizen to a very definite '
conclusion on the great subject of Peace and War.
He knows that we do not necessarily sin against the
sacredness of human life when we strike down a foe
in battle, any more tn.tn when we consign :i criminal
to execution. He knows that there causes, such as
life, and home, and freedom, lor which the gentlest
and the most humane of men mii-t bn prepared to
draw the sword.' But he is scrupulously anxious
that the sword should never be lightly drawn. He
will question with himself, once and again, whether
any war which he is asked to sanction or support is
really a just and necessary undertaking. He believes
—that the ruler of man, be he sovereign or statesman,
who kindles war for selfish or dynastic ends, or for
any miserable enterprise of annexation or self-
aggrandizement, incurs an amount of guilt too terri-
ble to contemplate. Not for an instant is he dazzled
by the glitter of arms, or seduced from his calmer
judgment by “the pomp and circumstance of glorious
war.” He remembers the words of the great
American General to the military students. "Boys,
you think war is all glory; 1 tell you it is all hell.”
He knows that it is a bell which brave and good
men must sometimes be prepared to face; but it
must be faced earnestly, resolutely, reverently, as men
face death and eternity. What he feels for himself
lie feels for his country. He has no ambition that
England should figure ns the Swashbuckler of
Europe. Rather it is his glory to see her lead the
way in the enterprises of peace, in the sciences which
prolong life mid the arts which beautify it. and in
the educative work of rational self-government.
I have spoken so far of the young citizen's duty to
others. But he has a duty to himself, and this-
naturally falls into three divisions corresponding to
the tripartite constitution of human nature—body,
mind, and soul.
I The young citizen recognizes his duty to his
body. He will strive to keep it, ns nearly, as may be,
in a state of physical perfection. To this the reason-
able use of athletics will greatly contribute; mid
remember that athletic training means also moral
discipline. On this point listen to a word of guidance
from’ St. Paul, who, like all effective teachers,
illustrated his lessons by reference to the lives and
habits of his hearers. Writing to his friends at
Corinth, where the athletic games of the ancient
would were brought to their highest perfection, he
thus urges temperance and self-control (I quote from
the Revised Version).—"Know ye not that they
which run in a race run all, but one receiveth the
prize? Even so run that ye may attain And every
one that striveth in the games is temperate in all
things. Now they do it to receive a corruptible
crown but we mi incorruptible I therefore so run.
ns not uncertainly; so tight I, as not beating the
air: But I buffet my body, mid bring it into bondage,
lest by any means, after f have preached to others,
I myself should be rejected.”
This Address was delivered long before the present war began, and I reprint it for that reason. – G.W.E.R
Fashioning himself on this precept of a man who, whatever else he was or did, has made a permanent mark on the higher life of the world, the young citizen will do his best, by vigorous self-discipline, to make his body not a master, but a servant—the pliant instrument of a high purpose, a fit habitation for the moral and intellectual being that dwells within.
The young citizen has a duty to his mind. He reveres his intellect as a sacred trust. He nourishes it with the best that has been said and written. He corrects its imperfections. He strengthens its weak points. He seeks to fire and animate it by contact with minds greater than itself. He recognizes the fact that education is no mere matter of schooling or book-work ; but a process which begins with the dawn of understanding and is never complete on this side of the grave, inasmuch as human life is inexpli¬cable unless it is itself one long education for a better and fuller being. With an intellect thus sedulously j tended and disciplined, with a range of knowledge thus constantly widening, with powers thus daily expanding to a richer and larger life, the young citizen goes boldly forward amid shoals and rocks and contrary winds, knowing that, in intellect and conscience, he holds the golden charts which never yet failed the diligent and courageous mariner.
And the young citizen has a duty to his soul.
This discourse would be glaringly incomplete if I omitted to say a word about Citizenship and Religion.
Whatever he the form of religious profession to which the young citizen—the Trustee of Posterity— attaches himself; however keenly he may feel the “blank misgivings of a creature, moving about in worlds riot realized this, at any rate, he will never do—he will never scoff at the idea of Religion. He will not ignorantly contemn that which has been, in every age, the guide in life and the strength in death of thousands of the world’s best heroes. He will never dogmatize where Revelation is silent and Reason can only walk by tentative guesswork; nor strive to enforce on others the creed which he has himself accepted. He will ponder deeply the sig¬nificance of those two splendid text “Ye shall know the truth, and the truth shall make you free.” “Where the Spirit of the Lord is, there is liberty.” He will seek, with all diligence, a light for bis own path, and conviction for his own intellect; but he will gladly concede to his fellow-men the same unrestricted right of reasonable self-guidance which he claims for himself, and will walk, not only in humility and purity, but in charily with all the world. And if, as he recalls the great triumphs for mercy and civilization which Christianity in its heroic days won, he sometimes feels a not unreason¬able impatience at the present spectacle of Churches untrue to their faith, and lives which have fallen so far below their type, and feeble efforts for human good and indifference to human wretchedness; then  he will bethink him that, after all, the fault may be in the generation and the men rather than in the faith and the system; and he will cry with Charles Kingsley—a man whose whole nature was stirred by the social and religious questioning of his own lime
Wake again. Teutonic father ages, 
Speak again, beloved primaeval creeds;
Flash ancestral spirit from your pages, 
Wake the drowsy age to worthy deeds.
Tell US how of old bur saintly mothers
Schooled themselves by vigil. fast, and prayer; 
Learned to love, as JESUS loved before them.
While they bore the cross which poor men bear.
Tell us how our stout crusading fathers 
Fought and died for God and not for gold;
Let their love, their faith, their boyish daring, 
Distance mellowed, gild the days of old.
The subject expands before us, and we must hasten to a close. It will not be supposed that I intend the sketch which I have placed before you for a finished portrait. I offer it rather as a rough, though I hope not inaccurate outline, which you must fill in and colour for yourselves.
And now you will ask, to what does all this tend? The character hits been sufficiently indicated—in what is it to issue? Our young citizen has good gifts and great opportunities; what is he to do with them?
Let me answer, in the first place, by negatives. There are somethings which he most certainly will not do. He will not sacrifice bis life and powers and aspirations to the Moloch of money-making. He will never regard poverty as a disgrace, or riches as a distinction. He will embark on no enterprise— political, commercial, professional—which he cannot reconcile with his notions of duty and honour. He will consider no occupation common or unclean or beneath his dignity, unless it implies dishonourable or immoral conditions. He will never content him¬self with a career of aimless idleness, “sitting down at life's banquet, and getting up without paying the reckoning.” If circumstances give him immunity from daily toil, he will recognize in that immunity a special call to some voluntary work for his fellow¬men, and will sacrifice leisure and means to its ful¬filment. If, on the other hand, circumstances bind him to active pursuits, he will carefully choose the work for which his peculiar powers seem best to fit him, and in which his moral nature will have fairest play. The work once chosen will be steadily pursued and honestly wrought with all his energies, but will never be permitted to engross his heart, or deaden his sympathies, or degenerate into an organized selfishness. Whatever be his handicraft, or trade, or profession, the young citizen will remember that be is something else, and something more important than craftsman, or tradesman, or professional man. He will recollect that he is a member of the human family, end that every child of Adam's kin has a claim on his sympathy and goodwill. But a vague cosmopolitanism will not satisfy him. He will bear in mind, every hour of his life, at play as well as at work, in society us well as in church, that he is a citizen of a great nation, and that the enduring greatness of that nation must be built, not on the abundance of its material resources, but on the honour and purity and courage of its sons. His is- that truest and holiest patriotism which strives to express the love of country, not by bluster or swagger or military vainglory, but by the sedulous cultivation in ourselves and in others of the “righteousness” which “exalteth a nation.”
"Here and here did England help me; how can I help England Say,
Whose turns as I. this evening, turn to God, to praise and pray.
The question was asked by a poet who is one of our national glories, and a not less glorious genius gave the answer in prose Said John Ruskin to the Under-graduates of Oxford : —
There is a destiny now possible to us the highest ever set
before a nation to be accepted or refused. We are still
nude genera to in nice-a race mingled of the best
northern blood. We are not yet dissolute in temper,
but still have the firmness to govern and the grace to
obey. We have been taught a religion of pure mercy,
which we must either now finally betray or learn to
defend by fulfilling. And we are rich in an inheritance
of honour, bequeathed tons through a thousand years
of noble history, which it should be our daily thirst to
increase with splendid avarice, so that Englishmen, if
it be a sin to covet honour, should be the most offending
souls alive	It is for yon, youths of England, to
make your country for all the world a source of light, a
centre of peace ; mistress of learning and of the arts ;
faithful guardian of great memories in the midst of
irreverent and ephemeral visions: faithful servant of
time-tried principles, under temptation from fond ex-
periments and licentious desires: and, amidst the cruel
and clamorous jealousies of the nations worshipped in
her strange valour of Goodwill towards Men.
And now you will understand why I have called
my discourse “The Trustees of Posterity for, if I
have m t utterly failed in the task which I proposed
to myself, I have shown that you, young citizens of
the present hour, are, in a very real sense, Trustees
for the greatness and happiness and Christian honour
of England in the years that are to come
And meanwhile, if these hours are dark, a- indeed in many
ways they are, at least do not let us sit deedless. like
fools, and fine gentlemen, thinking the common toil not
good enough for us, and beaten by the muddle; but
rather let us work like good fellows, trying by some dim
candlelight to set our workshop ready against tomorrow's
daylight.
G. W. E. R.
Sarawak Library.
Subscribers are invited to send in lists of books they may wish added to the Library.
For the convenience of subscribers a book will Ire provided in the Library in which suggested new books may Ire entered.
The following books have been kindly presented
From the Sarawak Gazette 50 Years Ago
THE
SARAWAK GAZETTE.
No. 50. TUESDAY. OCT. 1ST, 1872. Priced Cent'.
The Quop Estate and the other property of
Baroness Coutts at Lundu, was sold by public auc-
tion on the 19th nit. The bouse and plantations
at Tanah Puteh went for $800, their purchaser
being Ken What, a Chinese merchant in the
bazaar. He intends to present a large piece of
ground to bis countrymen for a public burying
place; and to keep up the bouse for the accom-
modation of pleasure-seekers from Kuching.
The sale of the whole property realised about
$1,500.
On the 10th August 1872, a meeting of the cre-
ditors of the Sarawak Sugar Company limited was
held at the Court House, when the accounts were
passed and a first and final dividend was declared
J of 9g percent.
JAMES INNES.
Assignee.
A gang of workmen has been set on the new
Court House, which has made no progress for
several months. A large quantity of bilian, chiefly
from Lundu. has been got together for building it,
and us the brick foundations were previously laid,
the walls and roof will rapidly appear as soon as
the beams are squared and fitted ready for putting
up. The building will probably be finished about
April 1873.
TELEGRAM.
THE AMERICAN CLAIMS.
London, I (Uh Sept.—The verdict of the Arbitra-
tors. which Cockburn refuses to sign, sentences
Englund to pay 15$ millions of dollars for American
claims under the revised statement claiming
154 millions. The Arbitrators unanimously find
Great Britain liable for the acts of the ‘•Alabama."
The Italian, Swiss. Brazilian, and American
arbitrators find Great Britain liable for the acts of
the “Florida.” The Italian. Swiss, and American
arbitrators find liable for acts of “Shenandoah.”
Swatow Relief FUND.
The local influential Chinese have organised a Committee to collect money in aid of the Swatow Relief Fund. Pamphlets printed in Chinese were circulated throughout the town, and the public were informed of the means by which they could swell the funds. It is interesting to note that the Chinese Indies took a prominent part in making collections amongst their own women folk.
On the 21st and 22nd September the Soon Lee Cinema gave benefit performances in aid of the Fund: the hall was gaily decorated with flags and palms and prices of admission were raised to $5. $2 and $1.
We are informed that the people are subscribing most generously and the results are very gratifying.
We commend this Fund to our readers; the floods in Swatow have rendered thousands homeless and it is the duty of their more fortunate fellow beings to help these people who, through no fault of their own, are enduring such tribulations.
The following subscriptions are acknowledged with
TAN SUM GUAN,
Honorary Treasurer.
Mainly About Nothing.
WE have just been told a most harrowing story ; it appears that:—
"A duel with pistols was fought between two people named Shott and Nott. It appears that
Nott was shot. and Shott was not. There was a rumour first that Nott shot Shott—not that Shott shot Nott but Shott says that he was not shot, which proves that the shot Nott shot at Shott was not shot straight, it is quite certain that the shot Shott shot shot Nott, although one witness states that Shott was shot and Nott was not—but what he must have meant was not that Shott was stint and Nott not shot, but Shott was Shott and Nott Nott—not not shot. It is hard to tell now who was Shott and who was Nott.” 
A prize of a brand new uvula is offered for the quick initiation of this little tale at 0 o’clock on my night in the Club on condition that none of the competitors are “Pussy Foot."
“THE Great Vitagraph Serial, William Duncan in the Smashing Barriers" is still showing in the local cinema according to the handbills circulated. It is directed by the Great William himself and is “one of the best and big, high powered serial the great outdoor. We need hardly say it is filled with more exciting in¬cidents, thrills, train speed, actions, and clever stunts, than the one shown here locally." We have not seen the one shown here locally but we take William’s word for it. As we are told that ' The goes more stronger, thrill after thrills" we have no doubt that the youngsters will, after mixture of Duncan's thrills and the ice cream seller’s w res, be glad to fly to the arms of that Coal Black Mammy of theirs.
THE following letter was received recently by the head of one the Government Departments in Kuching.
Sir,
We are four . standard in school to report you those our chance are losing because the boys from outside press us.
We understand the Gazette paper you were pointed a head to Departments.
We hope you will arrange us, should a vacancy occur in the Offices of any of your posts.
Very glad to let you know there was two boys named — and who was work in the
Government Printing Office they were fool.
We knew tin horn fire wood or Tambang boys.
Believe us, Dear Sir,
Yours Sincerely,
SCHOOL BOYS.
We are very glad to let you know," dear school boys, with what pleasure we read your well composed letter. Your suitability for the vacant posts is not to be doubted if one can judge by this effusion. Don’t be “pressed" out any longer by those two fools in the Printing Office.
RESIDENTS in Kuching will notice that the bandstand in tin' Museum grounds has been moved to a position under the trees and in close proximity to a Chinese grave.
As long as the band plays classical music, no doubt, all will be well, but in spite of “music hath charms to sooth etc.” we are apprehensive of the results which may accrue to our celestial friend when he hear? the Hunting lilt of “Say It To  Music" or “Jicky”. The old adage of “turning in one’s grave”  will be demonstrated with its full power.
[The Editor is not responsible for the opinions of 
Correspondents.]
Kuching Race Course.
KUCHING. SARAWAK.
20th September, 1922.
The Editor,
The Sarawak Gazette,
Kuching.
DEAR SIR,
I notice from your publication of the 2nd inst.
that it has been suggested to build a new grand
stand.	
If the above suggestion is to be put into effect, 
may I offer the following additional suggestions 
for the consideration of those responsible for the 
building.
That the present system of having a raised
plank floor be eliminated and a cemented
ground floor substituted, the latter being
more substantial while the former is also 
liable to be stolen by thieves.
That the site be cut up into terraces, say 4 or 5, 
each about II feet above the other. Con- 
gestion may thus be avoided, and spectators 
need not have to rush against one another or 
to stand upon their seats in order to obtain a 
view.
Thanking you for allowing me space for the above
suggestions.
I am. Dear Sir.
Yours faithfully.
A SPECTATOR.
Our correspondent is referring to the grand stand
on the race course. We quite agree with him that
the present stand is inadequate and badly planned.
We understand that the Race Committee are con- '
templating alterations and improvements to the I
course.— Ed. S. G.
“STRAINED STEERING LINK."—-We have received your letter and quite appreciate your point of view; indeed the points to which you refer are apparent to most of us.
We regret, however, that we cannot publish your letter as destructive criticism on such matters is useless, and likely to cause bad feeling amongst those responsible for the omissions.
We understand that measures are to be taken shortly by which the matter to which you refer will be remedied.— [Ed. S. G.]
More Statistics.
Some sixty thousand elephants are said to lie killed every year in order to supply the world with ivory. The number of rabbits sacrificed for the manufacture of real fox furs is, unfortunately, not yet available.
A Remarkable Boat.
Truly a wonderful boat is the p. s. Adeh, and as
full of tricks as the most capricious of women. Her
latest stunt shews that her repertory is still unex-
hausted .
It is to be wondered if the Government, really
appreciates what a humourist it possesses in the
Adeh. It is to be feared not, as humour and govern-
ments do not usually coincide. If it does might we
suggest that, when its span of usefulness (the Adeh,
not the government) is done, it might be relegated
to the museum with a tablet extolling its virtues and
enumerating its vagaries.
By the way, what is the function of the Adeh 
Is she a passenger boat, a cargo steamer in which
passengers are tolerated but not encouraged, or
merely a cause of much language which would have
to be paraphrased before repeated. Its itinerary is
as difficult to fathom as a Govt, blue book and if any-
one has ever found it to fit in with bis scheme of
travel, he is one of the lucky ones.
The incident referred to occurred on September
19th but as it happened in the dark it cannot be
described by eyewitness.
We left Brooketon on September 11th. proceeded
to Lawas to pick up timber and incidentally gathered
a cargo of mosquitoes of gargantuan size and un-
paralleled ferocity.
After enjoying this hospitality for a day and a half,
we meandered to Limbang for the usual menagerie,
which done commenced the homeward journey.
Miri was reached mid-day 16th but no lighter would
come for the timber till 6 a.m. next morning and it was
3 p.m. on 17th before we left. After a pleasant sail
up the Igan we dropped anchor at 9 a.m. at Hiba
19th, left 2 hours later and at 11 p in. left the Rejang.
At 2 a.m. the engine stopped, but having been
lead to believe that Kuching was to he reached early
we surmised that we had anchored off Goebilt till
day light, but when we saw trees or the outlines of
them, close on the port bow, heard remarks which
unfortunately we did not understand, the illusion
was shattered and we knew that some untoward
incident had happened. We heard Simanggang,
Batang Lupar. Lingga, Sibu Luut mentioned and so
deduced that there was considerable doubt as to our
location. The Serang laid his sarong on Lingga.
and we naturally followed bis lead. This was
verified by some fishing boats which came up to
investigate.
When daylight appeared we found ourselves ashore
well to the jungle. Fancy the Adeh mistaking her-
self for a tank !
The engines were put full steam astern to try and
extricate but without success and we were doomed
to spend the day in as desolate a spot as could be
imagined, slimy mud all round with a background
of weedy looking jungle.
A local Kampong hastily proclaimed a Hari Kaya, not in the Calendar, swarmed over the ship and made merry at our expense.
We understand that on all liners, when a delay occurs the owning Coy provides free champagne and other delicacies to passengers to alleviate the discomfort. We regret that this excellent custom has not penetrated to Sarawak. When we told the steward to bring some ginger beer he said that there was only one bottle left and a very few sodas. With the prospect of a protracted stay the outlook was not cheerful, the more so as fruit was unobtain¬able.
About 2 p. m. a second attempt was made to leave our unpleasant surroundings. Men with shovels dug round the keel, forty local residents got hold of ropes, the engine started and we moved
two feet. As this was the limit the attempt was given up and we prepared to spend the night with the mud and the mosquitoes. Sleep was out of the question and we turned ourselves into human punkahs.
At 3 a. m. a third attempt was made and as the tide 
was somewhat higher it met with, Success and it 
was with feelings of relief that we felt ourselves 
gliding into deep water and our troubles ended?	
At 6 a. m. the engines stopped once more and on 
turning out found the Serang and crew gazing into
thick mist trying to locate as they had not the foggiest
notion where we were.
Being in the jungle is uncomfortable but safe,
being lost in the China Sea is certainly the former
but not the latter, and we began to wish we had
stayed where we were.
After about an hour’s suspense we perceived some
small fishing boats and the anchor was raised in a
hurry. Then a steamer hove on the horizon and we
discovered that it was the Min from Miri to Kuching.
The Serang immediately gave chase and clung to
her heels till we got into the river.
Various theories had been formed to account for
our non-appearance, rough weather being the
favourite but quite wrong—the calm being the one
redeeming feature of the situation. (Contributed.)
Borneo Mission Association.
We have been shown a copy of “The Chronicle,"
a quarterly report of the Borneo Mission Association
This copy was published in July last and
contains much interesting matter in connection
with the S. P. G. Mission in Sarawak and B. X B.
The annual meeting of the B. M. A. was held on
June 21st at Sion College where the chair was
taken by the Right Reverend the Lord Bishop of
Willesden. whilst amongst those present were
Archdeacon Sharp. Bishop Mounsey, the present
Bishop and Mr. 1. Kirkpatrick-Caldecot.
A review of the work performed in the preced-
ing year was given and the speakers emphasised
the importance of raising enough subscriptions to
enable sufficient Priests to be paid and schools
kept up.
Amongst important events of the year were the .
ordination of Si Migaat. the only Land Dyak who
has ever been ordained deacon and the opening of
a School for Dyak girls in Betong by the Revel.
W. Linton. This School is in charge of Dorothy
Nadah, a Dyak herself.
We note that His Highness the Rajah has
recently granted $300 a month towards the up-
keep of the Schools in Kuching.
From the Editorial notes we find the following.
“The Chinese are perhaps the finest race in Asia.
But their conservative customs make the China-
man in his own country singularly impervious
to new ideas. Take him out of his village in
China and place him abroad he becomes a different
being: very much more get-at-able, very much
easier to reason with. That is why the missionary 
field amongst the Chinese in Borneo is likely to 
prove fruitful, and a little wise expenditure almost 
certain to bring a big return. The Governments 
concerned are beginning to wake up to this fact
They ask themselves: “If as seems likely, the
Chinese will dominate Asia in the course of years,
would it not pay from the material point of view
alone to have them educated in Christianity
We do not quite agree with the opinions ex- 
pressed by the writer nor with the conclusions
which he has drawn. The Chinese peril has been
a menace for many years it but the course which
the writer suggests is being adopted by Govern-
ments as a remedy against the evils of such domina-
tion, in our opinion, does not sound logical. With 
regard to the assertion that the Chinaman living
abroad is quite a different being from his fellow
countrymen in China. We imagine that as long as
it suits his purpose, the Chinaman abroad is quite
ready to give up his cherished conservatism but
directly these new ideas thwart his business or his
private affairs in any way then, in our opinion,
the Chinaman is as equally impervious to new
ideas as those remaining in China.
Notes From Miri.
A New Church of St. Columba Opened.
Sunday, September 3, was a red letter day here.
In the morning the new church was opened, and
Divine Service held at 9 o’clock. The congregation
filled the building. The church, to be dedicated to
St. Columba, is charmingly situated among trees,
and has picturesque approaches. The architecture,
including that of the spire with its appropriately
designed ornaments, belongs to the Perpendicular
style, although the pitch of the roof has been adapted
to local conditions. A happy effect is produced by
the fan-tracery in the vaulting of the open ornamented
timber roof over the Nave.
Inside, the decorative character is produced by
such details as columns, mouldings, anil simple but
effective tracery. Excepting the red brick plinth,
the work has been carried out entirely in timber,
principally billian. The altar itself is of billian too,
but the communion rail, clergy stall and lectern are
all of teak, and the execution of their pleasing designs
is a tribute to the skill of the local Chinese carpenters.
Striking examples of concrete work are furnished by
the font and granolithic floor. The development of
the window tracery contrives to pay a double debt
by excluding glare and giving the maximum of
ventilation. Very noticeable, too, is the decorative
effect of the varying shades of timber forming the
roof. Electric lighting, semi-indirect, has already
been installed. The new organ arrived a day or two
ago. It has 11 good tone and will be a valuable
auxiliary, both material and spiritual. All in all the
new church is a worthy monument to the skill of its
designer, the company’s civil engineer, and the fact
that it is entirely a local product speaks volumes for
his ingenuity and adaptability.
On Sunday afternoon, the new Miri Recreation
Club was opened and a sports meeting held. The
club is for the use of the kranis, and it is difficult to
avoid superlatives in describing it. The building
and its fittings are luxurious, and it is probably the
finest institution of its kind in the whole of Borneo.
A striking architectural feature is the ornamental
roof with its three tiers, each a miniature pagoda.
In front of the building is an ample padang which
is used for sports, football, tenuis, etc.
The formal opening of the club on Sunday was
done, by Dr. Andrew, the general malinger of the
Sarawak Oilfields, Ltd., at 2 o’clock, and the sports
immediately followed. There were twenty events,
all well patronized, and the weather was ideal, the
heal being tempered by a constant breeze. Two
notable events of the afternoon were the pole jum-
ping won by Chin Nyuk Sent and the relay race
won by the Gymkhana Club’s team. Music was
provided by die Miri Recreation Club Minstrel
Party. Mrs Andrew presented the prizes at 6 p. m ,
and this closed a memorable and enjoyable afternoon.
September 6 was a general holiday here and there
was a golf morning followed by a curry tiffin, but
the proposed tennis afternoon-could not take place
owing co rain. The vigil of the holiday was kept
by a lance in the Rest House.
We were hoping to have a concert, including a
sketch, on September 26, the birthday of H. H. the
Rajah of Sarawak, but it serins that man proposes
and woman disposes, so a bridge tournament has
been suggested instead. Il is to lie hoped that the
Entertainments Committee are not too discouraged
by the shelving of the concert; after all one doesn’t
always strike oil—even Miri.
CAMESTRES.
(S. T.)
Presentation of School Prizes by
H. H. The Rajah.
On the afternoon of the. 31st August His Highness
the Rajah received the boys of the Government Lay 
School, Kampong Jawa School and Kampong Gersik
School at the Astana on the occasion of the annual
prize giving. The boys, numbering some 230 al- 
together, assembled about 4 p. in. and lined up on 
three sides of the large dining room completely fill-
ing three quarters of it, so that the large number of
Malay ladies who attended the function had to be 
accommodated in the adjoining drawing room.
At 4.30 p. m. His Highness attended in turn by 
Messrs. Day and Ermen, handed the prizes to the 
successful scholars in the presence of the Resident 
1st Division. Mr. A. B. Ward, Messrs. G. C. Gillan
and 11. B. Crocker, the Datil Temonggong, Ditto 
Muda, Datu Hakim, Datu Emaun and Inche 
Mohamed Zin. This ceremony over, the usual
addresses from each school were read by a small
boy, after which the proceedings terminated with
the singing of various songs ending up with the 
National Anthem.
On the conclusion of the prize giving, the boys
were given a curry dinner to which they did more
than ample justice, and later H. H. the Rajah en-
tertained them to a Cinema show on the lawn in
front of the Astana at which specially selected 
amusing pictures were shown. We were obliged to 
leave before the performance was over, but from 
what we saw we should say that the boys were hav-
ing the time of their lives and spent an afternoon
they will long remember.
MONTHLY REPORTS.
SADONG.
August.
General.—On the 7th August, Mr. Carroll, Extra
Assistant Conservator of Forests, arrived from Ku-
ching in the s. l. Young Harry with a gang of coolies.
He was still here at the end of the mouth mid has
been exploring and demarcating a proposed Reserve
between Sebangan and Sadong
Tuesday the 8th August, being II. IL The Tuan
Muda's birthday and a Government holiday, the
Government Offices were closed for the day.
On the 9th I left Sadong in the s. 1. Vara to visit
the down river Kampongs and Semrah, returning
on the 11th. Everything was very quiet.
On the 12th Mr. David Evans left for Kuching in
the s. s. Sri Sadong.
Mr. mid Mrs. D. A. Owen and family arrived from
Sibu on the 13th in the s. s Alice Lorraine. Mr.
D. A. Owen left again for Kuching at 10 p. m. on
Sunday the 20th in s. 1- Chamois.
On the 23rd the s. 1. Chamois called at Sadong on
her way to Sibu, dropping Mr. David Evans and
Father Hopfgartner, the latter being on his way to
Tabekang to select a site for a mission school.
On the 28th the s. 1. Vava sailed for Kuching
with a Colliery cooly who had been seriously injured
by a falling tree. She returned to Sadong on the
31st.
H. H. S. Y. Zahora arrived from Kuching on the
30th with a number of passengers for Sibu, and left
again the same evening having taken on board Mr. ;
and Mrs. D. A. Owen and family.
Courts.—On the 24th three Chinese coolies from
the Colliery were sentenced to three months im- 
prisonment each for absconding. As most of the 
able bodied inhabitants were away on their padi 
farms, the Courts were unusually idle during the 
month.	
Public Works.—Dining the month carpenters
repaired the bridges and the Police barracks, and
erected belian platforms for the public stand pipes.
Prisoners cleared away the undergrowth round the
hospital and attended to the general upkeep of the
Station.
SADONG COLLIERY.
August.
The gross out-put of coal produced by the mines-
during the month was 1,926.13 tons. 465 tons of
this was consumed by our boilers, and the balance of
1,461.13 tons delivered to the wharf for export.
The shipments for the month were as follows : —
The balance stock of coal at the end of the month
was 2.115.02 tons.
The rainfall interfered with the stopping of
the Upper Seam underlying a thin cover of sandy
clay on the crop.
The yield from the Lower Scam in No. 8 Mine was low owing to the inferior condition of the coal pillars worked.
, The quality of the Seam, at the working face, in No. 9 Mine, showed a marked improvement; and  the yield per unit employed had very much increased. A total length of 102 feet of concrete arches were- erected at the new mines, and a fair drivage was made through the conglomerates in the Adit.
The new belian quarters for the blacksmiths were I completed mid occupied during the month.
I Mr. D. Evans left for the Kuching Races on the , 12th and returned on the 23rd.
। The rainfall for the month was 12.34 inches.
J. W. EVANS,
Manager.
SIMANGGANG
August.
Sembilan, extra clerk Kabong, arrived on the 1st
bringing copper coinage amounting to $1,500 for
Simanggang Treasury. Next morning he took over
the duties of Julin, who proceeds to Kabong as extra
clerk.
A contract to erect Engkilili Court and Officer's
Quarters was drawn up. The building is to be com-
pleted in five mouths time, dating from August 5th,
for the sum of $900.
On the 7th Mr. W. F. Dick, accompanied , by
Abang Zin and Drayp of Land Office, left for Betong
to settle up various matters .in that district, return-
ing again on the 10th.
The 8th His Highness the Tuan Muda's birthday
was observed us a holiday. 
On the 11th, accompanied by Messrs. W. F. Dick-
and H. E. Cutfield, I left for Kuching via Lingga
in the s'. 1. Lucile to attend the Races.’ The-s. l. One
also proceeded to Kuching in order to be docked. I
was still away at the end of the month.
Messrs. W. F. Dick and H. E. Cutfield returned to Simanggang on the 24th and the Court Writer । reported the escape of prisoner Wan Laham alias Drahim. This is the third time this prisoner has escaped from the gang; he was in irons at the time. The usual warnings were sent all round the Division.
Draup of the Land Office was busily employed in examining and drawing up maps dealing with farm¬ing land disputes. Sip, Forest Ranger, visited Lingga, Sebuyow and Samaludam in connection with duty chargeable on fishing stakes etc.
Reports from the Kalaka and Sari has state that all the fruit trees are in flower especially the engkabang tree. One only hopes that the fruit will form.
Public Works.—The prison gang, averaging 57, were busily employed on deepening ditches on the cattle plain and general upkeep of roads Carpenters prepared timber for Clerks quarters and erected the frame work of same.
Dyaks were unable to burn off their clearings for farms on account of the wet weather They are late this year in preparing their farms, the reason being that, having obtained a good harvests, they have all been feasting.
The following are the Trade Returns for the Division:—
LOWER REJANG.
July.
REJANG.
Court.--There has been a fair amount of work in
both Courts. The only case worth mention is that
of Ng Hoh Hin alias Ho Ah Kin. who was sentenced
to two years imprisonment for criminal breach of trust
and absconding under advances and Yee Foo to two
years imprisonment for assisting the aforementioned
to evade arrest and for receiving stolen property.
P. W. D.—The prison gang, averaging 24, has
been employed on the general upkeep of the Station.
General.—On the. 2nd the schooner Kim Wah
Nguang, en route to Kuching from Daro, ran aground
at Paloh Her cargo was a total loss, but the vessel
was saved, being refloated by the Paloh people. The
same evening the Gustia from Matu laden with taw
sago ran aground off Nyabor. I am informed that
she is a total wreck; nothing could be done owing
to the heavy sea.
On the evening of the I2th the Resident 3rd
Division and Mr. JI. L. Owen called in and left the
same evening by s. s. Alice Lorraine for Kuching.
The s. l. Chamois arrived in the evening of the
15th with Dr. J. G Reed. The next day Dr. Reed
injected several people for “yaws”. All the cases
appear to have received benefit therefrom.
The same evening the Resident 3rd Division
arrived from Kuching by the Chamois, and left early
the next morning, accompanied by Dr. Reed, for
Sibu.
P. S. Adeh called, en route for Sibu and the
north, m the evening of the 18th with Messrs. ILL.
Owen, F. G. Day and P. Stewart as passengers.
I left for Matu by the Mermaid early morning
of the 25th and was still away at the end of the
month.
MATU.
Court.—There was the usual large number of cases before both Courts. The only cases which call for mention are—Sri Gunong (f.) fined §50 for gross contempt of Court, in that she made false statements against the Native Officer and Tua Kam- pong Hj. Yaman regarding the winding up of her late husband's estate, Hj. Sadam fined $25 for forwarding a petition in favour of himself to be made Tua Kampong in place of the newly elected Tua of Ulu Bawang, and said to be signed by 95 people of the Kampong. On investigation it was found that the petition emanated from Hj. Sad am and not the people of the Kampong. Both the fines were im¬posed by order of the Resident 3rd Division.
P. W. D.—The prison gang, averaging 7, has been engaged generally on the upkeep of the Station.
General.— I arrived from Rejang on the 25th by the Mermaid. The Mermaid left the next morning for Daro and Rejang.
On checking the cash it was found there was a deficiency of $76.92. The Court Writer, J. C. de Rozario, could not give any satisfactory explanation. He was ordered to repay the deficiency at once, and I sent n report the same day, the 28th to the Resident -3rd Division. The same evening the Mermaid arrived on the flood tide with a broken piston rod. The engineer reported that the vessel could not steam against the tide and would therefore have to wait until another vessel could tow her.
DARO.
This Station has not been visited during the month. The Court Writer reports that nothing of any importance has happened.
P. W. D.—The prison gang, averaging 3, has been employed generally and on unloading Indian a taps for reroofing the Bungalow.
August.
R E J A N G .
Court.—Thore has been the usual amount of work
before both Courts, no cases called for special mention.
P. W. D.—The prison gang, averaging 26 in
number, has been engaged generally. A piece of
land adjoining the Government compound, between
the Court House and the Malay graveyard, is in
process of being taken in to enlarge the compound.
Tile Government boats are also being repaired by
prison labour.
General. 1 arrived back from Matu on the 4th
late in the evening, by the Chamois, having towed
the Mermaid and a tongkang from Daro.
Mr. C. King Roach of the Island Trading Co.
Selalang. visited the Station on the 9th and 11th.
On the 11th Drahman, nakoda of Schooner Kim
Hin Hock, reported that his vessel was blown
aground at Muara Selalang in a gale the previous
evening and was a total wreck. The vessel was en
route for Daro loaded with a general cargo and
carrying a mail. Everything was lost including the
mail
One Haji Ahmat bin Abang Bujang arrived under
arrest from Matu, having attempted to murder his
wife Haji S’lma with an axe. He was sent up to
Sibu by s. s. Alice Lorraine on the 22nd. Haji S'lma
(f.) was sent direct from Matu to Sibu for medical
treatment. Messrs. Aplin and Hallett both called
in on their way up to Sibu by the Alice Lorraine.
The Chamois arrived in the evening of the ‘23rd with the Resident 3rd Division and Mr. Calvert as passengers.
Messrs. Andreini and MacBryan, by s. 8. Alive Lorraine, called in on their way to Kuching on the -24th.
The Auditor accompanied by Mr. Jacques arrived by s. l. Chamois on the 26th to carry out the audit.
On the 29th the Resident 3rd Division arrived by s. l. Mermaid, and left immediately by the Chamois for Sadong.
H. H. S. Y. Zahora arrived early on the 31st with the Resident 3rd Division, Mrs. Owen and family, Messrs. Andreini and MacBryan, Bishop Bickley, Mrs. Bickley, Miss Felton and Master Bickley as passengers, en route for Sibil. The Chamois also I arrived later the same evening.
General.—I left for Rejang, via Daro, by s. 1. Chamois with the Mermaid in tow, on the 4th, and called in at Daro to pick up a tongkang.
The Court Writer reports the following:—
Early morning of the 19th it was reported that Haji Ahmat bin Abang Bujang of Kampong Jemoreng had attempted to murder his wife Haji S'lma.
The assailant gave himself up to the Native Officer, Abang Adeng, who immediately put him under arrest. •The Native Officer and myself proceeded to Jemoreng to inspect the woman. She had 4 deep cuts on the side of the head and two on the face, one, completely splitting the nose. Haji Ahmat was sent under arrest to Rejang the same day, and early next morning, Haji S’lma (f.) was despatched to Sibu for medical treatment.
P. W. D.-—The prison gang, averaging 11, has been engaged generally on upkeep of the Station.
The new site for the Government buildings was partly cleared by the kampong people.
DARO.
General.— The Station has not been visited during the month. The. Court Writer reports that the re-roofing of the Bungalow etc. is partly completed and that the site for the Police Barracks and Gaol has been cleared.
The people of Teba’ang reported that one Baggoh bin Jemun was taken by a crocodile whilst fishing on the 17th. The body was recovered on the 19th.
P. W. D.—The prisoners have neon engaged on the usual upkeep of the Station.
R. D. ST. J. HORTON.
Officer-in-Charge.
OYA.
May.
Court.—A normal number of cases were dealt with during the month, including many for theft. None call for special comment.
P. W. D.—The prison gang has been engaged with the up-keep of roads, ditches and ornamental grounds at Oya, and at Dalat where progress is being made in the renewal of the main road by the small Tamil gang.
Satisfactory progress is being made with the new Police Barracks there, and a floating stage has been nearly completed to replace the very old landing raft now worn out.
Repairs will soon have to be effected to the light¬house, which will not stand the strain of another monsoon.
Fifteen schooners, two steamers and one motor schooner entered and cleared the port.
General.—I arrived back from Dalat on the 2nd, returning again there on the 17th for a week.
Large catches of fish continued to be made during the month, and it has been one of the most success¬ful seasons for many years.
Mr. R. A. Miller Hallett arrived per s. I. Chamois on the 4th just. en route for Mukah. At the same time a gang of Tamil coolies, from Sibu, reported for work on the Dalat roads, which I trust will now begin to show signs 'of long needed improvement.
A consignment of 10 cent notes was despatched to Kuching on the 11th, via Sibu.
On the 24th, a very severe hurricane swept over this district about 5 p.m. Luckily no serious damage was caused, except to the light-house, which has been rendered structurally unsafe.
The 24th and 29th were observed ns Proclamation Day and Hari Raya respectively. and Government offices were closed.
E. O. BRUCE,
Officer-in-Charge.
Miri
August.
The usual number of cases came before the Police
Court but none of any special mention. Fines and
fees amounted to $453,39.
I left for Kuching to attend Race Week, returning
again on the 24th instant.
Mr. H. L. Owen, District Officer of Baram, did
duty here during my absence, returning again on
the 28th instant.
The Divisional Resident and Mrs. Douglas left
on 12th instant to attend Race Week, returning on
tire 24th instant.
Dr. E. Mjoberg, Curator of the Sarawak Museum,
arrived from Labuan on the 14ch instant and left for
Baram on the 28th instant. He is proceeding into
the interior oh a collecting expedition.
When the s. s. Krian arrived on the 14th several
persons, including some of the Sarawak Oilfields
Co.’s Assistants, boarded the vessel before the arrival
of the Medical Officer. The ship hoisted no quarantine
signal, and the Master was warned not to repeat this
omission again.
The Captain of the s. s. Sultan Fan Koetei was
lined $1 and costs for arriving from Bangkok with
no Bill of Health. It appears he had only taken over
at the last moment owing to the original Captain
being seriously ill and unable to sail.
Contracts were made for Wireless and Inspector
of Police’s Bungalows: the wood having arrived,
these should soon be finished.
Prisoners were engaged at the Baram mouth on
the Lighthouse and carrying wood here for different
new buildings.
The rainfall was 11 87 inches.
Mr. Ashley Carter, London Representative of the
Oil Well Supply Co. paid a visit during the month.
Seven Oil tankers arrived and six sailed with oil.
Sixteen cargo boats arrived and sailed.
C. D. ADAMS.
District Officer.
BROOKETON COLLIERY.
July.
The gross output of coal amounted to 1,372 tons, and of this 567 tons were consumed by our boilers, and the balance of 805 tons was sent to the wharf.
Coal shipped to Labuan by s. 1. L' Aubaine and lighters amounted to 379 tons, and 103 tons were supplied as hunkers to p. s. Adeh and local launches.
Sales at Labuan amounted to 478 tons, of which 450 tons were taken by the Straits Steamship Co.’s steamers.
The stocks at the end of the month amounted to 938 tons.
Everything went smoothly in both mining and mechanical departments during the mouth, machinery being overhauled where necessary and boilers cleaned.
The rainfall for the month amounted to 3*78 inches.
S. W. HARRIS,
Acting Manager
LIMBANG.
July.
Court.—Fines and fees amounted to $428.45.
Menudin and Usin were sentenced co, 6 mouths for gross contempt of Court.
The following fines were inflicted : —
Apong $5 for travelling without a pass, Ah Siong $5 for Breach of Customs regulations, Ah Lip $10 for drawing a parang. In the Native Court, Limah (f.) and Sabtu were fined for adultery and Ampal $44.28 for “Maharajah lela."
In the case Ah Tiau, vs: Cheek Lee, defendant appealed against the decision of the M. C. R.; the appeal was granted and the decision reversed.
Forestry.— Mr. .1. P. Mend, Conservator of Forests, was in the Division from the 7th to 24th, during which time he went up the Limbang river as far as Danau and Limpasong and visited Lawas, Sundar and Trusan. I understand from Mr. Mead he was very satisfied with the timber in the Lawas river.
General.—On the 26th, a female child, .aged about 2.1 years, disappeared from her home in the kampong. A diligent search was made, but with¬out success and nothing has been seen or heard of the child since. The Bruneis of course think this is the work of Eblis—but the more intelligent surmise she may have been seized by a crocodile.
On the 25th the old Residency bungalow was vacated, and new one occupied. The old building was erected here some, thirty years ago. having been removed from H. H. the late Rajah’s Tobacco Estate at Lundu.
The m. 1. Dam it has again been in trouble. Whilst she was being hoisted onto the p. s. Adeh the sling chain snapped and in falling she crashed against the side of the Adeh. She immediately began t<* settle down, but was got ashore before she sank. On examination it was found, she had had her pro¬verbial good luck, the damage was not nearly as bad as it was first thought.
Visitors to the station were Capt. Leslie, it. it. A. Mr. and Mrs. W. II. Geikie of Bau, Mr. P. M. Adams, A. D. O., Lawas and Trusan, Mr. Martin, I). O., Spitang B. N. B.. Capt. Haughton, Executive En¬gineer Labuan mid Inspector MacAfee. Chief Police- Officer, Brunei and Labuan.
Travelling.—I was away at Brooketon and Labuan from the 2nd to 4th, 14lh to 17th, and again on the 20th to 21st.
Shipping.—The p. s. Adeh made two trips, the m. I. Adele five and the s. I. Peter three.
Fifty bead of buffalo were shipped to Kuching.
The rainfall amounted to 5’68 inches.
August.
Court.—Khai Tai was fined for carelessly allow¬ing his tongkang to drift against the m. 1. Sylvia, and thereby damaging the paint work on the latter. Ah Hok was sentenced to3 months R. I. for theft of padi, and Ahmat to 18 months and a whipping for buffalo stealing. The inheritance case of Ahmat v.s: Chaia (f.) which concerned the dividing up of the estate of Tukang Mohamet, and which has been occupying the attention of the Court for some time, has now been settled, in accordance with the Mohamedan custom of Sarawak to the satisfaction of both parties.
General.—The Officers of the 5th Division all left
Brooketon for Kuching on the 12th to be present at
the races and returned to their respective stations on
26th, excepting Mr. Humphery who had been granted
leave for one trip of the Adeh.
Tama Kuling of Medihit came down towards the end of the month and reported that it was suspected that two of his people had been murdered, about a year ago, by the Pah Brians. He was informed that the Government could not. take any action until he brought down more reliable information. He was advised to make enquiries of the Lim Bahs and Bah Bawans, to whom the two missing men are related, and who live near to Pah Brian.
Public Works.—The old bungalow has been demolished and the dapor for new bungalow completed. Masons are busy with the cement work for same. Road coolies have been employed in ■collecting sand, and the prisoners in stone breaking.
Shipping and Trade.—The p. H. Adeh made only one trip, the s. 1. Peter Duff and m. 1. Adele each called in four times.
Thirty-five head of buffalo were shipped to Kuching and 100 head were allowed out of the district for transportation to Miri.
The rainfall amounted to 9'92 inches.
F. F. BOULT,
Resident 5th Division.
Lawas and Trusan
July.
Court —Lee. Corp. Bayang of the Trusan squad was lined $10 for being drunk and brawling in a Marut bouse. Hok San was imprisoned for breach of trust and Munap for debt. A, Javanese was detained on suspicion of being a runaway from Batu Apoi estate, and Ateng Mugang in connection with the rebel Tai Langub. Loyan was imprisoned for causing some Tagals in util Trusan to run away. Kumis Pasir, Raut Sia and Agong Riong were given till the end of the month to pay their forfeit of $100 each as security for Tai Langub. Several Malays at Sundar were fined for smuggling. Matassin was imprisoned at Merapok for broach of agreement and Samsu for debt. Two Trusan Muruts were imprisoned for breach of Government Orders, and Ah San for living in a Tagal house.
General.- I visited Trusan from the 2nd to the 9th and settled all outstanding affairs. The control of the wharf at Trusan was taken over by Govern¬ment, as the Chinese failed to pay the expanses put •up by one of their number as agreed. Troko Udin laid claim to some land across river on which Malays wished to farm. As the jungle has not been
felled for over 30 years, the Malays have been
allowed to use it. The Muruts have been very
slow in paying in their tax and it is probable that
they will continue to be so until their property is
seized. There have been a great many deaths
amongst these people from the latest influenza
epidemic.
Mr. Mead, Conservator of Forests, visited the
district from the 14th to the 19th and discussed
the new Forest rules and visited the new mill and
timber stand of the Vamco Timber Company.
1 accompanied Mr. Mead to Labuan in the in. 1.
Sylvia, going via Sipitang B. N. B. where we picked
up the District Officer, Mr. Martyn.
On the 21st we visited Limbang and I returned
to Lawas, accompanied by Mr. Martyn, on the
23rd. He came to discuss interior affairs in
connection with some Tagals who have lately moved
into Lawas from B. N. B.
I visited Merapok on the 26th and settled several
cases, returning to Lawas next day. The Vamco
Timber Co.’s new mill is now in running order and
turning out 5 tons per day, which amount they
hope to increase shortly. Owing to a prepon-
derance of B. N. B. notes in the Merapok district it
will probably be almost impossible to collect, tax
and customs duties. I have suggested to the
Resident, stopping such notes passing the customs
station in order to force the Labuan Chinese to
circulate Straits notes.
 It was reported from Labuan that two Limbang Chinese, who were taking a cargo of attaps to Lawas, were wrecked off Kuala Mengalong and one
 was drowned. The other was picked up and taken to Weston.
P. W. D. Rough stables were erected at Trusan and a site for six stalls was levelled at Lawas. The carpenters have nearly finished repairing the bridges on the Gay ah road. Timber for repairs the Trusan Fort was ordered. There are more than sufficient planks left over to repair all the bridges around Trusan. A new flag staff was purchased for Lawas and will shortly be erected in place of the old one which is rotten.
Prisoners, who numbered 22 at the end of the month, were employed in currying planks for bridge building and cleaning ditches on the cattle plain.
The month was exceptionally dry.
B. M. ADAMS, Assistant District Officer.
