The Sarawak Gazette.
MONDAY, MAY 1, 1922.
Sarawak.
We publish for the benefit of our treaders, who were so unfortunate as not to be able to go to Singapore, a short account of Sarawak's share in the reception of His Highness the Prince of Wales, and in the Malaya-Borneo Exhibition; On arrival in Singapore His Highness the Rajah transferred to H. H. s. Y. Zahora, and as soon as His Highness' pennant was broken at the main a salute of 21 guns was fired from Fort Canning.
His Highness attended by the Resident of 1st Division and the Treasurer of Sarawak, was stationed near Raffles Statue on the arrival of the Prince, whilst the Dyaks and Kayans, numbering over 250, under the command of Mr. F. A W. Page-Turner, D. O. of the 2nd Division and Mr. C. D. Adams, D. O. of Miri, together with the band of the Sarawak Rangers	'
were formed up in the left hand side of the road in the grounds leading up to Government House.
His Highness later lunched at Government House and was introduced to the Prince, later he took him round the Sarawak Section of Arts and Crafts at the Exhibition and attended the State Banquet that night.
His Highness dined at Government House on the next night and introduced His Royal High-	.
_ness to an exhibition of Dyak dancing afterwards.	’
From all accounts the Sarawak Section was a great success, the Forestry exhibits being much praised. A long Dyak house of no doors, of
which Andam was tuai was erected in the Exhibition grounds and persons paid ten cents
for the privilege of visiting this building.
When the Prince opened the Exhibition the Dyaks and Kayans were formed in a huge semi circle and advanced towards the Prince giving a manjong.
On Saturday night they assembled on the lawns of Government House after dinner. The Kenyahs gave drinking song and presented the Prince with a glass of port.
Four Dyaks did a WAR dance and later the Prince, who was much interested and examined some of the men was presented with a Kenyah war hat, shield and coat. Messrs. F. A. W. Page-Turner and C. D. Adams had the honour of being- presented to His Royal Highness.
The Dyaks and Kayans gave daily displays of dancing at the Exhibition and the band of the Sarawak Rangers was in constant attendance
With regard to the Sarawak exhibits one has but to read the Straits and Other papers to realise what a splendid show Sarawak put. up.
Among the wreaths placed at the base of the War Memorial in Singaporean the 3rd April was a Hural shield standing 4$feet high representing the arms of Sarawak cleverly carried out in Flame of the Forest, Marigolds and black silk. At the sides were streamers of ribbon in the Sarawak colours and a card was attached inscribed “A
tribute from Sarawak.”—C. V. BROOKE, Rajah.
His Highness the Rajah has asked us to say how much he appreciates the efforts made by all to ensure this success: especially’ ho mentions the names of Major Moulton and Mr. J. A. H. Hardie. 
Without Major Moulton’s aid in Singapore it would have been impossible to have achieved our object whilst Mr. Hardie, as Hon. Secretary in Sarawak, showed his usual ability and per¬severance in performing what was, at times, almost the impossible. His Highness congra¬tulates all on the successful end to their labours and expresses his complete satisfaction of the whole exhibit. Indeed thanks are due to all those who gave time and trouble especially those who prepared the interesting little book on Sarawak Trad® and to those in outstations who spent any amount of time and trouble in getting good speci¬mens of the local industries and who in some cases travelled some considerable distance in¬quest of their search.
Presumably the object of the Exhibition was to encourage trade and industry by showing people what countries can produce, and at the same time giving them an insight into little known parts of the British Empire.
Amongst all the countries and states exhibiting Sarawak is unique. It is not surprising that so little is known of this country.
The Government has always upheld the idea of Sarawak for the Sarawak people; not that outside interests are entirely disregarded but the Rajahs of Sarawak have always put their own subjects first.
In time go doubt there will he more immigration to a certain extent and perhaps some of the land be allotted to reputable companies, but as long as the Rajahs of Sarawak rule, we may safely say that the inhabitants of the country will be con¬sidered first anil their interests safeguarded with a jealous care.
One has heard it said that Sarawak is the land of small things—that may be true but it is just these small things that count.
It may sound paradoxical to say that Sarawak is the most autocratic and at the same time the most democratic-country in the world, but persons who take an interest in the country may come to this same conclusion. Long may it be so!
NOTES.
(April.)
His Highness the Rajah, accompanied by
the Resident, the Treasurer and Mr. F. A.
W. Page-Turner returned from Singapore on
the 6th by s. s. Kuching, other passengers
were Messrs. O. Lang, C. Fenwick and R. V.
Palmer.
A number of Dyaks returned also.
WE are asked to say that one of our readers
wishes to dispose of a collection of Sarawak
Gazettes the proceeds of which he intends to
give to the Rajah Brooke Memorial Fund
(Personal Memorial.)
The Gazette? are us under:—
From-lune 1883 to December 1889 bound
in 2 volumes and January 1890 to end of
1909 unbound. Indexes are complete. There
is a possibility-of two numbers, 1883—1889,
being missing. Will anyone wishing to pur-
chase this interesting collection of Gazettes
please send in their offer to the Editor S. G.
H. H. S. Y. Zahora sailed on the 14th for
the North with His Highness the Rajab on
hoard. His Highness was accompanied by
Mr. F. A. W. Page-Turner. Mi. and Mrs. H.
A. Adams and child and Mr. and Mrs. K. H.
Gillan and child
The Yacht was detained at Santubong until the 16th owing’ to heavy seas.
The party went on shore to bathe where they found Messrs. R. S. Holl, U. S. Griffiths, W. E. Le G. Clark and J. B. Archer who were spending the Easter week-end at San- tubong.
WE are asked to publish the following: —
“When the present stocks of three and eight cents postage stamps are exhausted, the colours of these two stamps will be altered in accordance with Postal Union regulations. The three cent stamp will be green, and the eight cent red, these being the colours of the present two and four cents stamps respective¬ly which will be later issued in new colours. The present twelve cunt scamp will also he re-issued in blue later on. and a new colour will be adopted for the 10 cent which is at present blue; the present two and four cents, which are green and red, will also have to lie re-issued in other colours, but as stocks of these last named four stamps are fairly large change will occur for some months.”
 Phew.”.! Now we know what made the chameleon so tired
| His Highness the Rajah has informed us 1 that lie has telegraphed to the Governor of B. N. B tor assistance in getting 30 Borneo ponies for a race-meeting this year
Mr. P. M Adams has been sent to B. N. B to choose and purchase tile ponies.
FROM Lundu the Court Writer reports the death of a Malay named Kassim who was seized by a crocodile st Tamalan.
It appears that the unfortunate man was bathing on a log when the crocodile came lip behind and seized him
The villages organised a search party and found the body headless and minus one arm, at Munggu Lokan. Some time later a cro¬codile was seen floating on the water; the Malays fired at it but failed to hit.
We understand that a Malay woman was taken at the same place about two months ago.
His Highness the Rajah and party attend¬ed Lee’s Cinema on the 12th and Witnessed a very good performance. We hope Mr. Lee will not mind us saying that, in our opinion, some of the films which are screened from time to time are rather unsuitable for natives. We had occasion to point out that one film in particular Was in rather bad taste and we’ understand that it was withdrawn.
No doubt some films are expensive and difficult io obtain nut we feel sure tb it tile audience would appreciate representations of actual happenings in Europe and other places whilst, of course comic films are always popular.
The two new bungalows, which have been building on tile site of part of the Old Rest House, are now practically completed
These little bungalows are for bachelor occupation, and we are informed that one is being reserved for the new Medical Officer, who is expected to arrive shortly.
The remaining part of the Old Rest House will be evacuated at the end of this month and two wore bungalows of the same pattern will
he erected
Although for sentimental reasons some of us
may regret the passing of the Old Rest House,
yet it is high time this dilapidated building
was pulled down.
There is, at present, a serious shortage of
bungalows for use of European Officials. The
New Rest House is full and there is no room
for visitors from Singapore or other places.
The foundations of two new houses near the
golf links are in the course of construction, but
it is getting more difficult year by year to
obtain a site near enough to the town for con-
venience and at the same time far enough
away from native houses.
BY the s. s. Kuching, which came in from
Singapore on the 17th. Mr. K H. Simpson
arrived to join the Borneo Company Ltd. Mrs.
Barraclough also returned by the same trip.
We regret to hear that Mr. Barraclough
has been in hospital for some time but learn
that he is now convalescent.
THE Kuching left again on the 20th. Amongst
her passengers were Messrs. J. W. McGowan
and J. Holliday: the former is leaving the
employ of the Sarawak Rubber Estates Ltd.
and the later the Island Trading Co. at Se-
la lang. We wish them both luck.
Mr. L. E. Currey also left on leave; we expect
he will be just in time for the General Election.
A reader sends us the following account of
an encounter with a bear:—
A Dyak named Inji of Kapit was out limiting ; with bis son as companion, when they put up a small bear which, instead ‘of running, turned and ' sprang at Inji tearing two large wounds in bis fore¬head with its claws and then biting his wrist as he beat it off. It was then speared by his son.
The Dyaks burnt its skin and all as a lesson to other bears.
THE Alice Lorraine which came in from Sadong on the 17th brought Mr. 1). Evans for medical treatment. We understand that Mr. Evans has since been operated upon at the Grange and that he is progressing well. We wish him a quick recovery.
On the 22ml the same ship brought in Mr. W. F. de V. Skrine, District Officer of Sadong, who is taking over Mr. Stooke’s duties in; the Resident’s Office whilst Mr. Stooke is going to Sadong as Officer-in-charge.
WE are sorry to hear that Father L. van den Bergh, who arrived from Sibu by s. l. Chamois on the 22nd, is seriously ill and has been admitted to the Grange.
Father V. Halder who brought the invalid down returned by the same steamer.
A mild epidemic of influenza seems to have visited Kuching during the past fortnight and, from reports, many persons are laid up. So far none of the European population have been attacked with this distressing complaint.
We are informed that whisky is a good preventative.
COPIES of “Sarawak” by Her Highness the Ranee dan be obtained on application to the Resident’s Office, Kuching, the price being $1.50 a copy.
ON the 16th about 1.15 a. m. P. C. Xo. 59- Mataha, whilst walking past the Government Store on beat duty, noticed a smell of burning; on investigation he found that something in the Store was on fire and immediately gave the alarm. When the Police arrived on the spot and had broken in the doors it was found that a sack of nails and sawdust had caught fire, but that beyond some shelves not much damage had been done.
The fire, which it is supposed bad originated in a cigarette end thrown away, was soon put out by the Police The fire engine stayed on the scene until 3 a. m. but was not needed.
It is not difficult to imagine what would have been tin- result if the fire had not been noticed in time; the Store is full of oil and
material which would have burnt easily, and
probably a great part of the Bazaar would
have been destroyed.
We understand that P. C. Mataha is to be
rewarded for his vigilance. He certainly
deserve it as, but fur his timely warning, immense damage might have been done.
THE Chinese have been celebrating their
sembahyang antu during the month. Proces-
sion to their grave-yards were of daily oc-
currence for over a week and caused many
interested onlookers
In spite of their many modern innovations
the Chinese appear to cling to their ancient
customs and rites For these we have the
highest respect, indeed there is much to be
learnt from the natives of the Celestial Empire.
THE amount of dry rubber harvested at Sungei Tengah Hiring the month of March was 83,000 tbs.
The Sarawak Oilfields, Ltd.
In the, mines section the Sarawak Oilfields Ltd., have an extremely micros Li ng display showing the various singes of oil production. A large working model shows the method of drilling by the water- flush system and a smaller model shows the percus¬sion system. This latter model also shows the method of shutting off water from the producing oil  sands.
The actual tools used in drilling are displayed, some of these being nearly a ton in weight. Sam¬ple lengths of the various sizes of casing used to line the bine hole are also on view.
A model refinery shows how the Crude oil is- broken up into the various commercial products—• Benzine, Kerosene. Solar oil etc., and samples of these products complete what is really a very line set of exhibits. The silver medal for the best exhi¬bit in the mines section was awarded deservedly to tbc Sarawak Oilfields Ltd.— (S.T.)
Native Medicine.
Yaws
There is something peculiarly fascinating in the
study of primitive medicine, the reason for which
is perhaps not easy to see. Still, no one will deny
that to read such details as that ancient Egyptians
were wont to swallow mice whole in order, possi-
bly, to cure whooping cough, or that the ancient
physician Galen treated wounds by the application
of red wine, is distinctly stimulating. Sometimes
the very incongruity of the treatment tickles the 
imagination; sometimes the remarkable similarity 
of ancient therapeutic methods to those of the 
twentieth century excites astonishment; and in yet 
other cases we get illustrations of the curious 
principle of “similia similibus curantur.” Besides, 
it is well to examine carefully native methods of 
treating diseases lest, perchance, we may alight on
a really useful remedy which these people, with 
their many years of experience and empirical 
experiment, may have evolved. Doctors, perhaps,
are too prone to cast a scornful eye upon all oriental
therapy. There is no doubt that the great majority
of native medicines are not only useless for the pm
pose to which they are put. but positively harmful
But, yet, amid all the useless rubble, there may be a
precious stone. It is a matter of surprise to some,
that natives remain so constant to their medicines.
and so steadfastly resist modern methods of treat-
merit. The explanation Jies, no doubt, partly in the 
prove Inal conservatism of these people, and partly 
in the comforting fact that the majority of illnesses ;
tend to recover spontaneously, so that a cure fol- 
lowing on the use of native medicine is more often 
a case of "post hoc” than “propter hoc." . It may
be added that this latter remark can also be applied 
to a good many European methods of treatment.
Lastly—with all medicines—the element of faith
is of paramount importance.
Let us first discuss the disease called Framboesia
or Yaws—which is so prevalent in this country.
This disease is known by a variety of native names 
of which a few are given as follows: —
Yaws is a disease of longstanding. It has even been suggested that it was the disease which attack¬ed the Israelites on their journey through the wilder¬ness. it was first seriously studied dining the 16th and 17th centuries, but in spite of continuous research there still remains some doubt as to bow the specific microbe is transmitted from one individual to an¬other. The Chinese term for yaws indicates the very commonly’ held idea among Asiatics of this country that the disease is somehow connected with the consumption of the Durian.
Any direct connection with this fruit is unlikely, but the fact remains that applicants for treatment for yaws appear to preponderate during the Durian season.
The tendency to incriminate certain foods is found in other countries.
In Ceylon, some believe a fish called “balla mal" to be the cause of the disease, others a cereal called “kurrakan", and in the West Indies, the mango has been blamed.
Most natives seem to have the Underlying idea
that dirt contributes to the causation of the disease,
but few of them seem to carry this notion into
practice.
Yaws is found in all countries in the tropical and
subtropical zone, but varies in its prevalence. In
Fiji, it is said that every child who does not contract
the disease in the ordinary way, is inoculated with
it by their parents who regard it as necessary ami
perhaps beneficial—surely a counsel of despair I
Of the Malay methods of treating Yaws, the
following examples may be given : —
1.	Batang birah is chopped up and mixed well
with lime (kapur). This forms a paste which is
applied as a poutlice at night time, the daun birah
being used as a bandage.
In the day time, however,t the following prescrip-
tion is used:—
2.	Nila (Copper Sulphate) and buah pinang tua are
burnt and pounded together. This powder is then
mixed with dripping or lime juice to form an oint-
ment winch is applied to the sores.
it may be noted that copper sulphate WAS used by
Europeans as a caustic in the treatment of the
lesions of yaws before the introduction of arsenical
preparations.
The following is a three days cure for crab yaws
given by Sudin of Samarahan:—
3.	take one leaf each of the black and yellow yam
and pound up with 2 Ozs. of lime. Make into a
paste. spread I" thick on the affected parts, and
bandage with a yam leave. Place the foot over a
fire ami leave it there till it becomes too hot to bear
when it is removed This treatment with heat is
carried on for hour. The dressing is changed
every morning.
This method of implying heat by pulling on the
application cold and heating it in situ up to the
limit of tolerance seems somewhat superior to the
European method of putting on a hot fomentation
and allowing it to get cold.
Both Malays and Milanos use a decoction called
Obat Gadong; which is taken by mouth. This rather
complicated potion is made up of the following in-
gredients :—
Pepper
Cloves
Buah Klat
Chankok
Sedoya
Chabi Dagang
Nutmeg
A small tea-cup-full of this mixture is added to
four pints of-water, and the whole is heated to
boiling point: One pint lasts about a week, and the
medicine is continued until a cure is obtained My
informant, however, did not say how long this
might be.
Land-Dyaks, Dyaks and Melanos seem to use
the Malay medicines, and it would be interesting to
know whether they have their own prescriptions for
treating Yaws.	
The Chinese use externally copper sulphate and
also a yellow powder which is said to be composed
of saltpetre and a mercurial salt.
Internally a decoction is used of which the in-
gredients are herbs imported from China. The
prescription for this medicine is as follows : —
Add to 24 OZ. of water and boil down to 8 oz.
Dose. 4 oz. morning and evening.
The Chinese druggists say this will cure yaws,
but, at the same time, they admit it is not so
efficacious as the European method of injecting.
N. A. B.—(Contributed.)
The Editor is not responsible for the opinions of Correspondents.]
ONLOOKER—I am afraid that you do not know
what you are writing about. What you appear to
have seen “between the lines'' is, I fear, a phantom
of your own imagination.
For these reasons we regret that we see no use
in publishing your letter.— Ed. S. G.]
A suggestion.
KUCHING, SARAWAK.
26th April, 1922-
The Editor,
Sarawak Gazette.
DEAR SIR,
I have read with interest the P. M. O.'s report
on the Medical Department and while it is gratifying
to hear about the improvements with regard to
medical matters which have been and are still to be
made at Outstations, and the new Hospital “for
Europeans only" to which further additions are
contemplated, it seems to me that there is one section
of the community which has been overlooked. I
refer to the many persons who are able arid willing
to pay a fair and reasonable sum for hospital accom-
modation and trained nursing, but who cannot, it
would appear, go to the Hospital “for Europeans
only, " and cannot be expected to go to the General
Hospital which has only rough accommodation for
the coolie class and does not possess any nurses,
trained or otherwise.
The Medical Department might with advantage
extend its sphere of usefulness to this large class by
building on “The Grange" site a hospital with
decent accommodation for 2nd class patients, as is
obtainable in the General Hospital, Singapore, where
the same medical and nursing attention is provided
as for 1st class patients but at a lower cost. Eurasian
nurses should be easily obtainable, or some of the
older girls in our local schools might be trained and
occupation thus found for them.
I commend 'this matter to the earnest attention
of the Government and am sure that such a hospital
as suggested will fill a long felt want.
Yours faithfully.
PROGRESS.
Admiral Sir Charles Dundas, in his breezy book, “An Admiral's Yarns," tells a good story of a Scotch minister. The subject of the sermon was Jouah. An old lady in a front pew was most interested. “Now, what kind of fush do you suppose it was that swallowed Jonah?" he cried. “ Aiblins it was herrin'? Aye. but it was no' a herrin’. Aiblins it was a cod? Aye, but it was no' a cod. Then dearly beloved brethren, what sort o' a fush was it? Was it a shairk."
The old lady could keep silence no longer.
“Maybe it was a whale," she said.
The minister rose in fury and banged her on the head with the "gudebuk.”
“Ye daft bletherin’ bizum,” he roared. “Ye’re takin' the word o’ God oot o' the mooth o’ ane o’ His ministers.
The Editor is not responsible for the opinions of Correspondents.]
ONLOOKER—I am afraid that you do not know
what you are writing about. What you appear to
have seen “between the lines'' is, I fear, a phantom
of your own imagination.
For these reasons we regret that we see no use
in publishing your letter.— Ed. S. G.]
A suggestion.
KUCHING, SARAWAK.
26th April, 1922-
The Editor,
Sarawak Gazette.
DEAR SIR,
I have read with interest the P. M. O.'s report
on the Medical Department and while it is gratifying
to hear about the improvements with regard to
medical matters which have been and are still to be
made at Outstations, and the new Hospital “for
Europeans only" to which further additions are
contemplated, it seems to me that there is one section
of the community which has been overlooked. I
refer to the many persons who are able arid willing
to pay a fair and reasonable sum for hospital accom-
modation and trained nursing, but who cannot, it
would appear, go to the Hospital “for Europeans
only, " and cannot be expected to go to the General
Hospital which has only rough accommodation for
the coolie class and does not possess any nurses,
trained or otherwise.
The Medical Department might with advantage
extend its sphere of usefulness to this large class by
building on “The Grange" site a hospital with
decent accommodation for 2nd class patients, as is
obtainable in the General Hospital, Singapore, where
the same medical and nursing attention is provided
as for 1st class patients but at a lower cost. Eurasian
nurses should be easily obtainable, or some of the
older girls in our local schools might be trained and
occupation thus found for them.
I commend 'this matter to the earnest attention
of the Government and am sure that such a hospital
as suggested will fill a long felt want.
Yours faithfully.
PROGRESS.
Admiral Sir Charles Dundas, in his breezy book, “An Admiral's Yarns," tells a good story of a Scotch minister. The subject of the sermon was Jouah. An old lady in a front pew was most interested. “Now, what kind of fush do you suppose it was that swallowed Jonah?" he cried. “ Aiblins it was herrin'? Aye. but it was no' a herrin’. Aiblins it was a cod? Aye, but it was no' a cod. Then dearly beloved brethren, what sort o' a fush was it? Was it a shairk."
The old lady could keep silence no longer.
“Maybe it was a whale," she said.
The minister rose in fury and banged her on the head with the "gudebuk.”
“Ye daft bletherin’ bizum,” he roared. “Ye’re takin' the word o’ God oot o' the mooth o’ ane o’ His ministers.
The Editor is not responsible for the opinions of Correspondents.]
ONLOOKER—I am afraid that you do not know
what you are writing about. What you appear to
have seen “between the lines'' is, I fear, a phantom
of your own imagination.
For these reasons we regret that we see no use
in publishing your letter.— Ed. S. G.]
A suggestion.
KUCHING, SARAWAK.
26th April, 1922-
The Editor,
Sarawak Gazette.
DEAR SIR,
I have read with interest the P. M. O.'s report
on the Medical Department and while it is gratifying
to hear about the improvements with regard to
medical matters which have been and are still to be
made at Outstations, and the new Hospital “for
Europeans only" to which further additions are
contemplated, it seems to me that there is one section
of the community which has been overlooked. I
refer to the many persons who are able arid willing
to pay a fair and reasonable sum for hospital accom-
modation and trained nursing, but who cannot, it
would appear, go to the Hospital “for Europeans
only, " and cannot be expected to go to the General
Hospital which has only rough accommodation for
the coolie class and does not possess any nurses,
trained or otherwise.
The Medical Department might with advantage
extend its sphere of usefulness to this large class by
building on “The Grange" site a hospital with
decent accommodation for 2nd class patients, as is
obtainable in the General Hospital, Singapore, where
the same medical and nursing attention is provided
as for 1st class patients but at a lower cost. Eurasian
nurses should be easily obtainable, or some of the
older girls in our local schools might be trained and
occupation thus found for them.
I commend 'this matter to the earnest attention
of the Government and am sure that such a hospital
as suggested will fill a long felt want.
Yours faithfully.
PROGRESS.
Admiral Sir Charles Dundas, in his breezy book, “An Admiral's Yarns," tells a good story of a Scotch minister. The subject of the sermon was Jouah. An old lady in a front pew was most interested. “Now, what kind of fush do you suppose it was that swallowed Jonah?" he cried. “ Aiblins it was herrin'? Aye. but it was no' a herrin’. Aiblins it was a cod? Aye, but it was no' a cod. Then dearly beloved brethren, what sort o' a fush was it? Was it a shairk."
The old lady could keep silence no longer.
“Maybe it was a whale," she said.
The minister rose in fury and banged her on the head with the "gudebuk.”
“Ye daft bletherin’ bizum,” he roared. “Ye’re takin' the word o’ God oot o' the mooth o’ ane o’ His ministers.
The Brunei Exhibit.
In his yesterday's account of the British North
Borneo Arts and Crafts Exhibits our representative-
referred to Borneo, Sarawak and British North
Borneo, omitting to mention what the natives are
pleased to term the ibu or mother of those States,
namely the rich and prosperous State of Brunei,
the exhibits from which are located between the
British North Borneo and Sarawak displays, and
under the same roof, at the Exhibition.
In the dim and distant past Brunei had a
population, it is said, of 400,000 inhabitants and
extended over the whole of the North West coast of
Borneo. A succession of Sultans, however, ceded
territory which now forms Sarawak and British
North Borneo, which still pay concession money to
the bit of the motherland which is left, and which
now has a population of about 25,000 inhabitants. .
Thanks to the courtesy of Mr. L. A. Allen, the
Resident of Brunei, and who is personally presiding
over the Stale’s exhibits, our representative was
given a considerable amount of useful information
regarding the Brunei Exhibits, the most striking
that meets the eyes as they rest in a kaleidoscope of
colours being the collection of a wonderful colour
displayed Jong Sarats or Brunei silk sarongs
including some of the gorgeous cloths of gold thread
for which the Slate is well famed. There is also a
fine collection of well woven sarongs, used hv the
middle classes and a large number of which have
already been sold to visitors at the ’Exhibition.
Then on one table in the section there is a gorgeous-
display of gold jewellery loaned by the Sultan,
Sir Jemalulalan, K. c. M. G , and which Mr. Allen
mentioned forms part of His Highness’ regalia, also
a striking show of engraved silver ware, the pro-
duction of which is confined it is said, to one family
in the State It is a magnificent exhibit, and in
I itself worth a visit CO the Brunei section. There is
already, we understand, a great demand at the Ex-
hibition for pieces of this silver (which includes a
mounted silver mangosteen and represents both old
and present day work.) They should make very
useful presents. Near by is an antique collection of
brass, as well as a large display of Brunei gongs,
seri silver sets etc., the above exhibits having been
loaned by Dr. T. C. A. Cleverton. Not the least
striking display is a well arranged collection of
Brunei weapons, including spears, krisses and swords
of nearly every conceivable kind and design, while
nearby is a wonderful collection of enormous brass
kettles, surmounted by figures of snakes and dragons,
the latter indicating Chinese influence in Brunei in.
years gone by.
The show on view also includes several educative
models, including a large one of a Brunet Rajah’s
house. This is a wonderful piece of work, and de-
lighted many of the schoolboys who visited the
Exhibition yesterday. The model contains over a
hundred figures illustrating a form of native dancing
which in real life none but the Sultan and his family
are privileged to witness. Strange to say the head-
dresses worn by the figures are typically those in
use in South India, this showing Indian influence in
the State in earlier times. There are other models, all
showing a very high standard of workmanship, among
them a fine brass representation of a local prow, as
well as a collection of dolls depicting the costumes
and 'gorgeous headdresses worn by brides and
bridegrooms in Brunei, even at the present day.
Then no one should miss seeing the lovely em-
broidered mats for which the state is famous, the
array of baskets made by different races in the
country, and the splendid display of walking sticks,
wrought from Malacca canes, nebong, and coconut
and other woods, many of them being finished off
with elaborately carved handles representative of
birds and other types. A Brunei collection would
be incomplete without the segup or Malay cigar
covered with the Nepa leaf and a large collection of
which is, as a result, to be seen at the Exhibition.
They are to be seen in various sizes, as in Brunei
the length of the cigar is in proportion to the
smoker’s rank in the social scale, the Sultan, as |
head of the State, smoking the longest cigar of all!
Finally mention should be made of two coats of
mail, lent by the Sultan, among the exhibits. They
are made of chain armour and strips of buffalo horn
and belong to a period of early history in the State.
Of course there are many more exhibits in the Bru-
nei section than are recorded in the limited space of
a newspaper account. These we leave the visitor
to pick out for himself, and all that can be said is
that he must be very hard to please, who does not
come away satisfied and gratified after a tour of the
Brunei Section
In the Agricultural Section Brunei shows samples
of paddy and also of coal, the latter from the Brooke-
ton mine.— (S. T.)
Death of Bishop Hose.
We regret to announce the death of the Right 
Reverend George Frederick Hose, D. D.; Bishop of
Singapore and Sarawak from 1881 to 1908.
The deceased took his degree from St John's
College, Cambridge, in 1861; and in the same year 
was ordained Deacon for the Curacy of Great Bar- 
ford in Bedfordshire.. After various other appoint-
ments he came out as Colonial Chaplain of Malacca 
in February 1868. In 1873 he was Colonial Chaplain 
of Singapore and in 1881 was consecrated in
Lambeth Palace Chapel as Bishop of the Diocese of 
Singapore, Labuan and Sarawak. His work in
Sarawak is so well known that it is almost unneces-
sary to mention that he built the Kuching Schools,
the club and many other buildings whilst his know-
ledge of natives and their languages endeared him
to the hearts of many—not only Christian natives
but especially to the Malays. He founded the
Straits Branch of the Royal Asiatic Society, of which 
he was the first President. He contributed many 
paper.- in Malay subjects and natural history.
In 1908 Bishop Hose resigned and the Diocese 
was divided and the new See of Labuan and 
Sarawak made.
The Straits Echo says “He was a man of saintly 
life and a most lovable character." We can say no 
more than that.
Sarawak Arts and Crafts.
The Sarawak arts and crafts exhibit in godown 
has an excellent collection of Dyak swords, native
bead work, hats and brass ware, most of which are
for sale and which may be taken away immediately
without waiting for the conclusion of the Exhibition. 
It is also requested that all purchases which have up
to the present been retained in order not to spoil 
the collection may be taken delivery of as soon as 
possible.—(S. T.)
Sarawak's striking Show At Exhibition.
To describe Borneo without Sarawak would lie
like playing Hamlet with the Prince left out. Un-
der a succession of white rajahs the State has pro-
gressed by leaps and bounds, and one has only to
read through the excellently written book specially
compiled by Her Highness the Ranee, and a number
of which visitors will find on the large table in the
centre of the Sarawak section which, as mentioned
before, is located in the same godown as those of
the sister states of British North Borneo and Brunei.
There is also another brochure which anyone in-
terested in Sarawak should procure, and that is
“ Notes on Sarawak Trade and Supplement,” ob-
tainable from the committee for the agriculture and
produce Section, Sarawak Section, and giving de-
tails of the State's sago, sago flour, jelutong, pepper,
gambler, gutta percha and gutta jangkar, rhe nipa
palm, coconut planting, birds' nests, camphor, rice
planting, alcoholic beverages, vegetable oils, wild
honey, fibres, dies, jungle products which are edible,
and medicinal plants and fruits —a list sufficient to
show the resources of the state, which are so well re-
presented by the display at the Exhibition. It is it
pity His Highness has not been able to visit the Ex-
hibition in person but. the Sarawak representation
has been placed in the hands of able officers with the
result that Sarawak is making a striking show at the
Exhibition.
As one enters the section he is faced with an array
of brass cannon captured from pirates by former
rajahs at one time or another, and judging by the
appearance of the firearms the pirates must have
obtained them either by fair or foul means from the
European adventurers in the old days. It is a hand-
some collection and serves with many other of the
exhibits, such as a fine collection of parangs and
swords, to make an effective display of weapons.
Then a Malayan or Borneo display would be in-
complete without an exhibit of sarongs, of which
Sarawak shows a large collection, not only of the
expensive Kuching gold threaded ones of every hue
imaginable but the less ornamental withal utilitarian
varieties, used by the middle class inhabitants of the
country.	•
There is also to be seen a distinct exhibit of native
bead work in the shape of pretty-coloured seri
baskets, tobacco pouches and so forth, while there
is a large and motley collection of masks used by
Dyaks in certain forms of their dancing.
In Godown S again Sarawak has very fine ex-
hibits in the Forestry Section, an outstanding one
in which is a kiosk built entirely of belian or iron
wood, which it might be added is practically indi-
genous to Sarawak and is almost indestructible.
There are several belian posts on view which have
been used in houses and factories for many years
without signs of deterioration. One is reputed as
having been the main post of several native houses
for 100 years. The label says 150! There is also
on view, in the same section, a very fine dining
table, cut from one piece of wood which in Sarawak
is known as tapang. These tapangs are ent solid
from the huge trees, and in this connection it might
he mentioned that there are several tapang exhibits
in the rough for sale, all of which would make hand-
some tables.
Then again Sarawak shows a comprehensive ex-
hibit of commercial timbers which we will leave the
visitor to see and admire for himself.
The state has also has a unique exhibit in the
Agricultural Section in the shape of Cutch, a dye
obtained from the bark of trees in Sarawak. It is
ordinary looking stuff but fulfils a number of uses.
For instance most people at home have admired the deep-red colon ring of the sails of the myriads of fishing boats in home waters. That colouring is due to the sails being dyed with cutch, which not only beautifies but preserves them. It is well-known that many of the finest dyes in this part of the world come from Sarawak, some of which can be seen at the Exhibition. In the above our re¬presentative has attempted to cover a portion of the ground of the Sarawak display, but it is only a portion, but more will have to be traversed by the visitor if he is desirous of gaining ever passing acquaintance with the State of Sarawak.—(S. T.)
DEAR CUTHBERT,
I have received your letter, Cuthbert old custrel, (not so bad for a first attempt is it, Cuthbert old Crustacea?) but as a matter of fact Percy, poor old porcupine, has gone so I am cut in for this apophthegmatic alliteration. I liked your remarks about Percies which you sent to pony, poor old polligig, (I'm getting dreadfully mixed) I mean about polligig to Percy—(Oh ! I give it up). By the way I had better tell you my name, it is Leofric. No’ don’t laugh, Cuthbert old cachalong, it really is; it reminds me of the story about the (Not in these columns, try the Sporting Times—Ed. S. G.) But talking i seriously, Cuthbert old cutcherry, I am awfully grieved that poor old Percy has gone. Can't you see him riding bis little horse round the race course. I say, Cuthbert old cutikins, we shall have to be careful of  the little "Green Maria" which is trundled round Kuching; I refer, of course, to the dog cart. When we have these wee ponies trotting round with no collars on there is going to lie trouble. Can’t you see the dog catchers egging om little mounts into the cart and sternly slamming the gratings on them.
I don’t know what people will say about this letter, Cuthbert old calippie, but anyway I've done my best don’t you think so, Cuthbert old cryophorus.
Let me know how you get on in Jesselton again, Cuthbert old coryphaeus, and don't forget to get those little wee horses just a size too big for the dog catchers.
Good-bye, Cuthbert old cuspidor,—I mean calcea- mentum.
Yours,
PERCY.
The Rajah Charles Brooke
Memorial Fund.
“Sarawak.”
'Sarawak' was written by Her Highness the Ranee at short notice to provide a brief history of the country, for the enlightment of those who visited the Sarawak Section at the Malaya-Borneo Exhi¬bition in Singapore, but the book merits more attention and a wider scope than a mere exhibition pamphlet.
The volume is small but its seventy pages tell in an attractive form the romance of a country'.
The authoress has divided her short history into three sections each dealing with the life-work of one of the three Rajahs of Sarawak and through it all runs the personal note that provides an unique interest: and bare historical facts are softened by the touch of one who not only knows but loves her subject.
“I love Sarawak" she says, and one can feel the enthusiasm welling up in almost every page.
A great point is made of the policy' of the Rulers of Sarawak, the desire to keep their people from the consequences of a too rapid intermingling with the baser modes of Western Civilization. " Sara¬wak belongs to the Malay, Sea and Land Dyak. Kayans, Milanos, Muruts and other tribes," but to those who would enter and develop the country on the broad principles of the Brooke traditions there is an ever welcoming hand.
The Brooke tradition is the history of Sarawak. Sir James laid the foundations of his rule in the hearts of the people; Sir Charles built a model state on the trust of the people; the present Ruler carries on the policy, but Sarawak is more in the world, is more accessible than she was and it will be harder to limit the Progress' that is after all her due. Nevertheless Her Highness only echoes the wishes of the friends of Sarawak who believe as Sir Charles did in " precaution and protection."
(Contributed.)
" I Don’t Think.”
I’ve always heard of Arcady
From poets who profess,
That Arcady's a place where we
Find perfect happiness.
I always thought that Arcady Lay in the realms of mind. And only those who hold the key True happiness could find.
Ahis! thought I, that all this bliss Lies in a shadowy land,
The road to which so many miss Save those who. understand.
But now I learn from those “who know" That Arcady's surpassed.
By a real land where all may go
What e’er their creed or caste.
All’s more than perfect in this land Where j y will last sane cesse. Of course by now you’ll understand This is the F. M. S.
Topical Topics.
There are various rumours going round about the price of the Borneo ponies which H. H. the Rajah has ordered. Wb hope the prices mentioned in these rumours are incorrect otherwise we shall have to rely on our merchant princes to uphold “ The Sport of Kings."
We hear that palatial mews are being erected at B. M. K.
We understand that invitations are being issued to join the camp which is being pitched on the golf links for those who can find nowhere to live in Kuching.
The proposer of the scheme suggests that each green should hold a tent and the numbers be out¬lined in electric lights for the benefit of the wicked revellers from the club. We imagine that some of the “blind"’ holes would lie a serious obstacle.
We have had it suggested to us that the recent outbreak in smartness and energy amongst a small section of our local police force is due to their pick¬ing up the oats, which were left behind when their equine predecessors left. Well! well !
A correspondent writes as follows :—
Your remarks in the last issue of the Gazette on the subject of hair-cutting refer, I presume, to prices charged by the local Malay barbers for coming to the house. On the face of it 75 cents ( =ls. 9d.) seems an exorbitant charge—especially for the sort of haircut provided for the money—but there is another side of the question to be looked at.
If you go to the man’s shop he will only charge you 30 cents, it is therefore, I think, not unreasonable to pay 60 cents if he goes to your house, leaving out of the question the quality of the work.
For many years before the war the recognised fee for a haircut at one's bouse was 50 cents, and this was considered fair taking into account the time wasted by the barber in going to and fro.
During the period of high prices caused by the War many persons voluntarily paid 75 cents, but prices are down now so that there is no longer any excuse for this higher fee.
In London many years ago the writer, when re-covering from an operation, sent for a barber to come to the house to remove a week's growth of beard and was charged 2s. 6d.
A motorist, stranded by the road-side, telephoned frantically for assistance. “My car's turned turtle," he shouted. "Apply at the aquarium," came the answer.
Animals of Sarawak.
The Tarsier.
When it is considered that even in a country like England there still remains much to learn about the life and habits of the indigenous fauna, it will lie realized that, in spite of the energetic work of several naturalists out here, the country of Sarawak is prac¬tically a terra incognita so far as a knowledge of its animals is concerned.
We still await the Fabre of tropical entomology, and when he eventually appears, what wanders of tropical insect life shall we not learn!
A study of the habits of lower animals is not only fascinating in itself—it forms the basis of the re¬latively new-born science of comparative psychology, a science which is likely to be of considerable value in estimating precisely the relation between the men¬tal activities of man and lower animals, and in the interpretation of the working of the human intellect by ascertaining the primitive elements from which it has been built up.
The islands in this part of the world provide a home for an astonishing number of what are some¬times called "living fossils”—creatures which serve to Jink up for the biologist large distinct groups of ani¬mals which have now widely diverged from each other in the course of evolutionary development. Here, in effect, is a sort of backwater in the stream of life, where many antiquated and primitive animals have found a temporary refuge from the ever-strenuous struggle for existence, and here we may LOOK with some confidence for information to help ns weave the isolated and disconnected threads of systematic biology into a connected and orderly whole.
Take for instance the curious animal, the Tarsier, which has lately been engaging so much attention in the scientific world. This animal has never been kept in captivity for more than a very short time, and opportunities for a study of its habits have been very few Until, recently, indeed, no satisfactory photographs of the living animal have been available.
The Tarsier is at present confined to a few islands of the Malay archipelago, including the Philippines, Celebes, Borneo and Sumatra.
In Sarawak it is by no means difficult to get, at any rate in the 1st Division ; bur yet it is astonishing how few people, including natives, are acquainted with it.
The Dyaks term the animal Ingkat. and ascribe to it the power of being able to turn the head in a com¬plete circle. This idea is derived from the animal's bird-like habit of turning its head round to look backwards.
The creature is nocturnal and arboreal in its habits, and is singularly elusive, so that no one has yet, I think, been able to study it in its natural surround¬ings. Dyaks usually come across it while felling trees in which the animal may be slumbering during the day. As a rule, the Tarsier is found singly or- in pairs only. It progresses from branch to branch by a series of frog-like leaps for which its curiously elongated hind limbs are well adapted. The animal can leap a distance of over a yard in the day-time with great accuracy, and this is the more remarkable because, judging by the bad shots it often makes in attempting to catch hold of its food, it must be partially blind in the day-light. The rapidity with which the animal jumps is quite astonishing. At one moment it is clinging to a vertical branch with its large ears on the alert and its huge brown eyes wide open gazing at one with a look of seeming astonishment, and the next instant it is in a precisely similar position on another branch several feet away. In the interval one catches a glimpse of a brown body flying through the air with a long tufted tail streaming behind. It has been said, by the way. that the
tail is prehensile. It is certainly not prehensile in
the usual sense of the Word, but it evidently helps to
support the animal while it clings on to a branch,
for the base of the tail is pressed firmly against the
branch below. No doubt the V-shaped ridges on the
ventral surface of the tail can obtain a considerable
grip on the rough bark, and possibly a movement of
the tail may assist in the leaping from branch to
branch.
There is still considerable doubt as to the natural
food of the Tarsier. Natives usually say it feeds on
banana, but I have never seen it touch this fruit.
Lydekker, in his book on “ Mammals, Living and
Extinct," and evidently quoting from Burmeister,
states that the animal feeds chiefly on insects and
lizards. I can corroborate the fact that it will eat
grass-hoppers. Oue ate thirty or forty at a time
every morning, but whether or no this was his usual
diet is difficult to say, for he did not live, for more
than a week. With regards to lizards, I am not sure.
Certainly one animal would not look at an ordinary
chichak which I offered him. Further information
on this subject of food is urgently required.
The breeding season of the Tarsier would appear
to vary considerably. From information recently
acquired, in Sarawak the season seems to coincide
with the landas. As with most truly arboreal
mammals, it brings forth one young at a time. The
young Tarsier is a very pretty little creature, with
Us fluffy brown fur and blue eyes
C. Hose, who has done so much to make us
acquainted with the natural history of Sarawak, has
stated that the mother Tarsier carries her baby in
her mouth as a cat carries her kitten. After care-
fully watching three mothers with their young, I
have not been able to verify this observation. Usually
the young clings on to the ventral surface of its
mother with arms and legs and so is carried about
from place to place. The young utter a squeaking
noise like that of a mouse, but I have never heard
the adult make a noise of any description.
Geologically speaking, the Tarsier belongs to a
very ancient order, for remains of Tarsier— like
animals have been found in the Eocene deposits of
Europe and North America, deposits which ware
laid down many million years ago when mammals
were first beginning to assert themselves in the
world.
In its structure the Tarsier retains many evidences
•of its primitive status, and yet it also possesses
features which closely ally it to the group of animals
called the higher Primates, which include man, apes
and monkeys.
Indeed, apart from some highly specialized features
which adapt the animal to its arboreal mode of life,
the Tarsier provides a most interesting link which
helps to fill up the gap between the higher Primates
and such lowly mammals as the tree-shew's and
marsupials. This intermediate position is corrobo- 
rated by many details of the creature's internal
anatomy, and especially in the conformation of its
brain.
We will note one particular only to illustrate this,
namely, that part of the brain which is concerned
with the function of vision.
There is a school of anatomists in England which
has lately brought forward many cogent reasons in
support of the thesis that the initial stimulus which
led. to the evolutionary development of the compli-
cated Primate brain from the simple primitive brain
of lowlier mammals lay in the increasing part which
vision took in the guidance of the animal, and the
extent to which this sense replaced the sense of
smell as the means by which the animal acquainted
itself with its environment.
In a rabbit, the eyes are more or less situated on the sides of the bead, so that each eye sees a totally different picture. This animal is said to possess panoramic vision. In a monkey, however, the eyes have swung forwards so that by their urn vergence simultaneously on one object, each eye receives HO identical picture but from slightly different points of view. The effect of this is to produce the faculty of stereoscopic vision. A cat, although able to con¬verge the eyes, has not true stereoscopic vision.
This acquisition of stereoscopic vision by the higher primates has led to powers of discrimination not possessed by other mammals, and there is little doubt that it forms the starting-point which has culminated in the complex human brain with all its power of intellectual superiority
Now, in a certain part of the brain there is a small group of nerve cells called the nucleus of accommodation, and this nucleus controls the accom-modation or focussing of the eyes. In the nigher primates this nucleus is divided into two parts, each of which controls an eve. This is evidently cor¬related with the fuel that each eye is capable of focussing independently on any particular object, such independent focussing being essential for true stereoscopic vision. In acai or rabbit the nucleus is median nod single, and the eyes are not capable of independent accommodation
Working recently on material sent from Sarawak, an Australian anatomist bus discovered the interesting fact that the nucleus of accommodation in I Tarsi us, although single, is broadened out as though, it were trying to divide!
In other words, although Tarsius evidently does not possess true stereoscopic vision, it is, in this respect, in advance of all animals lower than the I higher primates, and is a biological stepping-stone ' between these two groups.— (Contributed.)
A Foreigner’s Dilemma.
An engineering firm some time ago despatched an aermotor for pumping water, to » gentleman i esiding in Mexico, who had a customer for it. As a constant supply of water was required, and as a steady breeze could not always be relied upon, the aermotor was equipped with a valve and handle, to be used, one presumes, when the wind was not sufficiently strong to turn the wheel.
A week or two after the despatching of the aer¬motor. the firm in question received the following:— •‘Dear Fren,
“I got the valve witch 1 by from youalrite but why for God's sake you doan send me no handle. Wats the use of the valve when she doan have no handle i loose to my customer shore thing. You doan treai me rile, is my money not so good to you as the other fella? i wate ten days and my customer fie holler like hell for the valve.
"You know be is summer now and the win has no blow the wheel the valve she got no handle so what the hell i goan to do. You doan send no handle pretty quick I send her back and I goan to order some valve from Krain Company.
"Goodby,
"Your fren,
“(sd) ANTONIO DUTRA.
"p. s.—Sine i write i find the goddam handle in the box. excuse to me."
We hope Mr. Dutra was excused for, in our opinion, a man who adds to the gaiety of nations in this fashion should be forgiven anything and everything.
Motoring Notes.
By “Spark Plug.”
A few days ago our Editor decided to devote a column to motoring subjects—and this is the result.
Acting on his instructions I risked my body by going for a ride, my purpose being to collect suffi¬cient data for such hints on motoring as might with advantage be published.
They told me that this particular species of car was not a Ford but a Dodger--! think it was Dod¬ger—it sounded so appropriate. Those of our read¬ers who are keen on motoring will no doubt be in¬terested to hear how these machines are driven. The steering wheel, of course, we all know about. And yet although it is so simple the beastly thing can be most perverse, and however sober you may be nothing will persuade the car to go straight. You career on down the road in an ever widening serpentine 8. The only thing you can say for this method of progression is that it vanes the monotony of a straight road —and then, too, it makes such a pretty pattern in the dust. But it is very unnerving! The only thing to do is to stop, get off, and kick it in the —well, just under the bonnet.
Just below the steering wheel is the throttle lever. If yon pull it towards you it throttles. If you" push it away from you it unthrottles. Quite simple, too, but you have to be careful not to push when you want tO pull- especially if you are not insured. It is wise. loo. to roll your sleeves up to the elbow as in the physical contortions necessitated when steer¬ing round a corner, your sleeve might catch the throttle. And then complications would set in.
The next thing of interest is the gear lever. After mature consideration I have conn to the con¬clusion that for really enjoyable motoring it is best to hire a man to work the gears. Then mere is the foot work. Your left foot you put on the clutch pedal. This has to be pressed When necessary viz: when your gear man wants to play about with the gear lever, or when you see a bullock cart in front of I you, or on any occasion when you have a sort of | feeling that a disaster is impending.
You have to be very careful where you put your I right foot. Next to the clutch pedal is a smaller j pedal very aptly described as the exhilarator. I think that is the correct term. It is a trap for the unwary. I am convinced that its only reason for existence is to make things more difficult. It is so easy for an absent-minded driver, like myself, to drop his hoof by accident mi the exhilarator—it’s in just the place where you want to put your foot— and it always happens just at the moment when you are trying to avoid something. The car leaps ahead -and it takes yon about twenty minutes to get it and yourself out of the ditch.
The third pedal is the most reliable of the lot-- the brake. Whenever in doubt put your, foot on the break and push hard—put both feet on if you feel that one is not enough, and you need fear nothing— unless there is a car behind you. when you put both feet on the exhilarator and hope for the best.
Next month I shall have much pleasure in telling you all about a Ford car ( I doubt it— Ed.). Will some kind reader please lend a Ford car or two for experimental purposes—apply to Spark Plug. C/o this paper.
N. B..-The writer of this is now in the Hospital. (Ed. S. G.)
Extracts from the Annual Reports.
Forest Department.
I. Forest Reserve proposals and settlements.
First Division.—Moderate progress was made during the year with the final settlement of re¬serves, a total area of 22,531 acres being gazetted. The major portion of the area reserved is man¬grove forest, the Lobah Kara and Buntal reserves, with a total area of 21.151 acres, being finally constituted.
The only timber reserve completed was the small Setapok Reserve with an area of 1,377 acres. This contains very fair forest in which Meraka, Meranti, Urai Mata, Bintangor, Jelutong, Ren¬gas, Nyatoh, Kapur Paya, Medang, Geronggang and Keruing are plentiful Belian in the pole stage occurs on the Sungei Mating.
This forest is within four miles of Kuching and should prove very valuable later on.
The mangrove forest between Pulau Salak and Sibu Laut referred to last year was preliminarily notified. This reserve contains the best man¬grove encountered in the delta of the Sarawak river up to the present
Third Division.- The Darn Reserve with an ap¬proximate area of 18,000 acres was partially de¬marcated and preliminarily notified, it is situated near Darn in the Rejang delta and contains good forest including Resale, Meranti. Ramin, Jelutong, Simpoh, Sepetir, Merawan. Meraka, Bintangor, Kapur and Luang (Straits Tembusu )
The proposed reserve at Sungei Merah near Sibu was not proceeded with after exploration.
7. Regulation of Management.
Owing to lack of senior staff it was still not found possible to commence the drawing-up of working- plans for the mangrove reserves.
There is small probability of any work of’ this na¬ture being undertaken before 1923
First Division. -—All forest offences in the Kuching district were compounded without recourse to the Courts There were only 16 cases as compared with 26 in 1920 and the total fines inflicted amounted to $-18.30
There were* 7 cases in outstations, all of which were taken to Court, the total flues inflicted amounting to $48.
Third Division.—Only seven offenders were de¬tected dining the year. Four of these cases were taken into Court, in three of which con¬victions were obtained. The fourth was still ad¬journed at the end of the year.
Financial Results
First Division —The revenue was $21,164.32, an increase of $3,162.47 over 1920. The total ex¬penditure was $12,890.90, thus leaving n profit of $8,273.52.
Included in the figures for expenditure is the cost of cutting new reserve boundaries, surveys, etc. Second Division!—The Forest Rules were partially introduced during the year, the accounts being kept in Kuching.
The revenue was $6,136.53 and the expenditure $1,327.86. showing a profit of $4,798.67.
Third Division —During the year the Forest Rules were brought into force in the Matu. Duro, Mukah, Oya and Dalat districts 1’hey are how¬ever not yet in force for Balingian and Bintulu.
The revenue for the. whole Division was $16.822.91 and expenditure $9,945.98. showing a profit of $6,876.93.
No useful comparison can be made with the figures for 1920.
tions. The Committee of the Rajah Charles
Brooke Memorial Fund appointed a sub-commit-
tee during the year to consider the technical
details in connection with the proposed new
leper camp. and. in November, detailed plans
were submitted to the committee for its approval.
Much credit is due to Captain Lowe. Superin-
tendent P. W. D., for the care and trouble which
he has taken to draw up these plans in accord-
ance with the most modem ideas obtaining in
Eastern countries.
BUILDINGS.
The European Hospital was removed from the
Pavilion to the Grange in September.
The advantages of the new site have fulfilled
all the expectations held regarding it. During
1922 it is proposed to make additional buildings
in the hospital grounds to provide accommodation
for matron s quarters, maternity wards and an
operating theatre.
EUROPEAN HOSPITAL, KUCHING.
The health of the European community has
been, on the whole, good.
Nineteen patients were admitted into the
Grange Hospital during the year. Four of these
were maternity cases of which one was complica-
ted by eclampsia. One major and eleven minor
operations were performed.
One case only of malaria has occurred in the
Kuching district during the year, and this appeared
two days after the patient had returned from leave.
Two deaths occurred among Europeans in Sara-
wak during the year, both at Miri.
OUTSTATIONS.
Sibu. -The health of this station has been good
among Europeans and it was not found necessary
to visit it during the year. 1,744 patients were
treated by the dresser-in-charge at the dispensary
and hospital.
Yaws has accounted for a great deal of misery
in the Sibu bazaar, but this is being dealt with
by treatment with N. A B.
Simanggang. -The hospital at Simanggang has
proved successful, and there are indications that
it is gradually becoming more and more popular
with the natives. During the yea; 90 patients
were admitted. Of these 16 were Malays. 19
Chines*! and the remainder Sea Dyaks. Two
deaths occurred. The prevalence of tinea imbri-
cata among the Sea Dyaks is very notable, and
the treatment by sulphur fumigation, originally
installed by Dr. Luhn, has proved very attractive.
1,473 out-patients were treated at the Dispensary’
-during the year.
Sadong.—325 patients were treated in the hospi-
tal during the year, of which 4 died.
Mukah. 509 patients were treated at the dis-
pensary during the year.
With the consent of the District Officer, I hope
to have a small hospital built at this station.
Goh Ah Peng, dresser-in-charge during the lat-
ter half of the year, has shown much energy
in travelling around the Mukah and Bintulu
districts, vaccinating and attending to the sick.
He reported an epidemic of whooping cough
among tiie natives in November with a consi-
derable infantile mortality.
Miri. - To Dr. Foster Smith, Senior Medical
Officer of the Sarawak Oilfields, Ltd., I am
indebted for a report on the health of the Euro-
peans during the past year. Two deaths occurred,
one from malignant malaria and one from drowning. There were four confinements during the
year.
Malaria was the disease of greatest import-
ance. Among Government officials their wives
and families 3 cases occurred, one of which un-
fortunately ended fatally.
Amongst European employees of the Sarawak
Oilfields, Ltd., forty-five, or approximately half
the average total strength, were off duty with
malaria for an average period of 6 days. Among
wives and families of employees, there were 33
cases of malaria.
Thirty-three patients were admitted to the Euro-
pean Hospital during the year Eight operations
under general anaesthesia were performed, and
two cases were sent to Singapore for operative
treatment. Four Europeans were repatriated for
reasons of health during the year.
 Baram — The Resident of the 4th Division has
made arrangements for the erection of a hospital
and dispensary at this station, and it is proposed
to send a dresser there during 1922.
EDUCATION.
The problem of educating dressers efficiently is
I regarded as of great importance. During the year,
as far as possible, 5 lectures a week have been
given. It has been found advisable under the
existing conditions to make the course of instruc-
tion as practical and as much on the clinical side
as possible No effort is made to teach •‘pure"
anatomy, “ pure " pathology. “ pure, chemistry "
and etc. Instruction is rather given in ‘ applied "
anatomy, “applied" pathology and so forth.
4TH DIVISION.
The Revenue for the Division amounted to
$149,322.88 as compared with $ 169.237.70 for the
previous year. This decrease is more than accounted
for by the fact that in 1920 a large cargo of jungle
produce was exported direct to Singapore mid the
duties collected on same amount to about $34,000.
Tne Expenditure amounted to $155,064.31 show¬ing an increase of $30,751.35. This is principally due to the increased scale of pay now m operation, and also to Public Works mid increased numbers of the Police force.
The Trade Returns show large increases, the figures being :—
Baram.
Revenue. -The Revenue for the year amounted to
$39,383.51 being a decrease of $19,646.41 as compared
with 1920: this is practically explained by decreases
under two items: Export Duties $18,610, and s. l.
La Follette $1,190, winch payments were due to the
chartering of the s. s. Rendang in 1920 by the Baram
Chinese and despatching by her a cargo direct to
Singapore whilst the launch's revenues benefitted
as she towed the lighters down to Miri, where the
steamer was loaded. If this revenue is compared
with that of a normal year, say 1919, it shows an
increase of nearly $7,000 which is very satisfactory.
Dato Sheriff Hamid was allowed to retire on
pension owing to illness. The retirement of this
valued servant of the Government is much to be
regretted as he was a most loyal and hard working
official and was probably the most erudite scholar on
Mahommedan Law and customs in Sarawak. He
was never afraid to express his own opinion which
was of great assistance in Court cases. He also
came of that good old Simanggang stock winch has
provided so many of the prominent men in Sarawak
History.
General.—Things have been very slack in general
owing to the slump in trade.
The health of the District has been good and there
have been no epidemics. It is to be hoped that the
Medical Department will see its way to sending a
dresser here soon. His services are badly needed
and it seems a pity. as all the natives so thoroughly
believe in European medicines, not to start work
amongst them as soon as possible. The money for
the dresser's salary was guaranteed two years ago.
Barnin seems to be obtaining u name as a beauty
spot and pleasure resort and has been visited by
crowds of Europeans at various times.
Miri.
Public Works. -Those have been very heavy this
year owing to the increase in motor traffic, so all the
roads had to be constantly repaired. The Sarawak
Oilfields, Ltd., kindly granted » subsidy of $5,000 a
year for upkeep of roads, but this will always be an
expensive item until proper metalled roads are laid
down. The present surface, a mixture of sand and
Berembang oil, is good for light traffic? but soon
wears off
The expension of the bazaar entailed an increased
water supply, which necessitated the relaying of the
main with 6 inch pipes. Mr. Kortright carried out
this work before the end of the year and since then
there have been numerous applications to lay water
into the shophouses.
Industries.—The general slump in trade has na-
turally effected the working of jungle produce and
rubber gardens are not being tapped
The birds’-nests of Niah are still fetching a good
price.
The Sarawak Oilfields, Ltd. have prosecuted the
work on the Min Oilfield with great zeal and have
met with corresponding success as will be shown by
the following notes kindly given me by to- General
Manager, Major Benjamin.
1 should like to offer the thanks of the Government |
to the General Manager and the other officials of the
Company for their assistance mid courtesy on many
occasions.
The total net production for 1921 was 199,858.42
tons as compared with 141,492.04 tons for 1920 an 
increase of 41.25%.
During the year 24 new oil wells and 3 water wells
were drilled to completion, and 19 wells producing at
the end of 1920 were deepened, generally with good
results. A total footage of over 32,000 feet was
drilled.
The excavations for foundations of new No. 2
Trumble Plant were begun July 25th a good deal of
the concreting work of reports below ground level
is completed, the excavation for fractionating system
is dug and concreting well in hand
Shipments of products during the year:—
We commenced using water from the Salome Dam in April, last, although the actual construction of the Dam WAS not completed until June.
The Dam with its capacity of approximately 11,900 bus of water has been a valuable asset during the prolonged drought It has been primarily held 4is reserve for supplies to use when other supplies become inadequate during dry spells.
The bulk of our water supply is drawn from Seri- tan Dam which collects from a very large area, but the amount we can depend upon, in addition to the water wells, is insufficient to carry us over a dry spell of two or three weeks duration.
During the year reconnaissances for further water supplies were made between Min and Mt. Lambir, etc. and two sources were reported upon.
A number of 5,000 ton and 8,000 ton storage tanks
have been completed or are in course of completion.
During the year under review the erection of the
new machine shop was completed and all machines
moved in from the old shop. A 65 B. H. P. Ruston
Oil Engine was installed A d93squnre feet capacity
Babcock and Wilcox boiler was also erected for
supplying steam to the steam hummers.
Tile new ice plant arrived in Min during the year
and should be ready to commence making ice very
shortly. The old plant after overhauling will be
placed in the new building. The capacity of the
combined plant will then be approximately 3 tons
per day.
The soda water plant will be operated from the
ice plant engines and will be installed under the
same roof as the ice machines as soon as the pressure
filter, buttle washer, corks, etc. arrive.
The following structures have been erected for the
European staff:-
UNDER CONSTRUCTION.
7	timber bungalows each containing 4 rooms.
The erection of a new double storey Office building
123 feet frontage with a superficial floor area 14,000
square feet is well in hand
A third submarine pipe-line was successfully
launched in August last.
The following are particulars of the three Sub-
marine Lines at Lutong:—
The increase in production brought an increase in the shipping
which was particularly noticeable in the latter half
of the year.
Much work has been done in the direction of
mosquito prevention. All ravines in the neighbour-
hood of residential areas are sprayed with oil at
regular intervals. Mosquitoes have certainly dimi-
nished in numbers during the last few months in
these areas and it is hoped that there will be a
corresponding diminution in the incidence of malaria.
Preliminary operations at Buri were put in hand
during the latter part of August, and under adverse
conditions the rig was erected and finished October
16th.
A considerable amount of very valuable geological
work was undertaken in connection with the Miri-
Pojut fields and at Buri-Bakong, etc.
The work in connection with the erection «f the
caseboard sawmill at Bakong made progress during
the year.
MONTHLY REPORTS. 
SADONG.
February.
His Highness the RajaK having very kindly
decided to station a launch in this district, the I
steam launch Fava was sent here on the 1st in the ■
«. s. Alice Lorraine in charge of mechanic Omar.
This launch will considerably facilitate travelling |
here, as being small and of shallow draught she can
reach most of the outlying parts of the District.
Mr. H. Miller Hallett of the Forestry Depart-
ment passed through in the s. s. Alice Lorraine
on his way to Sibu on the 1st.
1 sailed for Tabekang in the s. I. Vava on the
4th. accompanied by Mr. J. W. Evans; we reached
Ampungan the same evening and Tabekang early
the following morning. Whilst at Tabekang 
inspected the new bungalow Court House, which is
now nearly complete, visited the Pichin Dyaks
and met the local chiefs and traders We left the
following day, stopping on the way at Gumpeh and
Gedong, and reached Simunjan the same evening.
Native Officer Haji Mol mi in proceeded up-river 
early in the month to select and take over the 
specimens of native craftsmanship promised by the 
land Dyaks and others for the Malaya-Borneo 
Exhibition. He returned on the 18th with a 
splendid selection, these have since been priced and 
labelled and sent on to the Secretary, Arts and
Crafts Section, Kuching.
On the 13th the Manager of the Collieries
reported that a Chinese Mine coolie named Tsang
Ngee had been found dead in a disused part of
No. 9 Mine. I held an inquest at the hospital the 
same afternoon and, owing to the deceased being 
subject to fits, confirmed a verdict of death' by 
misadventure.
The 24th, being the anniversary of the birthday 
of Her Highness the Ranee, was observed as a public
holiday ; His Highness the Rajah having been 
pleased to order a public holiday in honour of the
marriage of Her Royal Highness the Princess Mary 
on the 28th, the day was observed as a public holi- 
day and ail offices closed.
Accompanied by Messrs. J. W. Evans and D. Evans J sailed for Sebangan on the 28th in the j s. 1. Fava returning again the same day.
Courts —An unusually large number of cases were dealt with during the month. Tamin bin Awang Noh was sentenced to two months imprisonment for defrauding Haji Mohamad, Anyi and Bayong, Dyaks, were imprisoned for breach of agreement. Ho Huat Tee and Sin Choo Foo were fined for brawling in the bazaar, Chan Teck Foi and Tam Jin were imprisoned for stealing medicine whilst; under treatment in hospital. Two Chinese traders were fined for using false and unregistered gantang measures, Tang Hak Thiam was fined for felling timber for sale without a permit, Chia Seng an ex-Chinese mine coolie was fined for brawling at penghulu Ali's house.
The local Dyak chiefs were again warned against
harbouring Chinese coolies.
Several persons were cautioned for letting their 
cattle stray on the Government roads, and a 
number of Dyaks were fined for refusing to carry 
out Penghulu Win's directions in connection with 
the construction of a new house. These local 
Dyaks show a strong tendency to break away from 
their chiefs, they live in small padi huts dotted 
about the country and generally copy the Malays in
everything but manners.
Forest. The Forest Guards inspected jelutong
tapping at Ensingai and Sebangan and also the timber
workers up the Gedong river. They detected several
cases of bad tapping and also of Dyaks felling katio
and jangkar trees to make jelutong paths ; the
culprits have since been convicted and fined.
P. W. D.—The new Police barracks and kitchen
WHS completed and the Court House bungalow at
Tabekang finished except for a few minor altera-
tions ; this is a very substantial building on a fine site
overlooking the surrounding country and being
fitted with a belian shingle roof should lust many
years.
The prison gang, averaging 22 men, was employed
whitewashing and tarring the Government
buildings, and filling in swampy parts of the station
grounds.
. Part of the Kampong Simunjan road, which had
sunk considerably during the recent floods, was
repaired and resurfaced with ashes and coal’ dust
kindly supplied by the Manager of the Collieries
Shipping — Five small coasting steamers cleared
with cargoes of coal during the month.
The Trade Returns are as follows:—
SADONG COLLIERY.
March.
The gross out-put of coal produced from the
mines during the month was 1,457.06 tons ; 465 tons
of this was consumed by our boilers and the
balance of 992.06 tons delivered to the wharf for
export.
The shipments for the mouth were as follows : -
The balance of coal in stock at the end of the month was 3,718.12 tons.
The following samples were sent to the Malaya- Borneo Exhibition by the s. s. Alice Lorraine on the 2nd instant
Underground conditions continued similar to- those reported for the previous month.
The survey (underground) of ail the mines was completed, and mapped up to date. An improved arrangement for the screening, and washing of coal for export was made, as the quality of the coal turned out of the disturbed areas of No. 8, and particularly No. 9 Mine leaves much LO be desired on account of the high percentage of dark-coloured shales and dirt mixed with it.
Five head of cattle were purchased for a total sum
of $105. Their owner, one Matt Gani a Malay em-
ployee, being unable to keep them within bounds,
had decided to dispose of them, on account of their
straying, and damaging Colliery roads and drains.
One young bull, which belonged to the herd was
discovered dead at Tanjong Batu on the 6th. The
cause must have been a disease of some sort, as the
Hospital Dresser could not  find any signs of internal
trouble mid there were no visible marks of violence
externally
The foundations for the re-arrangement of the
sawmill machinery, including the setting of the new
saw-bench, were completed during the month.
One Lan Ka Cho, a Sibu Foochow Chinese coolie, '
under advances to work for the Collieries, was 
smartly captured by the District Officer whilst in 
the act of absconding aboard a Chinese bandong
bound for Kuching on the 29th,
The rainfall for the month was 20 44 inches.
J. W. EVANS,
Manager
LOWER REJANG
February
REJANG.
Court. There has been the usual amount of work
before both Courts. No cases call for particular
mention.
P. W. D.—The prison gang, averaging 18 5, has
been employed on the general upkeep of the station.
General. — The Resident 3rd Division arrived on
the 5th by 8. s. Alice Lorraine, leaving later the
same evening for Kuching.
Kitut, 2nd light-house keeper of Jerijeh light-
house died on the 9th. He has been replaced by
his son, Bujang.
On the 11th s. 1. Chamois arrived with Mrs. D.
A. Owen to meet, the Resident 3rd Division, who
arrived huer in the afternoon by s. s. Alice Lorraine.
The Resident and Mrs. Owen left by the s. l. Chamois
for Sibu, and s. t». Alice Lorraine for Sadong later
the same day.
Messrs. G. Beresford Stooke and H. A Miller
Hallett arrived by s. l. Chamois mid-day the 19th,
both leaving for Selalang the next morning.
The 24th, being II. II. the Ranee's birthday, was
observed as a public holiday.
11. II. S. Y. Zahora arrived at 10 a. tn. on 28th
with 11. H. the Rajah, accompanied by Mr. Page-
Turner and Capt Lowe, en route for Gunong Ayer
and Sibu.
Trade —The foreign Trade Returns for the month
are as follows: —
Imports.	Exports.
$3,924.19	$26,683.70
Matu and Daro.
 There is nothing to report on these stations,
except Hie following, as I have been unable to visit
them during the mouth.
MATU.
General. — The Acting Court Writer informs me
that one Chong Ah Fob, goldsmith, reported
jewellery value $60 and cash $16 was stolen from
his shop in the bazaar during the night of the 17th
No trace of the thief has been found.
P. W.D.—The prison gang, averaging 4:42, has
been employed in the general upkeep of the station.
DARO.
General.—S. S. Sarawak arrived on the 26th
and cleared the next day for Kuching with a cargo
of sago.
P W. D.— Prisoners, averaging 3 in number,
have been employed in the general upkeep of the
station.
R. D. ST. J. HORTON,
Officer-in-Charge.
SIBU .
March.
Court.—Lasa a Skapan boy, being annoyed with
Tungang a Dyak who came to the house to ask for
rice, wounded him slightly with a spear and was
fined and also paid damages.
Jali and Tungan Kapit Dyaks proceeded upriver
without a pass—the latter after having been refused
permission by the Resident. They were fined one
and two piculs respectively.
A number of Kanowit Dyaks were fined for pro-
ceeding to the Igan and working gutta without
passes. One boat-full attempted to pass through the
channel behind the island instead of going to the
Fort and were arrested.
Two Malay traders were arrested at Sarikei in
 possession of a number of large fire crackers
known as merchoon damar which they were selling
to Dyaks. These crackers contained about 3 gun
charges of powder each and were imported from
 Pontianak. Mat was fined $150 and Awang Antin
 $50 for importing gunpowder and selling it to
 Dyaks.
Kong Foh Loong forged the name of Ah Chai on
a mortgage deed for $500 and was sent to gaol for
 18 months
A number of cases of no particular importance
 were before the Coutts.
Public Works —The floating stage for the Govern-
 ment launch has been rebuilt and fitted with two
' approaches similar to those fixed to the large stage
 upriver.
The fence round the Customs Wharf has been
rebuilt and now gates fitted. The ground inside has
been partly filled in and levelled up All the posts
pulled out from the wharf have been brought down-
river and stacked in the timber yard.
The Tamils weeded and repaired the Lanang
road. The weeding of this road was formerly done
by contract hut as the work was not done properly
it was stopped and will now be done by the gang.
Telephones have been fitted to the two remaining
Government bungalows. New guttering was fixed
to No. 2 bungalow. Repairs were effected to the S.
Merah bridge, new rails being fitted.
General.—His Highness the Rajah, who arrived
in the Yacht Zahora on the last day of February,
left Sibu for Kuching early to the morning of the
3rd instant with Mr. Page-Turner and Capt. Lowe.
Mr. and Mrs. G. B. Stooke also accompanied His
Highness to Kuching where Mr. Stooke takes up
another appointment.
A bang Abdul Latip proceeded to Kanowit on the
4lh having been appointed Native Officer there in
place of Abang Elijah who is now Native Officer at
Sibu. Abang Moos has been appointed probationary
3rd Native Officer at Sibu.
Mr. Miller Hallett left for Daro in the s. 1. Mermaid
on the 7th for the purpose of surveying the new
Forest Reserve there.
Mr. MacBryan left for upriver on the 8th to
collect the Kayan tax. Owing to a heavy fresh in 
the Rejang winch came down immediately after he 
left and the river remaining in heavy flood for over
a fortnight he was unable to leave Kapit for a con- 
siderable time.	1
The Rev. Mother Perpetua having met with an
accident at Kanowit which necessitated medical
attention, was sent to Kuching in the s. 1. Chamois
on the 7th. The s. s. Alice Lorraine arrived from
Sadong with 110 tons 8 cwt. coal on the 10th. Mr.
Archer came from Kuching in her returning again on 
the 14th.
The s. s. Sarawak arrived on the 15lh. Pas-
senger Mr. Lowman who came on behalf of the
Rubber Patents Ltd. to visit their branch here.
The s. s. Flevo made two and the s. s. Han Siong
Bee two trips to Singapore during the month.
Owing to the heavy rain upriver the island and
surrounding country was flooded from the 11th to the
21st mst. The local rainfall amounted to 14 85
inches. Fortunately a great deal of the padi bad
been harvested before the floods but the straw is of
such exceptionally strong growth this year that the
watered but little damage. All the Chinese and
Dyaks are busy harvesting. Towards the end of
the month the weather changed and the heat became
intense fully favouring such operations.
There is as yet no very decided improvement in
trade. Smoked sheet has been fetching between 20
and 24 cents a catty in the bazaar and jelutong gutta
has fallen to $7 a pikul, though large quantities are 
being worked at that price.
Sago flour remains the chief article exported.
DONALD A. OWEN,
Resident 3rd Division.
OYA.
March.
Court,—A normal number of cases was disposed of during the month, none of which call for special mention, except perhaps that of Omar, who was fined, with an alternative of one year's imprisonment, for abduction. Nyalong. also, was sentenced to four mouths R. I. for swindling.
P. W. D.—The small prison gang has been en¬gaged with the usual up-keep of roads, ditches, and ornamental grounds.
Preliminary work has been commenced prepara¬tory to renewing and widening of the coastal bridges at Sungei Penat. Buluh, Jailing and Benutus.
The Mukah road to the shore has been widened for it's entire length, enough to facilitate the passage of a motor cycle and side car later.
One steamer, three schooners and one junk en-
tered ; while one steamer, eight schooners and one
motor schooner cleared the Port
General.—A consignment of various models for
the Malaya-Borneo Exhibition, despatched to Ku-
ching on the Bill, have, I trust, duly arrived, as no
acknowledgment has yet been received.
A Chinese junk, the Sim Guan Lee, grounded on
the 4th, and was later wrecked on the bar. Owner
Tek Chuan, juragan Hua Chan, lessees Juan Jee
and Juan Moh of Chop Guan Chiang, Kuching.
The vessel was registered in Bun Ching. China.
Enquiries proved that she attempted to clear the
Port, in spite of warnings from other schooners,
with the tide at strong ebb and a sea swell. Having
grounded, she heeled over, flooded and was deserted
without loss of life.
Organized gangs succeeded in felling the massive,
masts, and when she had righted herself, salving
1:34 passus out of her cargo of 30 koyans raw sago,
although under water Salved tackle etc. was duly
auctioned, together with the hull, which broke up
and was washed ashore. The crew proceeded to
Kuching later.
Mr. J. Miller Hallett, Temporary Assistant Con-
senator of forests, arrived per s l. Mermaid on the
26m, returning to the Rejang on the 28th
The re-painting of all shop houses in the Bazaars
was completed satisfactorily by the owners by the
end of the month.
E. O. BRUCE.
Officer-in-Charge.
MIRI.
March.
The Resident, accompanied by Mrs. Douglas,* returned from short local leave on 1st. He left for Baram on 8th after settling up various matters here.
On the 15th all the Chinese coolies working for the Sarawak Oilfields Limited went on strike. Ap¬parently they were demanding justice for the sup¬posed murder of one of their number, but after things had settled down it was found out that this story was only used as a pretext for some of the more turbulent characters to break out.
On the 15th the coolies assumed a very threaten¬ing attitude and tried to storm the Court House. Eventually the leading Chinese persuaded the strikers to go home and, after conferring with the General Manager on the 16lh over various details, they agreed to return to work the following day, which they did and there has 'been no further trouble.
The Resident arrived on 16th with additional. Police from Baram and on 8th n. H. s. Zahora ar¬rived with 50 Rangers under Lieut. Clark, S R. These latter after making a demonstration, together with the local forces, returned to Headquarters
On the 23rd Mr. C. D. Adams, District Officer, left in s s. Kajang with 72 Baram Kayans to attend the Malaya-Borneo Exhibition in Singapore. Major Benjamin, General Manager, and Mr. McAlpine also went down by this boat to supervise the Company’s exhibit.
Mrs. King, who had been on a visit here and at Baram left on 27th instant en route for England.
Mr. Beasely of the Borneo Company Limited ar¬rived on 30th and went to Niah to examine reported discoveries of gold in that district.
There were the usual large number of petty cases before the Courts, but beyond the case already mentioned above none are worth of reference.
