KUCHING, TUESDAY, JANUARY 3. 1922.
The Sarawak Gazette
TUESDAY.JANUARY. 1922
1921
In attempting to give a review of the past year at this time we must of course be handicapped by the lack of any actual statistics as to the Revenue and Trade of this country. These of course will not be available for some time to come ; but, though naturally Sarawak has felt the general financial depression throughout the year, we think it may be safely said that it has suffered much less thereby than the great majority of other countries in this part of world. This satisfactory.
result, in a negative sense, may be directly
attributable to the comparatively slight extent to
which the inhabitants of the country placed their
faith in para-rubber planting as the main source
of income The policy of His Highness the late
Rajah from the inception of para-rubber planting,
right through the 1908—10 boom, to the time of
his death has been amply justified. While at the
same time encouraging the natives to plant up as
much rubber as each family could personally look
after, restrictions were laid against the employ-
ment of land which could be more suitably used
for rice farming, sago, pepper or coconut planting.
The regulations forbidding the sale of rubber
plantations to other than natives of the country
even to those only under a heavy tax and dis-
allowing the registration of any mortgages on
native owned rubber plantations-both of which
Orders were the subject of much outside criticism
at the time- have without doubt been very bene-
ficial in inducing the natives of the country to
turn to other kinds of agriculture as well for their
livelihood Any who may have been able to plant
up their farming land with rubber, owing to
the difficulty of absolute supervision in such a
country as this, must now be amply punished for
their disregard of the wise advice of their late
Ruler.
TRADE.
For the first ten months of 1921 the total amount
of Imports shew as 81,000 tons valued at $6,858,000
against 71,50010ns valued at $13,630,000 for the
same period of uj2O, which goes to evidence the-
general drop in the cost of imported com-
modities, whereas the figures for Exports are
83,300 ions valued at $7,551,000 compared with
72,420 tons valued $11,665,000 up to the end of
October of the previous year. The figures for
Exports are interesting shewing increased pro-
duction with nearly 50% reduction in the prices
realised. This of may not indicate a
revival of trade but merely merchants have at last been compelled to realise on their stocks of produce, bought on a falling market, which had been held up for months in the hope of a rise, and we fear this conjecture is only too correct in the case of a large quantity of sago flour and pepper— but at the same time it cannot all be attributable. to this, and may be taken as a healthy sign
though both Imports and Exports are down by
10,000 tons as compared with the figures for the
first ten months of 1919.
All jungle as well cultivated produce was
greatly down in price during the year compared
to 192b.
Sago flour, which started in 1920 at $12 a pikul,
fell in December 1920 to $5, and further still in
the beginning of the past year. The average price for 1921 has been $5 however. The price of
pepper has gone from bad to worse, fluctuating
between $34 a pikul for white pepper in January
to $25 during the last two months, whereas in
1920 it touched $70 and black pepper even
realised $43.
Jelutong, one of the principal exports, started
at about 89. and after touching as low as $6 a
pikul about the middle of the year, ended up at
round about $10.50. At the commencement of
1920 the price was 820 and went to $26 about
June, gradually dropping thereafter.
Plantation Rubber (smoked sheet), which
dropped as low as 21 cents in June, appears
to be slowly recovering as evinced by the latest
quotation of 39 cents.
It is estimated by the Superintendent of Cus-
toms that the Duties collected in 1921 for Kuching
only will be, approximately, Imports $171,000 Ex-
ports $218,500 -or a total of $389,500—compared
with Imports $141,500 and Exports $638,000—a
total of $779,500 in 1920. The total Duties for the
whole of Sarawak, will not, it is expected, exceed
$500.000—more probably about $490.000—com-
pared with $1,065,260 collected in the previous
year, which was the highest figure ever touched.
With reference tn these figures for duties it must
be remembered that all Export Duties were
doubled from March to June inclusively in 1920,
and that the Import Duties were permanently
doubled from July that year.
REVENUE AND EXPENDITURE
As we remarked before, the Treasury Returns
are naturally not available yet but it may be con-
jectured that, though the Revenue may not shew
much decrease except under that accruing
from Customs Duties, which of course is one of the
chief heads but against which may be set off other
probable sources of increased revenue, the expen-
diture is likely to shew a considerable, increase
from the enhanced price of materials and the
increased rates of pay granted to the Civil Service
Subordinate Service, Police, Rangers, and other
Government employees, in order to meet the
higher cost of living.
LEGISLATION.
Amongst Legislation passed and brought into
effect during the year may be noted the Limited
Companies Orders 1920 and 1921; The Stamps
(Revenue) Order in connection therewith; the
Foreign Companies Order; the Wireless Tele-
graphy Order; the Forest Rules, 1921. rescinding
previous Forest Regulations; the Order Consti-
tuting Courts Martial; Bye-laws with regard to
the Kuching Water Supply; and a revision of
the Import Duties on tobacco, cigarettes, and
cigars. In accordance with the. findings of the
International Conference of the Postal Union
which has been sitting at Madrid the postal rates
to places outside Sarawak were raised in the
latter part of the year. Amendments to the
Sarawak Civil Service Regulations, affecting
Leave and Promotions were ’Iso issued during
the year. The Registration Partnerships Order
was repealed without having been enforced.
The Assessment Committee which had been
sitting since 1919 to revise the Kuching Assess-
ment, having completed this task, was dissolved
at the end of the year and received the personal
thanks of His Highness the Rajah for their public-
spirited labours. As an outcome of these a Sani-
tary and Municipal Advisory Board was instituted
and appointments thereto made by His Highness
the Rajah. The gentlemen appointed to this,
some of whom were members of the late Assess-
ment Committee, commence their duties in
the New Year, and we tender them our best
wishes for the success they deserve in their disin-
terested efforts for the betterment of the community.
THE FOOD CONTROL.
Rice and Padi were released from Control in
Singapore on the 1st. May. Owing to conditions
peculiar to this country it was impossible to
immediately institute this here, but gradual de-
control was started from the 10th. of t e same
month. This was done in the interests of the
! public in order to ensure an adequate supply of
rice until the merchants were able to resume the
business in sufficient bulk to guarantee such. The
policy followed undoubtedly justified itself, and
complete release of padi and rice from control
took place on the 18th. October. All Orders and
Government Notifications in connection with the
Food Control were repealed on the 1st. December.
GENERAL.
Their Highnesses the Rajah and Ranee returned
to Kuching from England on the 3rd. October in
H. H. s. Zahora after an absence of just over a year.
Before arriving in Kuching, Their Highnesses hail
spent a few days at Miri. whither they proceeded
direct from Singapore.
, The British Agent for Sarawak. His Excellency
Sir Laurence Guillemard, K. C. D., Governor of the.
Straits Settlements and High Commissioner of the
Federated Malay States, paid a visit to Kuching
and Miri in June.
Mr. Charles Willes Johnson. Legal Advisor to
the State Advisory Council in England, arrived in
Kuching on the 14th. June, accompanied by Mrs.
Johnson. Mr. and Mrs. Johnson during their stay
visited most of the out-stations, and left for
England again at the beginning of December.
Sarawak suffered severe losses in the deaths of
three of the most valued Native Officials in the
persons of the Datu Bandar, the Datu Hakim, and
Datu Ali of Sibu. The Datu Bandar and his wife
Dayang Sahadah. who had left Sarawak in April
on the Pilgrimage to Mecca, died in July within
two days of each other in that spot hallowed to all
Islam, at their great age the arduous nature of the
hardships experienced proving beyond their powers.
The Datu Hakim Abang Haji Mohomad Ashari,
died in Kuching on the3ist. August from pneumonia after a short illness of but ten days. Datu
Ali died at Sibu on the 19th. August after a comparatively short illness, though he had been in
failing health fo some time. The loss of Datu Ali
will be felt for many years in the Rejang, it being
difficult to replace one so versed in Dyak know-
ledge—except by the lessons of experience
The twentieth triennial meeting of the Council
Negri was held in Kuching on the 17th. October,
when His Highness the Rajah announced the
appointment of Abang Haji Abdillah to the rank
of Datu with the title of Datu Muda, as held by
his father the late Datu Bandar during the life-
time of his grandfather, Datu Bandar Haji Bua
Hassan, sou of the famous Datu Patinggi Ali, and
the appointment of Datu Haji Halil, grandson of
Datu Patinggi Ali in the direct male line also, to
be Datu Hakim in the place of the late Abang
Haji Mohomad Ashari.
  In his address to the Council His Highness urged
the members to promote the cultivation of Sago
and Pepper which were the foundations of the
trade of Sarawak. New members of Council
sworn in for the first time at this meeting were
Mr. F. G. Day. Mr. C. Ermen, Mr. H D. Aplin,
Mr. C. D. Adams. Abang Haji Abdillah, and
Abang Aboi of Kapit.
During the year the Treasury issued new nickel
coins of the value of 1 cent. 5 cents, and 10 cents,
and new currency notes of the value of $1, $25,
and $50 bearing the portrait of His Highness the
Rajah.
On 20th. July a new company was incorporated
in Kuching to take over the oil interests previously
administered by the Anglo-Saxon Petroleum Co.,
Limited, in Miri, entitled the Sarawak Oilfields
Limited. Miri shews signs of becoming a very
rich oil producing field.
Mr. H. B. Croker was engaged on a survey 
of the N. I. Border in Upper Sarawak during 
October and November in connection with Jagoi Dyaks lands.
  Bau Gold Works ceased operations in August,
and the how long is rapidly filling up with water.
Since then some gold has been produced by re- 
treating-Bau and Bidi ore. Examination of certain
supposed gold-bearing country in the Lingga
District did not prove successful.
Steamship communication was kept up by s. s.
Kuching with tri-monthly trips The s. s. Rajah
of Sarawak made three trips when the s. s. Kuching
was in dock and with rice from Saigon Apart 
1 from the time on charter this vessel had to be laid
up in Singapore Harbour. The s. s. Gladys also
made some trips to Singapore, and the Sibu-Singa-
pore run was maintained by the Chinese owned 
s. s Flevo. S. S. Che Foo and s. s. Moo Sang made
certain voyages to Hong Kong from Kuching and
Triso with timber and general cargo for the Lupar
Timber Concessions, Ltd. Communication up the
coast was carried on by the Government owned 1
p. s Adeh, now in her 38th. year.
The coal deposits in the country were the object 
of examination during the year by an expert
brought out by the Government, and also by 
a representative of Lord Inchcape.
FORESTRY.
Reservation of suitable areas was continued in
the 1st. Division as notified from time to time in
the Government Gazette. and a start with reserva-
tion was made in the 3rd. Division. The Forest
Rules were extended to the 2nd. Division on 16th.
June. At the Council Negri Meeting in October,
His Highness the Rajah mentioned the policy
with regard to reservation, which would not in 
any way interfere with any sort of cultivation, but
which was intended to safe-guard this most valu
able asset of the State for the future.
DYAK AFFAIRS.
The year was free from any inter-tribal feuds of 
any nature. The Nanga Pila incident in 1916
followed by the 2nd. Gat Expedition in 1919
and the subsequent extradition from N. I Terri-
tory and settlement in the Igan of these rebels;
are no doubt the reasons for this in the Rejang,
while in the 2nd. Division it may be attributable
to the satisfactory conclusion of the Peace-making
between the Ulu Ais and the Skrangs, Lemanaks 
and Layers at Simanggang in 1920
The presence of some Dyaks amongst the 
Kayans and Kenyahs in the head-waters of the 
Rejang and Baram nearly led to trouble. This
was averted by the prompt action of Mr. C. D.
Adams. District Officer of Baram. 
Fifteen of a party of some forty Rejang Dvaks
collecting jungle rubber in S. Iwan. N. I. Terri-
tory. were killed by Uma Tepu Kenyahs. The
latter were rounded up and duly punished by the
N. 1. authorities, and pati nyawa to the extent of
$2,100 paid to the relatives of the murdered men.
whose heads were recovered and buried.
Nyanggau, a Poi Dyak, was executed at Sibu
on the and. June for the murder of a Binatang
Dyak.
CRIME.
Petty theft was as prevalent as usual, both in
the town of Kuching and among the surrounding
gardens. But there was comparatively little
serious crime A gang of Javanese, who had
evidently been at work for some time breaking
into European and other house's, was rounded up
in a house off Rubber Road in November, and a considerable portion of the articles taken in
several recent robberies recovered. There were
two cases of suspected murder amongst Chinese
gardeners at the 5th. and 7th. mile. Certain
arrests were made, but no evidence sufficient to
prosecute any charge was adduced. A murder 
was committed in a house close to the Brooke 
the Dock in October. A China man was arrested and arraigned before the Supreme Court charged with
this crime, and being found guilty was sentenced
to imprisonment for life. Towards the end of the
year a Land Dyak of Tebang, Upper Sarawak, was
placed on trial before the Supreme charged with
killing his wife and father-in-law, and sentenced
to fifteen years imprisonment.
A very unusual case of amok took place near
Simanggang in June, an Entulang Dyak killing
five and severely wounding four others before
being cut down himself.
Ghin Heng Soon, who retired from the position
of Govt. Printer at the end of 1920 after thirty
years service, disappeared mysteriously on the
22nd. April, and has not been heard of since
A Limbang Malay, having been sentenced to
death by the Supreme Court for the murder of
two chinamen, was executed there on the 6th.
June. This was the first execution that has taken
place at Limbang during 31 years of Sarawak rule.
P. W. D.
Mr. O. F Ricketts was Acting in Charge of the
Department until the appointment of Captain
C. P. Lowe as Superintendent in April.
Besides the usual repairs and renewals to build-
ings, roads, and the railway, the Grange Property,
which had been purchased by the Government
from the Borneo Company Limited in April, was
converted into an European Hospital, mid the
Pavilion altered for the use of the P. W. D.,
Forest, and Surveys Departments as Offices - the
former P W. D. Offices being turned into a Police
Court and District Office.
The old Government Rest Houses were pulled
down, and four Bungalows to be used as Officers
Quarters arc in the course of erection on this site.
Additions and alterations were made to the build-
ings within the General Hospital Grounds. A
new floating stage for steamers was completed
at Sibu
The sites for further much needed Government
Bungalows are being prepared on the rising ground
between the golf course and Mr Ricketts' property.
A start was made on the proposed road to
Lundu from the end of the Matang Road, but work
on this was later abandoned near Singghi as it
would have opened up comparatively little suit-
able new country. Instead work has been started
on metalling the road from the 3rd mile on the
Rock Road linking up with Batu Kawa.
HEALTH.
We are indebted to Mr. W. E. Lc Gros Clark,
F. R. c. s. ENG.. P. M. O., for the following account
of the health of the community during 1921.
The Medical history of Sarawak during the past
year has been fortunately moderately uneventful.
The health of the European community has been,
on the whole, good. In Kuching 19 patients were
admitted into the European Hospital during the
year, four of which were maternity cases. I
major operation and 11 minor operations were
performed during this time. One case only of
Malaria has occurred in the Kuching district, and
this was clearly contracted in Singapore. The
malarial question threatened to become trouble-
some at Miri. and a number of cases of the malignant type were reported among Europeans, with
one fatality Dr. Foster-Smith, however, has
attacked the problem very energetically and with
good results.
Two cases of small-pox were notified from Miri in May. Vigorous quarantine measures were
taken both at Miri and Kuching, and no further
cases occurred. In the bazaar communities,
tuberculosis remains the most pressing problem
which requires attention. It is hoped that by
propaganda and education, abolition 'of over-
crowding and improvement of sanitation, the
annual death-rate due to this terrible disease will
be lowered.
Amongst other native communities, yaws and
leprosy are rife. With regard to yaws, a system
of training outstation dressers in the technique of
injecting arsenical preparations has been adopted,
and it is interesting to note that during the month
of November 50 cases were treated successfully by
the dresser in charge of Simanggang Hospital.
With regard to leprosy, plans have been com- 
pleted for the construction of a new leper settle- 
ment of modern type, and at present it only 
remains to decide upon an appropriate site.
Reports from outstation dressers indicate that
there has been a high infant mortality among 
natives due to whooping-cough, especially in the 
3rd. Division. It is difficult to deal with these 
epidemics, as so much depends upon proper 
isolation and general hygienic measures. Here 
again it is hoped that conditions may be improved
by education.
THE GAZETTE.
The following were the appointments notified 
in the Government Gazette in the course of the 
year:
Mr. F. F. Boult to be an Officer of Class I with the
rank of Resident 5th. Division: Mr. H I. Owen
an Officer of Class II to be an Officer of Class I.
also Acting Resident 3rd. Division during the 
illness of Mr. H. D. Aplin: Mr. I’. H. Hayward to 
act in charge of the Telegraphs and Telephones
Departments during the absence on leave of Mr. 
J. R Barnes: Mr. H D. Aplin to act as Resident
3rd. Division, during the absence on leave of Mr. D
A. Owen: Mr. J. A H. Hardie at various times Act
ing Registrar of the Supreme Court, Acting Food 
Control Officer. Acting Magistrate Court of Re-
quests, Acting Manager of the Government Printing
Office and Editor of the Gazette-. Mr. P. M. Adams
at first Assistant District Officer of Sadong and 
later transferred to Lawas and Trusan : Captain 
C. P Lowe to be Superintendent of the Public 
Works Department: Mr. .J. C. Swayne, an Officer
of Class III to be an Officer of Class II: Abang
Suleiman to act as Superintendent of the Land and
Surveys Departments : Mr. A. E. Lawrence, Acting
Magistrate Court of Requests and Coroner for
Kuching before being appointed District Officer
of Mukah and Oya : Mr. P. Stewart to be Assistant
Engineer on the return from leave of Mr W.
Service for whom he had been acting as Super-
intendent Engineer, Government Work Shops: Mr.
H. E. Cutfield, and Mr. G.T. M. MacBryan, Cadets,
promoted to Class IV and the latter to do duty at
Sibu: Mr. W. F. de V Skrine to be District Officer
of Sadong: Mr. H. Calvert to be Government
Auditor: Captain E. V. Andreini transferred from
Lawas and Trusan to do duty at Sibu : Mr. H. FI
Kortright to be District Officer of Bintulu: Mr.
J B Archer to do duty temporarily in the 2nd. 
Division: Abang Haji Abdillah, son of the late
Datu Bandar Abang Haji Mohamad Kassim, to 
the rank of Datu with the "title of Datu Muda : 
Datu Haji Halil to be Datu Hakim in the place
of the late Abang Haji Mohamad Ashari: .MT.
R. A Miller Hallett to be temporary Assistant
Conservator of Forests: Mr. K. H. Gillan.
Captain C. P. Lowe and Mr. W. E. le Gros Clark,
F. R. c. s., ( Eng )., to be Ex-officio Members and
Messrs. K. Parnell, C. Fenwick, Tan Sum Guan,
Lau Chayn Hian, Lam Chin Gee, Kon Eng Law, 
Haji Hassim bin Haji Mohamad Arip, and Salleh
Marican Ordinary Members *of the Kuching 
Sanitary and Municipal Advisory Board.
The following were gazetted as Cadets in the
Sarawak Civil Service during the year:—Mr. R.
V. Palfreman, Mr. It E. Le Sueur, Mr. R. L. Daubeny, and Mr. E. Humphery.
Mr. G. M. Gifford, District Officer. Kapit, resign¬ed from the Service on the termination of his fur¬lough.
The following Officers in the Government Ser¬vice proceeded on furlough in 1921: - Mr. J. R. Barnes, Mr. D. A. Owen. Mr. H. H. Kortright. Mr. H. B. Crocker, Dr. O. G, F. Lühn, Lieut. W. T. Clark, MT. W. R. T. Clement. Mr. H. L. Owen, and Mr. J. C. Swayne, while Mr. F. G. Day, Mr. G. B. Stooke. and W. F. Dick were granted East¬ern leave. Mr. G ,C. Gillan, Mr. F. A. W. Page- Turner. Mr. H. D. Aplin, Mr. R. S. Douglas, Mr. A. E. Lawrence, Mr. H. A. Adams, Mr. W. Service, Mr. W. F. de V. Skrine. Mr. J. R. Barnes, Mr. H. B. Crocker, Mr. F. G. Day, Mr. D. A. Owen, Mr. H H. Kortright, and Mr. G. B. Stooke returned from leave in the course of the year.
NOTES
December.
IN the Sarawak Gazette Almanac f r 1922
have tried to put in as mam anniversaries
of events of interest to Sarawak as ran be
accurately traced, eliminating those not of
significance to this country. Outstation Offi-
cers and others will confer a favour by send-
ing as particulars of any dates which may
have been omitted from the new almanac, for
inclusion in next year.
THE Deli during her voyage from Singapore,
in the  middle of October, in attempting to
land cargo and passengers off the oil camp at
Miri, rolled so heavily that there WAS at one
time imminent danger of her foundering. A
heavy sea swept across her main deck and
washed overboard four deck passengers and a
quantity of timber loaded on the deck. Boats
were lowered to attempt a rescue but none of
the unfortunate victims were seen.—(S F. P.)
A new tubeless cushion tyre is claimed to
yield an average mileage of 25,000 to 30,000,
without trouble, care, or repairs. It has
tread and outer walls of very tough and du-
rable rubber, and the interior consists of highly
resilient red rubber reinforced by layers of
fabric, a small central cavity giving greatly
increased resilience. The finished tyre has
the appearance of an ordinary pneumatic tyre,
with which it is interchangeable on the same
rim.
MR Lim Swee Kim is resigning the Go-
vernment Medical Service at the end of the
.year to set up a private practice in Kuching.
'Mr. Lim Swee Kim entered the Government
Medical Service on 6th. January, 1899, was
appointed Dresser-in-charge of the General
Hospital in September 1904, and Assistant
Surgeon in June 1918. We give Mr, Lim
Swee Kim our best wishes in his new sphere
of usefulness.
PEARLS appear to be turning up all over the X
place nowadays writes Beach Comber in the
Daily Express. A scientist tells me you can
find a pearl in the joint of a Java bamboo, in
the endosperm of a coconut or in the wood of
a pomegranate tree. A vegetable pearl can
be the size of a hazel nut, and is said to act
as a charm to hold the possessor immune
from the common ills of mankind. The con-
stitution of the plant pearl is just the same
as that of ns oyster contemporary—almost s
pure carbonate of lime. This news, if it does
not glamden the hearts of pearl owners, might
at least start a boom in the coconut trade.
I		
JINRICKSHA (sometimes spelt Jinrickshaw, and
shortened to ricksha).—This phrase (for it is
not a word) was imported with the vehicle,
known under that name from Japan and simply
means “strength carriage” i.e., yan (Japanese
Jin) lick (rick) ch’e (sha), or “carriage drawn
by the strength of man ”
A mail from Kuching to Lundu was lost at
sea by the capsizing of a small vessel, the Sri
hint, off Kuala Sempadi, on the 12th. De-
cember. Goods, valued at $600 were lost,
included in which were 23 bags of rice worth
$350. A parcel containing stationery from
the Government Printing Office was recovered
in a very sudden condition. The rest of the
mail consisted of 8 letters O. H H. S., 18 paid
letters, and 9 printed papers.
JAWI is a very pretty script and it would be
a thousand pities if, as a result of the efforts
of the utilitarians to force romanised upon the
Malay, it were to fail into desuetude. How-
ever, there is little fear of this so long us the
teachers in the vernacular schools remain as
conservative as they are now. b is true that
we have noticed that the Malay letters which
occasionally find their way into our hands are
hot so neatly or elegantly written as they used
to be ten or fifteen years ago. But that, we
find on enquiry, is really a good sign, for it is
due to the fact that, whereas in the old days
the bumbler Malay employed a petition-writer,
he now conducts his correspondence him-
self.—(S. E.)
THE following is the text of an appeal
recently sent us
“Sir,
I ask you please for a day's leave as I wish to
attend to the death of my mother-in-law.”
Your obedient servant,
Have you ever felt like that?
CALCULATIONS have shewn that a grama-
phone record slips round upon its baize-covered
table when it is being produced, a slip of 6
inches having been recorded in some cases
with the result that many of the notes are
flat, the amount of slip being governed by the
baize, the angle of the needle and the weight
of the tone arm and the diaphragm sound box.
A device will shortly be produced and market-
ed locally which entirely overcomes this draw-
back, a simple and inexpensive embossed rub-
ber disc for 10 inch turntables. Mr. H. A.
Laing, who is experimenting with this and
other applications of rubber, will be pleased
to assist anyone with an idea likely to be of
material commercial use.—“M M.”
DURING the early hours of Monday morning,
the 12th. instant, a fight with knives took
place at the Tanjong Batu Chinese quarters,
Sadong Collieries, resulting in the death of
Yew Tek Fatt from a deep wound in the abdo—
men. His adversary, a young Chinese miner
by name; Man Quai Pan, fled to the jungle, and
 was only discovered four days afterwards,
throughly exhausted and in a painfully wound-
ed condition.
FROM a Leading Article in the Struts
Times -
Go to any decent timber yard in Britain or
America and ask for a thousand feet of mank-
ing 8 in. by I in in 15 feet lengths. The
order will be carried out so precisely that if
a floor is laid with planks it will be almost as
flat as H billiard table because they are ah cut
by machinery which works almost to a hairs-
breadth. Order the same timber in Malaya
and the thickness of the boards will vary as
much as a quarter of an inch while the breadth
may be anything from 7 in. to 9 in. and the
seasoning may hardly have been thought of.
‘The consequence, of course, is excessive
waste, and villainously bad work, but the
Chinese, who are largely engaged in the tim-
ber trade, have been handling wood that way
for centuries until they have exhausted most
of their own forests, and bid fair to dig deeply
, and disastrously into ours. The forests are
। most valuable public property. The crude
I Chinese methods should be made illegal.
Grants to cut timber should be made con-
ditional upon proper methods of felling and
cutting up being followed, and the various
forms in which wood is supplied and used
should be standardised.
A Chinaman of Pengkalan Bukar, Upper
Sarawak, was recently sentenced to a term
of imprisonment in Kuching for being in the
illicit possession of gun-powder.
THUS the Free Press. “A young London
doctor who has just settled in the Malay
States has hit upon a plan of increasing his
practice which would have commended itself
io the immortal Bob Sawyer.
Knowing the prejudice of Eastern women ;
to see and describe their ailments to a male
doctor, he has had a number of China dolls
made and sent to wealthy native ladies. Ac-
companying the dolls are instructions, request-
ing the recipients, should they be suffering
from any pains or aches, to mark the part of
the doll that corresponds with the lady’s suf-
fering anatomy, write a brief account of the
symtoms and return the doll to the doctor.
In this manner life is able to prescribe for
his patient without seeing her.”
AND the Straits Echo. “Certainly, Asiatic
ladies are sometimes a little startling in their
ideas of medical treatment. A European
doctor friend of ours was once called in to
attend a Chinese lady who was suffering from
pains in her chest and a rash on her legs.
He treated her according to the textbooks and
her chest considerably improved, but the rash
proved obstinate. In a week or two the
patient expressed strong dissatisfaction that
her legs were still giving her trouble. “I’m
sorry.” said the doctor, “then I suppose you
won’t want me to call any more ?” “Oh dear,
no ” replied the old lady, “ for I'm most satis-
fied with the way you’ve treated my chest
and I wouldn’t lose you for anything. But
I’m afraid you’re not much good at legs. So
I've called in a native medicine-man who, I
know, is good at legs You must go on look-
ing after the chest and ne will cure the rash ”
So the doctor and the medicine-man divided
the patient into “spheres of influence,” our friend taking charge of her down to the waist and the leg-artist assuming responsibility for her nether limbs, and the doctor calling during the morning and the native practitioner in the afternoon. Such an arrangement was perhaps not in accordance with the strictest Home practice, but the result proved satis-
factory.”
THE skeleton of a Dyak woman was found
by the Police lately in a deserted hut at
Musi, near Busan.
THE following extracts are from a letter re
ceived from one of the largest firms of brokers
in London:
“ As regards your enquiries re German
Marks, this business is not worth your doing
or ours either. The money’ will be lost if we
buy them and it is not a form of business to
encourage. After losing our money in Oils
and Rubber, we cannot afford to start gam-
bling ill exchanges.
In connection with this matter, we hear
that a lot of the German 3 per cent Bonds
which are being bought all over the world at
about 3-4 per cent, are arriving BRAND
NEW Bonds so that the Printing Press is at
work here as well as in marks. Even if Marks
recover their value, a lot of the floating paper
is said to be worthless, there being an inten-
tional error in the printing.
“ We trust you will not be sending us any’
further orders in marks as we are not wishing
to do the business. Tn the first place, you are
only buying rubbish paper money which may-
or may not be forgeries and it is certainly un-
patriotic to send good money into German
hands, which she is using to buy raw materials
abroad. Germany will default some time
within the next twelve months and the begin-
ning will be her inability to pay the reparations.
“The whole point about German mark
speculation is that it is impossible for anyone
to form any opinion of what may happen. The
buyers might possibly make a little money as
if any reparation agreement favourable to
Germany was agreed upon, then the present
mark quotation is probably much too high a
figure. On the other hand, with the German
printing press turning out millions of paper
marks, of what intrinsic value can they be?
“Also there is a great chance of many of
the marks being purposely printed with an
error in the printing making them valueless.”
DRY rubber harvested at Sungei Tengah
during November amounted to 78,500 lbs.
NYABONG, the Land-Dyak of Tebang, Upper
Sarawak, who was tried during the month
before the Supreme Court on a charge of
murdering his wife and father-in-law, has
been sentenced to fifteen years’ imprisonment.
HER Highness the Kaneo is returning to
England at the beginning of February. The
Dayang Elizabeth has had to undergo a slight
operation at home but we are glad to say is
quite recovered. Her Highness will be accom-
panied by Captain W. R. Barry Gifford, A. D. O.
MAJOR H. E. Bullis of the United States
Service, Manila, visited Kuching during the
month. He also passed through Brooketon
and Miri, and made a trip to Sadong Mines.
MR. L. T. Warder arrived from Singapore
on the 18th., for the Government Wireless Telegraphs Department MR. M E. Sherwood, Secretary to the
High Commission r for the F. M. S., who
 came over from Singapore by the Kuching
on the 18th. December, has been the guest
of His Highness the Rajah at Astana, and
during his stay visited Kapit and Simanggang.
Mr. Sherwood returned to Singapore on the
31st.
LIEUTENANT and Mrs Clark, with Master
Clark, returned from leave on the 29th. Miss
Doris Clark is now in Singapore.
DURING the night of the 31st. a fire took
place at the Government Motor-lorry shed,
three of the lorries being badly burnt, but we
understand two may possibly be repaired.
As bearing on the discussion which crops
up periodically concerning the relative speeds
of the University Boat Race and the long
boats competing in the Kuching Regatta the
following times may be of interest:—
His Highness the Rajah’s Cup, 13-minutes
56 seconds.
Champion Cup, 10 minutes. 15 seconds.
These times were taken from gun-fire to
gun-flash, as seen from the Starters’ launch.
A certain amount must be deducted from
these times as the finishing gun is not fired
until the 3rd. boat is past the post.
The boats in these two races were very
little helped by the tide ; and bad to contend
with a strong head wind over the whole
course. The course is a little over 2 miles in
length.
FROM information received this month we
have to amend a statement in the note to the
letter from the Rev. F. S. Hollis in the issue
of 1st. September in that the matter had been
reported by him to the Resident.
The Kuching Assessment Committee.
At the final meeting of the Kuching Assessment Committee held on 22ml. December 1921, the Chair¬man, Mr. K. H. Gillan, read the following letter of thanks from His Highness the Rajah to the Committee for their assistance in connection with the reorganization of the assessment.
KUCHING,
1st. December, 1921.
The Chairman, Assessment Committee.
SIR
In view of the final meeting of the Assessment
Committee, I should be glad if you would kindly convey
my thanks to its members for their work in connection
with the revision of the assessment and my appreciation
of their efforts, especially those of Mr. E. Parnell, the |
Reverend Father Haideggar, and Mr. Tan Sum Guan,
towards its reorganization.
Yours sincerely,
C. V. BROOKE.
The Chairman further informed the meeting that as a result of its work the collection of assessment had been consolidated within the Municipal area, and that all propel lies had been revalued on a very fair basis and generally to the satisfaction of the owners The income from this source of revenue had steadily increased as a result, in spite of a re¬duction in the Municipal area. In 1919, prior to the appointment of the Assessment Committee, the income amounted to $20,546/26. In 1920, owing to the revaluation and reorganization, $26,581/60 w is collected—while for the present year the amount is $27,787/85. Had the rubber market been normal, these figures would have been larger, as the rateable value of a number of properties would have been higher.
Rates in Kuching were exceedingly light, and in more propitious times would be capable of still further expansion, especially in the event of any of the necessary improvements being made in the town for the benefit of the ratepayers The improvement rate, which had not yet been levied, could then lie charged, and the amount derived from this additional income could then he applied towards the recovery of expenditure on whatever works were being carried out.
Ratepayers should realize that, if improvements
are to be made in the town for their benefit, they
should be prepared to pay for them if required to do so.
The Chairman, in conclusion, said how much
pleasure it bad given him to be associated with the
other members of the Committee, representing as
they did some of the ablest members of the Com-
munity, and to recall the very amiable relations
which had always existed amongst them.
All Appeal for Apeh.
We have to acknowledge with thanks the follow¬ing contributions in response to our appeal in the December issue: —
The Fund is still open, and we shall be pleased to receive any subscriptions as before.
Sago Cultivation in Mukah and Oya.
In the Melano country a certain amount of land continues to be newly planted with sago. This can always be gauged by the planting of padi. Melanos do not often clear jungle and straight way put in sago; but they almost always plant it in land from which they have just reaped a crop of padi. I therefore think that, since more padi has been grown during the last few years of rice shortage, the acreage under sago must have in¬creased appreciably, even after allowing for plan¬tations which have died out through neglect when the price of raw sago was low.
Obvious restrictions on the present sago output are :—
Direct
Allowing plantations to die out.
A good price for raw sago is the best
remedy for this: but an owner might, if it
is thought desirable, be made liable to
some penalty for proved neglect.
2 Felling immature sago palms through
pressure of debt, or greed of gain, when
the price of raw sago is very high.
To stop this it would have to be made
an offence against the law. After felling,
the palms must be brought into the Kam-
pong for working into flour, and it is easy
to tell from their appearance then whether
or not they are immature.
Indirect. but by far the most important as affect-
ing the price obtained by the workers, for
without a good price there cannot be the
highest possible output.—
Want of really good titles to sago lands,
leading to frequent disputes about owner-
ship and sometimes actual wrongful occu-
pation of land which, under present
conditions cannot be detected by the
Courts
The only remedy is a complete survey
of sago bearing lands so that every planta-
tion would be registered under its owner’s
name. During the progress of this. Court
work in deciding ownership disputes
would be much greater than usual, and
might entail a temporary increase of staff;
but it would be well worth doing from
more than one point of view.
The number of middle-men drawing profits
from sago flour. It goes from worker to
merchant in outstation bazaar: from out-
station merchant to Kuching merchant .
from Kuching merchant to Singapore.
This entails three separate profits, none
of them likely to be small, and two sepa-
rate shipments with their consequent
freights.
Poor communications.
A part from the fact that schooners carry-
ing sago are occasionally wrecked, all ex-
ports from Mukah and Oya districts stop
during rough weather. The immediate
result every' year is a drop in the price
paid to the workers, as merchants cannot
buy largely’ until the fine monsoon has
begun. The worst off in this, respect are
villages like Judan and Penat, which have
to start by bringing their sago by boat to
Mukah and Oya.
If, or when, it can be done, 1 am inclined to
think the following scheme would be a great be-
nefit and tend to increase the price of sago paid to
workers by the elimination of middle-mens’
profits and the yearly? close-to me for exports. Be-
sides this, I do not think the original outlay would
be so great as perhaps it may appear at first
sight: expert opinion would have to decide that.
Build a sago refinery, not a factory, at the Igan end of the Cut.
Canalise the Cut, so that small lighters could bring raw sago through to the re¬finery.
Run a light railway, or truckway, from Mukah to Oya so as to tap the Mukah sago all the year round.
Ship the refined flour direct from the refinery to Singapore: an Igan refinery would also tap the sago of the Rejang delta.
This is, of course, a mere rough outline of the scheme. There would be business difficulties to be overcome, and many points to be discussed before it could be put into practical working order.
A. E. I.AWRENCE.
Prize distribution at st. Thomas'
School.
The annual prize distribution took place at St. Thomas' School on Wednesday, 14th. December, and Her Highness the Ranee very kindly came to distribute the prizes.
The chair was taken by the lit. Rev. the Bishop, who welcomed Her Highness to St. Thomas' School and gave a history of the school from its in¬ception up to the present, showing how, from a very humble origin, it had become an important factor in the education of the Country.
The Headmaster emphasised the need for ex¬tension. the present accommodation being totally inadequate for the present numbers, without allow¬ing for further applications.
He further said that, thanks to the untiring efforts of the staff, the standard of education was still maintained at its usual level, and that the special classes in shorthand, typewriting, and book-keeping were lie- coming increasingly popular. In connection with the first named, nearly 20 Pitmans’ Certificates had been secured in the past year.
The prize distribution then took place, after which the Headmaster thanked Her Highness and called for three cheers, which were heartily given. Cheers were also given for His Highness the Rajah, who provides the prizes annually, and the Rt. Rev. the Bishop for presiding.
The proceedings were enlivened by songs, which were tastefully rendered by the boys. •
Immediately after the National Anthem, an ex-hibition of hand bell ringing given by the boys, and this was much appreciate I.—(Contributed.) 
The Rajah Charles Brooke
Memorial Fund.
Malaya-Borneo Exhibition, 1922.
The Minerals Section Committee for the Ex¬hibition at Ilie end of March next bus now been formed and is as follows.—Chairman, Mr. J. B. Scrivenor, Govt. Geologist; Hou. Sec. Mr. G. E. Greig, Warden of Mines Perak; Chairman Chinese sub-committee, Captain China Chung Thye Phin, O.B.E.; Chairman French sub-committee, Mons. I. L. Poulou; Chairman American sub-committee C. H. Munro; Chairman Selangor sub-committee, Mr. A. R. Mynott: Mr. F. H. Nash, Mmes Dept.; Mr. A. G. Glenister, president F.M.S. Chamber of Mines; Mr. J. L. Sime, Straits Trading Co; Mr. T. R. A. Windeatt. Manager Lahat.Tm Mines.
An Art Exhibition will be held in connection with the forthcoming Malaya-Borneo Exhibition in Singa¬pore. Excluding the section devoted to amateur and professional photography, exhibits will lie con¬fined to amateur work only, and will comprise draw¬ing and painting in oils, water colours, pastels, black and white, etc., as well as wood-carving, metal work, fancy needlework, or other decorative exhibits It is intended to offer prizes for competition, details concerning which will be published as soon as possible. In the meantime it is hoped that ail amateur artists will endeavour to prepare samples of their best work for exhibition, so that the art section may be representative of the best amateur art in British Malaya. Enquiries should lie ad-dressed, in the F. M. S. and Malacca, to Mr. R. D. Jackson, Public Works Department, Kuala Lumpur, and from other parts of British Malaya, to Lieut.- Colonel J. H. Tyte at the office of Inspector of Prisons, S. S , Singapore
The publicity committee of the Malaya-Borneo Exhibition, announce an important news-item, in-teresting to exhibitors erecting their own buildings at the forthcoming exhibition. Contracts have been placed with Messrs. Barker and Co. (engineering department). and work already has been started on the exhibition buildings, and Messrs, Barker and Co. are now in a position to quote very favourable prices to merchants and others, due to the fact that the firm has large stocks of material available, and being fully conversant with the plans, specifications and general requirements of the ground committee, they are able to advise exhibitors to their best ad¬vantage. The contract for the Malaya-Borneo Ex¬hibition hoarding, to be erected on the Telok Ayer Reclamation Ground, has been let to Messrs. Tan Eng Wah and Cheong Kong Wee. The fence is to lie completed soon after the close of the present year. Tenders will lie publicly invited shortly, through the columns of the press, for the advertising rights on the hoarding.
The Exhibition will include a display of forest pro¬ducts from all of British Malaya. Borneo has a large amount of timber available for export, and will there- foie provide the principal display of timbers. The countries of the Malay Peninsula, which do not have any considerable supply of timber for export, will pre¬sent a display of special uses of local woods, but will devote the largest part of their space for displays of jungle products other than timber. The display of rattans, gutta percha, gum, damars, palms, bamboos &c. will be fairly extensive. The methods of collec¬tion and preparation, and the uses of the different products will be shown. It has been decided to offer two sets of prizes in connection with the rattan exhibits, as follows:—
Walking Sticks. For the best collection of walk¬ing sticks, finished and ready for display, two prizes
will be offered, first prize $20; second prize $15;
Entrance fee $1 The collection when prepared
should lie brought, with the entrance fee. to the
nearest forest station.	'
Longest Roll of Rattan. For the longest roll of
rattan two prizes will be offered, first prize $20:
second prize $15. Thera will be no entrance fee,
but the rattan will become the property of the Ex-
hibition Board. The roll of rattan must be of a
single continuous piece. It should be prepared as 
follows : The plant should he cut off just above the
ground mid just below the. last leaves, and all other
leaves removed. The stem should then be rolled up
and labelled with the local common name. It
should then be taken to the nearest forest station.
When the different rolls are assembled at Singapore,
they will be unrolled and measured, and the length
recorded. Each roll must consist of a single con-
tinuous stem. It will not be worth while* to enter
any stem which is less than 300 feet in length.
Particulars of the Prizes offered provisionally for
exhibits in the Sarawak Arts and Crafts Section
will he found in our Advertisements, pages VI and
VII.
Kuching Market Price List at the end of December. 1921
Sarawak Regatta.
Monthly, January 2nd. 1922
In accordance with the decision of the general
meeting reported in our last issue, a meeting of the
owners of long boats was held on the 8th. Decem-
ber to discuss the Regulations most suitable for
boats which have won His Highness the Rajah's and
the Champion Cup on three occasions.
It was then unanimously decided the rule in
I future should he that:—
“Any boat, after winning His Highness the Rajah's
Cup for the third time, not necessarily in succession,
shall be ineligible for entry in this Rice for the next
two Regattas following the third win. There shall
he no disqualification or ham neap against any boat
winning the Champion Cup for any number of times.”
This has since been confirmed by His Highness
the Rajah, and is now embodied in the regatta
Regulations as Rule 15.
This rule was framed with the object of encourag-
ing  boat-racing locally, which, since the advent of
the Sri Belalang and Sri Kendawang, has slackened
off considerably Mr. Page-Turner's Sri Kendawang
is thereby ineligble for entry in H. H. the Rajah’s
Cup Race till 1921. Mr. Hardie's Sri Belalang is
still qualified for entry, but was not entered this year,
ITS place being taken by a new boat, the Sri Belalai.
The result of these two boats not being entered is
obvious against only one Kuching boat—Inche Abu
Bakar's Api Neraka last year, there were nine
oi her boats entered this year, besides the Sri Bela-
lang Biak.
Inche Abu Bakar is to be congratulated on
his success with the Senang Hati in H. H. the Rajah’s
Cup. This is the Api Neraka of 1920 rebuilt. He
has always shewn great sportsmanship through good
years and bad, and it must be some satisfaction for
him to be the one to regain the head of the river for
Kuching. It will be seen that Inche Abu Bakar also
won H. H. the Ranee's Cup with the Sri Lundu.
His name has appeared continuously in Regatta
Programmes since 1880.
The Kongsi Lima (Messrs. Ward, Gillan. Ermen,
Clark, and Fenwick) boat. Sri Melawan, which won
the Champion Cup after a dead-heat with the Senang
Hati was only built in November by Penghulu
Angkon of Banting, who also built, and whose
people paddled, both the Sri Belalang and Sri Bela-
lai for Mr. Hardie.
Other long boats reappearing this year under new
names were the Datil Temenggong’s Chehaya Negri,
the former Dayang Houri, and Haji Mohamat Rais'
Inlong Buan Mantari. the late Datu Hakim's Putri
Kemala.
With exception of a few showers, the weather was
line throughout the day, and some very interesting
racing, including two dead-heats, was witnessed by
a large crowd.
The numbers of sight-seers and boats from round
the coast appeared to be many more than in the past
four years, though still perhaps not quite up to those
of pre-war years.
Water-sports were re-introduced and might be
made even more of a feature another year, the tub
races and duck hunts creating some amusement.
 Thanks are due to all those who gave up their
holiday to assist in the arrangements, and to the
Manager of the British Malaysian Co. Ltd., at
Goebilt for the loan of the m. 1. S-u<i for the use of
the Umpire.
Programme. .
Judges:
Mr. A. B. Ward, The Right Rev. The
Bishop, Messrs. F. G. Day, II. A. Adams,
C. Ermen, and C. Fenwick, The Data
Temonggong, The Datu Imam and Inche
Abu Bakar, Messrs. Ong Tiang Swee,
Chan Kee Ong and Law Miang Yang.
Umpire
Capt. S. Cunynghame.
Starters:
Messrs. H. B. Crocker, E. Parnell, O. Lang and J. P. Mead, The Datu Muda, The Datu Hakim and The Tuan Belal.
Stewards>
Messra. K. H. Gillan, W. E. Le Gros Clark, Captain C. P. Lowe, J. R. Barnes, W. Service, H. E. Cutfield and G. T. Bates, Inche Mohamad Zin and Abang Suleiman, Messrs. Lim Tee Chew, Tan Sum Guan, Tan Boon Siew and Chua Boon Khian.
Clerks of the Course .-—Lieut. W. Clark, Messrs. P. Stewart and R. C. Street.
Greasy Boom
Messrs. H. Calvert, J. P. Baird and (R. A. Miller Hallett)
Water Sports
1st. Race, 8 a. in.—BANDONG RACE.—For bona fide fishing boats to lie propelled by oars, steersman only to use paddle Crews limited to 5 men 1st. prize $7.50 2nd prize $5. From Pengkalan Dayang Atun to. Stone Wharf. Entries to be notified by December 29th. Messrs. C. S Griffiths. (P. C. Cobbold and J. G. Barraclough.
Honorary Secretary:—Mr. J. A H. Hardie. Honorary Treasurer:—Mr. P. II. Hayward
Abdulrahman.
Haji Mat.
Won by a length. Only four entries.
2nd. Race, 8.30 a.m.- B C. L. CUP.
$100. For any description of boat with
limited to 15 men 1st. prize to crew $1
to crew $7.50. Entrance fee $1.50.
Patingan to Stone Wharf.
Value
crews
2nd prize
From Tanjong
Won by a quarter of a length.
3rd Race, 9 a. in.—SHIP’S GIGS.—1st. prize $6.
2nd. prize $3 From Pengkalan Dayang Atun to
Stone Wharf.
p. a. Adeh.
H. H. s. Y. Zahora.
Won by two lengths.
4th. Race, 9.15 a. m.—FOB BOATS WITH CREWS
LIMITED TO EIGHT MEN.—1st. prize $10. 2nd. prize
$5. From Pengkalan Dayang Atun to Stone Wharf.
Haji Hassim.
Ayup.
After a dead heat. In the second race, Ayup's
boat, then a long way behind, sank opposite the
Fish Market.
5th. Race, 9.30 a. m.—FISHERMEN’S RACE —
(Dayong Ikan).— 1st. prize $2. 2nd. prize $1. 3rd
prize 50 cents Men to wear a distinctive mark on
the left arm. These badges will be provided and
prizes will inly be given to men who have them at
the Winning Post. From the Judges box round
H H. s. Y. Zahora's mooring buoy, turning to the
right and return.
Kawi.
Abang Achek, Snlak.
Jin.
6th. Race, 10 a. in.—ARMY, CONSTABULARY AND
STEAMERS.—Crews limited to 15 men. Mixed Crews
from steamers will not lie allowed, each steamer
must run a boat containing members of its Crew
who are “signed on” before January 1st. 1922. 1st.
prize $15. 2nd. prize $7.50. From Tanjong Pa-
tingan to Stone Wharf.
s. s. Sri Sadong.
s. s. Sarawak.
Won by half a length.
7th. Race, 10.30a m.—OFFICES' RACE.—Limi-
ted to employees in Government and Mercantile
Offices whose names as being in the receipt of monthly wages appear on the Pay Sheet of any such office for December, 1921. A list of crews to be sent in before December 28th. Limited to crews of 8 paddlers in each boat. 1st. prize $16. 2nd. prize $8. From Pengkalan Dayang Atun to Stone Wharf. 
Won by three-quarters of a length, half a length
separating the Printing Office boat from the Medical
Department's, which came in third.
8th. Race, a. m.— HER HIGHNESS THE
RANEE’S CUP. Value $75.—Open to all boats.
Crews limited to 30 paddlers One flag-man and one
bailer may be carried in addition but these must not
use paddles.
Won by a quarter of a length.
INTERVAL.
9th. Race. 1.45 p. m.—CHAMBER OF COMMERCE
CUP.—Value $50. —For any description <J boat with
crews limiter! to 15 men. Winner of the 2nd. Race
Li pull with 12 and 2nd. boat in the 2nd. Race with
13 paddles only. 1st prize to crew $ 15. 2nd. prize
to crew $7 50 Entrance fee $1.50. From Tanjong
Patingan to Stone Wharf.
Won by a quarter of a length. 10th. Race, 2.15 p. m.—His HIGHNESS THE RAJAH'S CUP.—Value $200.—2nd. prize $65. 1st. prize to crew $80. 2nd. prize to crew $ 10. 3rd. prize to crew $20. Entrance fee $2. Open to any make of boat unlimited as to size or number of crew. From Batu Bliong to Stone Wharf.
The Senang Hati had a clear lead from Muara Padungan and won by a length and a half, half a length separating the second and third. The Sri Belalai got clean away at the start, having the out¬side position, hut Inter got into difficulties in trying to get across lo the town side, and finished fourth. An accidental collision between the Chehaya Negri and Sri Belalang Biak left the latter in a somewhat badly damaged condition.
11th Race', 2 45 p —FARMS DIRECTORS' CUP.- Value $75—Presented by the Directors of the New Farms syndicate Open to nil boats. Crews limited to 30 paddlers One flag-man and one bailer may be carried in addition hut these must not use paddles. Winner of the 8th. race to pull with 26 and 2nd. boat in the 8th. race with 28 paddles only. Entrance fee $2. 1st prize to crew $30. 2nd prize to crew $15. From Batu Bliong to Stone Wharf.
Value $125. — Presented by the New 'Sarawak Farms Syndicate 2ml prize $40. 1st. prize to crew $80. 2ml. prize to mew $40. 3rd. prize to crew $20. Open to any make of boat unlimited as to size or number of crew. Entrance fee $2. From Batu Bliong to Stone Wharf. In the first race a dead heat between the Senang
Hati and the Sri Melawan, and only won by the
latter with six feet to spare on racing it off. The
Sri Belalai again came in fourth.
13th Race. 3 45 p. m.—THE CHINESE BANKS
CUP.—Value $45.—Presented by the Sarawak Chinese
Banking Company Limited and the Kwong Lee
Bank. Open to all boats that have not won a race
at this meeting. Crews limited to 30 paddlers.
Entrance fee $1. From Batu Bliong to Stone
Wharf.
Seven boats entered.
14th. Race., 4.15 p. m -THE SARAWAK STEAM-
SHIP Co. CUP.-Value $100—$50 presented by the
Sarawak Steamship Company with $50 added. Open
to all boats that have not won a race at this meeting.
Crews unlimited.. Entrance fee $1. From Batu
Bliong to Stone Wharf.
Won by two feet, with the other boats a long way
behind.
The Sarawak Library
The Sarawak Library having recently issued a
new catalogue of it's very ancient works, a few
remarks in general upon it would not be without
interest.
On visiting the Library one is struck by the
extreme dolefulness of the place, and might not
this be mostly due to the rows upon rows of works
by out of date authors and austere divines that
fill the shelves?
Ninety per cent of Kuching and Outstation
readers seek lightness and amusement in their
books, not dullness and depression There is no
real human touch or friendliness amongst this
Library's books. They gaze at you from their
battered covers as much as to say -"We may not
be amusing but at any rate we are respectable".
But are they? Suddenly within this early
Victorian well of gloom a nineteenth century
production squeezes its way between Lord Lytton
and Walter Besant. A dressed up painted wanton
of a book that should to my mind never have
climbed those Library steps at all.
No wonder that the subscription list is a small
one for who in a Tropical climate can appreciate
such dry and dusty authors responsible for two
hundred or more volumes Marryat, White Mel-
ville, Mulock, H. Ward, P. White, Rider Haggard, W. Irving, C. Lever, Baring Gould, R. Burton, 
Marion Crawford, S. Brooke?
I suggest that the whole of this early Victorian
period be scrapped or else relegated to the Museum as
memorials of a glorious past. For we have passed
them even in Sarawak, these ghosts of romance
are being un-necessarily thrust upon us Surely
more recent literature could be substituted. The
funds of the Library are at a low ebb, but it would be possible to make a start
What of these authors—Could they not be more
fully represented? I enclosed suggestions of a
somewhat mixed collection -L. Merrick. W. B.
Maxwell. Somerset Maugham, Masefield. Maeter-
linck. E V. Lucas, (a most prolific and delightful
writer:, Jack London, Belloc Lowndes, A. Lang,
D. I! Lawrence. G. Cannan. O. Henry, Gals-
worthy. C. Garvice, J. Farnol, Tergenev, Tolstoi,
Dostoevski, E. M. Dell. F. Danby. B. Coplestone,
J. Conrad. Cunningham Graham. J S. Clouston,
Winston Churchill M. Cholmondely. O. Onions.
H. W. Nevison. II. C. Newte. Nat Gould. G. K.
Chesterton, R W. Chambers. J. Buchan. M. Bowen,
I G. A. Birmingham. \. Blackwood. A. C. Benson,
A. Bennet, H. Belloc, Von Hutten. W. H. Hudson.
I mention Nat Gould, the sporting writer, be-
cause he has the biggest sale of any works in
England. His books can do no harm, they might
do good.
Drama is hardly represented at all in the Library.
There are no plays by Barrie and there are thirteen
to his name. Only one by Ibsen and not one by
Bernard Shaw.
I suggest some plays by G. Barker and Pinero also being added.
Poetry in the Library is scarce and of the older school No Swinburne. No A. Austin. No Mase¬field. No Rupert Brooke. No Drinkwater, etc. etc.
The above lists could be added to indefinitely, but here I think is enough for a start on the right lines of-human interest.
The haphazard way of ordering books should be discouraged and the selection made at the dis¬cretion of a select few.
If these few suggestions be followed, I think that the Library would become more human, more up to date and more readable The suggestion tion list would, in consequence, be much enlarged.
ORANG TUA.
British North Borneo
We take the following extracts from the
Supplement to the B. N. B. Official Gazette,
dated 1st. November, 1921, containing the
Annual Reports for 1920.
NIPAH SWAMPS.
It is gratifying that very recently inquiries have
been received as to the possibilities of establishing
a nipah alcohol industry in the State. This is a
potential wealth that will become a considerable
source of revenue within a few years. We need
more data on the area and stand, which work it is
planned to start in IQ21. The nipah plant, with
care, will perpetuate itself and when concessions
are granted this should be taken into consideration
to avoid granting areas several times too large for
the proposed plant. This is not an unknown in-
dustry as the production in the Philippines is
nearly 10,000,000 litres per year. There are reliable
books on the manufacture of alcohol, vinegar and
sugar which give all necessary data as to yield and
method of cultivation. With the threatened
shortage of fuel for oil burning and internal com-
bustion engines it is probable that our nipah
swamps will be called upon to supply a substitute.
MISSION SCHOOLS.
Signs of expansion are wanting, but it is at least
something that the Mission schools can just hold
their own when the general financial circum-
stances are so adverse. The S. P. G. Boy's School
at Jesselton received less and less support and be-
fore the end of 1920 was compelled to close down,
as the number of pupils did not justify retaining
an efficient school-master. It has therefore been
omitted from the schedule. The Basel Mission
Chinese School at Jesselton failed to fill in the
half-yearly capitation grant returns and is omitted
from the schedule. This apathetic attitude to-
wards Government assistance is to be regretted;
at the same time it must be remembered that there
is at present no educational ordinance in this
State so that the Educational Department is
not in a position to enforce any requests. The
only power it holds is that of recommending a
withdrawal of the capitation grant
The value to education of private schools, with
but few exceptions, is small and the problem of
education will more likely be solved by the
expansion of mission schools and the creation of
Government schools than by any trust in private
schools such as they are in this State.
LAND LAW AND ADMINISTRATION.
The most important alteration during the year
was the increase in the scale of survey fees. The
former survey fees had been below those in force
in the Federated Malay States and did not cover
the actual cost of the work The scale was ac-
cordingly increased and now corresponds with the
Federated Malay States scale as regards the
survey of country lands.
Natives are, of course, encouraged to take up
land on ordinary titles and. where the land applied
for is situated in the midst of Native holdings
and not suitable for alien settlement, Native titles
may still be granted, but carrying rent as on
ordinary’ title, and subject to the usual restriction
in every’ -Native title forbidding transfer to an
alien.
LEPER SETTLEMENT.
The new settlement ton the east side of Berhalla
was completed in November and the lepers moved
round to their new houses on November 20th.
The new settlement has been built in the centre of
a most picturesque bay looking across the entrance
to Sandakan Harbour ; the bachelor quarters con-
sist of eight buildings built to accommodate four
men in each, the floors are of reinforced concrete
raised about four feet from the ground, the walls
and roof are of ‘'kaiang" and “attap” respectively,
supported by angle iron. The interior of each
house is divided into front verandah, living room,
kitchen and back verandah for messing purposes.
The married quarters are five in number and are
similar to the bachelor quarters except that the
living room is smaller. In addition there is a
hospital with accommodation for sixteen patients
with kitchen and attendants’ quarters. Water is
brought to the lines by a pipe from a dam situated
some distance away and the dam is of sufficient
capacity to provide enough water during a three
months drought. The latrine, of reinforced con-
crete. is built over the sea. and is easily reached
by a wooden wharf. The new buildings are much
appreciated by the lepers. The old settlement on
the west side of the island was burnt down.
CASES OF BERI-BERI.
It is significant that the great decrease in the
incidence of beri-beri coincides with the in-
auguration of the food control in North Borneo in
June, 1919, when owing to the possible shortage of
I rice, it became necessary to restrict the rice ration
and add food substitutes such as sweet potatoes,
sago, tapioca, maize, wheat, etc.
RATS. 
Altogether 25,171 rats were examined, from
which 1,198 smears were taken and bacilli pestis
found in 97. Practically all the rats belonged
to the species, Mus rattus, but they were a few of
the species Mus decumanus. The fleas found on
the rats were of the species loemopsylla cheopis.
Rat destruction: Barium carbonate 'mixed with
bananas was good as a poison, traps were also
employed, but in the Customs. Japanese bird lime
spread on planks proved the most effectual: on
one occasion 16 rats were caught on one plank in
one night.
VAGRANCY.
The question of vagrancy has always been a
difficult one to solve in this State where such a
large population of alien labourers is employed.
After a labourer's physical stamina is exhausted
he becomes a vagrant and is swept up by the
police and passed on to the Prison Department.
Here he gets good food, medical attention, clothing, accommodation, in fact everything but free-
dom. Seventy-five percent, are really’ beyond the
time when they can ever become normal labourers
again, therefore those who go out again, on im-
provement in health lead a hand to mouth existence,
break down, and are swept in again. I am of the
opinion that it would be politic to repatriate on
a larger scale and to have a separate vagrants
hospital and home. sav. under the joint supervision
of the Medical and Protectorate departments. It
would certainly be more humane and probably
the hopeless cases would be weeded out and re-
patriated more easily, more cures effected, and
work found at once for those who have recovered.
The vagrants are kept as much as possible se-
parated from the ordinary prisoners but they are,
however, under Prison staff and discipline.
that it would be more in reason to marvel at the number of fossil links already found. Only under very exceptional and favourable circumstances will the bones of an animal be preserved sufficiently intact through millions of years to provide the evidence that is required, and it will be realized that only by an extraordinary piece of luck will such remains be found and brought to the notice of someone able to appreciate their value. The fragments of the famous Piltdown skull, which combines a modem type of cranium with a jaw closely resembling that of a Chimpanzee, were picked up accidentally by the late Charles Dawson from a heap of rubbish piled up by work¬men during the repair of roads. One wonders how many fossils of inestimable value have been used for mettling roads in the past!
And now let us come to the point. Here in Sarawak we have abundant Miocene deposits, laid down in the time when the most interesting ; phase of our own evolution was taking place, and who knows but that somewhere here the history ;
of this time-is written clearly in the bones of our primordial ancestors? It is true that many of these deposits seem to be unfossiliferous. But so are similar deposits in Java, where Pithecanthropus came to light. For this reason. I would urge that close attention lie paid to any excavations or earth-works which may be carried on at any time. Only by such concerted action can sufficient evi¬dence for the completion of the detailed case for Man's origin be collected.
W. E. Le G. C.
Natalite
OFFICIAL TEST.
The British Alcohol Mort or Fuel Com mil tee. con-sisting of Sir Boverton Redwood. Major A M. Coo per Key Professor Crowther, Sir James Dobbie, E. R. S. Sir Frank Heath, Dr. Hinchcliffe, General Sir Capel Holden, Sir Frederick Nathan, Dr. W. R. Ormandy. Mr. H. Paterson and Mr. Arnold Phillip, through its Chairman, speaking of Natalite, stated: “1 think I may say that the general statements which have been made public for some past have left no doubt whatever on the minds of the Com¬mittee that a mixture of this kind is available for employment as an effective substitute for petrol in internal combustion engines of the usual kind. We recognise that you did not employ your spirit, Natalite, with the higher amount of com¬pression that is admissible without getting pre- ignition. and that you are not getting the best result out of your Natalite mixture: but, neverthe¬less, we also fully-understand that it would be a long time before the existing type of engines become altered, and that, therefore, there is a great advantage in being able to suggest the employ¬ment of an alternative fuel, which can, as we are quite satisfied already, be successfully employed without any alteration whatever to the present type of internal combustion engines."
We understand that preparations are already under way for a big public demonstration of Natalite at the forthcoming Malaya-Borneo Ex¬hibition in March and April next, where its value, not only for internal combustion engines but also for lighting purposes, will be fully shown.
We gave an account of Natalite, which is a spirit distilled from the juice of the Nipah or Apong palm, in our April number.
Impressions of Old Sarawak. (Continued.)
Being Extracts from “Ten Years in
Sarawak" 1853—1863 by His late Highness
Rajah Sir Charles Brooke, o. c. M a., etc.
The three old Malay chiefs that accompanied
my party, were objects for a picture. They had
dressed themselves in thickly-quilted mattress
jackets and hats, which were very heavy, but sup-
posed to be a protection against spears and Sumpit
arrows. But their weight in walking, after rain,
or when soaked with perspiration, must interfere
a good deal with their usefulness in other respects.
Mr. Crookshank (at considerable risk) took
charge of the rockets, which were of ancient make,
and a few that were fired entered the enemy’s
fort and did groat execution, but the majority
whizzed round and round, and sometimes lodged
in the ground among our own party: we were all
more afraid of these missiles than anything the
enemy could produce.
During my many quiet hours at Lingga. I really believe few of God’s creatures could have eaten his own heart as I did. I even welcomed the coming of an old Dyak woman (without a tooth in
her head) to be my companion. But at many
other times, when the people were not employed
at their farms, they would arrive by tens and
twenties, with each ebb tide, and bring all their
cases of debt and quarrelling to me for settlement.
I gradually made many friends among the people,
particularly the female part of the community. I
soon learnt that great power and influence attached
to their opinions on matters in general, and that
to stand well with them was more than half any
Dyak battle.
As has already been mentioned, the most influen-
tial and distinguished of the Lingga population
were two old Malay ladies, who had held the
government here for many years. When I first
arrived “they paid me frequent visits, and their
powers of conversation were so hopelessly un-
limited, as to become extremely disagreeable and
tedious; occasional naps being the only relief
during their stay. On re-awaking every time,
their tongues were invariably moving; and whe-
ther awake or asleep, it was quite immaterial to
them.
Their remarks generally Lad reference to the
people on the coast, on whom they made sweeping
claims as slaves and followers, to the number of
many thousands. In fact, they led one to suppose
the whole country belonged to them, with every-
one in it. These old lasses, however, were not
without some sterling qualities besides the tongue:
for on more than one occasion, when the Saribas
forces had; been making an attack on Banting,
they were to be seen dressed in men's clothes, with
swords and spears in hand, commanding the people,
and working as hard as any of them. But they
were only endurable while such disturbed times
lasted
And now the day had arrived when their tether
was to be sadly curtailed. Such tyranny as they
were in the habit of displaying could no longer be
permitted. They practised the blackest arts for
the purpose of gathering into their net everybody
I for whom they had a fancy.
The old ladies 1 heard were furious, and I was
cautioner! not to partake of any fruit or sweets
they might present to me. and not to drink water
drawn from my usual drinking well, about which 1 they had made some suspicious inquiries.
After a short time their anger subsided, and the old ladies then sought occupation in studying Mahomedan scriptures repeating their prayers regularly seven times daily.
October. 1854 —I was now appointed to the Command of the whole Batang Lupar district, the , he al quarters of which were at the Sakarang Fort, lately occupied by Mr Brereton On taking charge 1 felt a deep melancholy for some days, while living among, and viewing, the many relics ■of mv departed friend.
The natives were much attached to him. and felt his death with no ordinary degree of grief— more particularly those who were immediately around the fort. To a few chiefs he left all his effects; a mark of affection which has served as a lasting memento in the mind of the people. The land about the fort was not sufficiently drained or cleared for European constitutions, and I believe this had much to do with his many ailments—the country round being without roads. The only mode of taking exercise* was to wade knee deep in mire. Though the place did not appear un¬healthy. fryers and ague were more prevalent here than at Lingga. the sea-water not reaching so far as Sakarang at flood tide After my arrival I threw my doors open to the public, more particu¬larly to the Dyaks, and from morning to night my apartments were crowded with men. women, and children, with whom 1 soon became personally acquainted By this means I daily gained new stores of their language.
I always found the plan most likely to answer was to 1 term it the Dyaks to settle their disputes themselves, if possible, anti upon their failing to do so, to bring them into my court, on the under¬standing that no word should be spoken after judgment h id been passed by me. It may appear summary anti despotic, but is very effectual, and in a country which contains so many varied cus¬toms, the administering of justice must necessarily differ-entirely from the mode which prevails in a civilised community.
One Dyak. who was a proved friend, came to me to receive instructions, and 1 fully expected it would have taken three or four days before he could learn all the particulars by heart, as they have no means of distinguishing marks or letters, I commenced the lesson, with my imperfect know¬ledge of the Dyak language, and was surprised how wonderfully acute his' mind was, and how- strong his memory. He brought a few dry leaves, which he tore into pieces ; these 1 exchanged for paper, which served better, lie arranged each piece separately on a table, and used his fingers in counting as well, until he reached ten, when he lifted his foot on the table, and took each toe to accord with each bit of paper answering to the name of a village, name of chief, number of follow-ers. and amount of fine; after having finished with his toes he returned to his fingers again, and when my list was completed, I counted forty-five bits of paper arranged on the table ; he then asked me to repeat them once more, which I did, when he went over the pieces, his fingers, and toes as before. “ Now,” he said, "this is our kind of letter; you white men read differently to us." Late in the evening he repealed them all correctly, placing his finger on each paper, and then said, "Now. if 1 recollect them tomorrow morning it will be all
right, so leave these papers on the table;" after which he mixed them all in a heap. The first thing in the morning he and I were at the table, and he proceeded to arrange the papers as on the evening before, and repeated the particulars with complete accuracy; and for nearly a month after, in going round the villages, far in the interior, he never forgot the different amount, &c.
This was an original character named Sandora, whose brother has been murdered by Rentap, under circumstances which appear in Mr. Spencer St. John's book. I presented Sandom with a rupee, when he. asked me the use of it, and whether it would purchase padi. A very few years later he was an active trader, and gained considerable riches; but at this time, he was a determined molester of the enemy, and, in his foraging excur¬sions, would go with only one follower in a small boat light enough to carry on their shoulders. The | weight of it together with all the articles they took with them, could hot have exceeded a few pounds.
My feeling was from the first an intense interest in the people, and I could not very severely blame । them for head- hunting. It was an old established । custom of their forefathers, and they considered it their duty to maintain it. Nevertheless my busi¬ness was to prevent it to the utmost, and the only way of doing this effectually was by a strong hand and steady perseverance. An olive branch held in one hand, and a broomstick in the other, was the method of rhyme and reason with such simple-minded beings.
I led a party to burn down one of the principal Orang Kaya's house, for disobeying Government orders in advancing in search of heads after he had been forbidden: this step made Abang Aing and many Malays feels great anxiety, but I took it as simply a matter of duty and justice to strike at the chiefs with greater severity than the lower class men. The culprit had been made an Orang, Kaya by Mr. Brereton two years previously, before a large audience in open court. I had reason to believe subsequently, that my stroke of policy in upsetting him had a great effect on the minds of the population, although it necessitated extra watchfulness for some months.
The inhabitants of the house fled to the jungle in the first instance, but after becoming hungry they returned and were humble; the fine was paid immediately. The principal people who were to demand it, besides Aing, were other Dyak chiefs— one of whom, when he afterwards met me, said, | " I never heard of such a severe fine being imposed, and 1 never yet saw a fine so quickly paid down; that is the quick way I like to see things done." This amount of fine became proverbial, and a great assistance to Aing in his coaxings and reasonings. When one contemplated a quarrel or threatened to fight, it was, '* Remember Jannah's twelve jars, the fine for killing; and if you cannot pay. your life will have to answer." It was a great increase in the price of flesh and Wood; as heretofore £8 had been the forfeit for committing murder, “or change of life." as they termed it. For years after this, Jannah was one of my best friends, and always most obliging in assisting in any work, for which he used to come and ask. The tree subsequent years, he told me, his farms had yielded better harvests than he ever remembered; and this he accounted for by hi being a friend of the white man.
The Cure of Leprosy.
The conquest of that age-long scourge, leprosy,
is a problem which has occupied men’s minds almost
since the dawn of recorded history, and now, at last, 
the desired end seems to be nearly in sight, and the 
practical instrument of its attainment was on view,
in concrete form, at the London Medical Exhibition, 
held at the Central Hall, Westminster, in the form 
of a limpid, almost colourless oil known by the name 
of “moogrol.” The story of “moogrol ” is a ro- •
mance of modern science—a tale of patient, labo- |
rious, disinterested scientific research, carried on
through many years, with no eye to an immediate
outcome or to material reward, and culminating at
last in the discovery and trial of a substance
which is expected to cure one of the most dreaded
of diseases.
For many years, a vegetable oil called chaul-
moogra oil has been known and used in India for
the treatment of leprosy. Though undoubtedly bene-
ficial at times, it was known to be slow and uncer-
tain in its action, and very disagreeable to those
who bad to take it.
It was only in 1900 that the exact botanical origin
of chaulmoogra oil (the seeds of a Burmese plant
rejoicing in the name of Taraktogenos kurzii) was
demonstrated. With the possibility of obtaining
an oil of uniform quality and purity, scientific in-
terest was aroused, and the long-continued series
of investigations into its constitution and properties
were commenced at the Wellcome Chemical Research
Laboratories, London. ,As a result, it was estab-
lished in 1904 that chaulmoogra, and certain other
oils related to it, such as hydnocarpus oil, have as
their chief components certain substances belonging
to the class “fatty acids”. The chaulmoogric series
of fatty acids, however, were found to possess cer-
tain unique physical and chemical characteristics
which differentiated them from every other known
fatty acid. A natural assumption was that the
known remedial value of chaulmoogra and hydno-
carpus oils resided in these peculiar acids, and that
better results might be obtained from the latter,
or their derivatives, than from the crude oil. This
assumption has been amply justified by the chemical
investigations and therapeutic trials which have
been carried out in the 17 years that have elapsed
since this pioneer work was done, and it has further
been shown that the most satisfactory method of
using these acids is to inject them in the chemical
form known aa “esters” of the acids, into the pa-
tient's muscles. This treatment has had a very
thorough practical trial at the Leprosy Investigation
Station of the U. M. A. Public Health Service,
Honolulu, and has given remarkably good results.
The latest step in the long progression is represen-
ted by “moogrol,” which is officially described by
the makers, Messrs. Burroughs Wellcome and Co.,
as “a mixture of esters of acids of the chaulmoogric
series” and which puts the treatment within ready
reach of every medical practitioner interested in
the cure of leprosy. The same firm, who have done
so much notable pioneer work in the domains of
pharmacy and medicine, were well represented at
the Medical Exhibition by many other products of
The District Officer.
We take the following extracts from an article
on the Protectorate System by Mr. J. R. Innes,
late Chief Judicial Commissioner in tin- Federated
Malay States.
Now, if the writer were asked what measure in
the earlier days of the administration did most
towards ensuring the settlement upon the land
throughout the States of a prosperous peasantry,
towards attracting the cautious Chinese small
capitalist and his coolies which laid the founda-
tions of the country's prosperity, and (c) towards
the maintenance of peace and order among a
heterogeneous population of divers relgions and
customs, he would answer unhesitatingly, “ The
establishment of the District Officer system," and
he believes that this would be the unanimous
response of the pioneer British miners and planters
to whom the country’ owes so much and of the
older members of the legal profession.
The District Officer of Malaya does not, as might
be supposed by those acquainted with the adminis-
trative system of India, closely correspond to the
Assistant Commissioner of India. The conditions
under which these officers work in their respective
countries are widely and essentially different.
The Malayan District is an Indian District in
miniature. This is not merely attributable to the
enormous difference in the size of the two count-
ries, but is an inevitable consequence of the fact,
which has already been alluded to, that in very
few districts of Malaya is the population homo-
geneous. In districts where the Malay population
largely preponderates, the District Officer, who is
the chief executive officer of the Government in the
district, may delegate some of his functions to a
Malay Assistant District Officer or Malay Peng-
hulu (headmen), and some of these officers have
been trained to take a very useful part in district
administration. But in the districts where mining
anil planting are carried on. and where Chinese
or Indian labourers are employed, the Penghulu's
activities are restricted, and matters of adminis-
trative detail affecting these people must be
handled by the District Officer himself, Thus
the character and training of the District Officer,
who of necessity comes into frequent and close
contact with the people of his district, are of the
utmost importance.
All Malays know by instinct whether or not they
are dealing with a gentleman. Educated Chinese
are capable of making the distinction, and the con-
duct of both races is influenced by this knowledge.
As regards character, it is sufficient to say that the
Malayan Public Service is recruited by public com-
petition and that in the past most of the successful
candidates have been educated at British public
schools or British universities, or at both. The all-
important factor in the training of the young Civil
Servant in Malaya is that he is usually posted to-
a district in the early years of his service, and be-
fore being entrusted with any work of importance
there he must have acquired a command of one or
more of the Asiatic languages spoken by the
people of the district. If he has first learned Chi-
nese or Tamil and not Malay, which is the lingua
franca of the country he soon picks up a working
knowledge of the last mentioned language, and
the duty cast upon him by conditions already
alluded to of meeting personally those who have
public business rapidly develops his linguistic cap-
abilities and gives him that insight into the
character and habits of thought of different
Asiatic races to which he could not attain if the
greater part of his work were transacted through
the medium of minute papers, or if he came to a
district late in his service, after having lost some
of youth's receptivity and enthusiasms.
It has been wisely said that with every new lan-
guage one acquires an additional pair of eyes and
an additional pair of ears, and the saying is especial-
ly true with regard to Oriental languages. Indeed,
in the writer’s opinion, it is impossible for a young
man to hear and use the idioms of such languages
as Malay and Chinese in daily conversation with
those who speak them as their native tongue
without arriving at some understanding of the
general outlook upon life of the Malay or Chinese
average man or woman. Not only is such under-
standing the first condition of success in the ad-
ministration of a district in Malaya, but the policy
of the Government in placing, so Ur as is possible,
each Civil Servant while he is still young in an
upcountry district ensures that when later he en-
ters upon secretarial, magisterial, judicial or legis-
lative duties he does so with a knowledge of the
mentality and point of view of the various Asiatic
races which is of the utmost value, if not indis-
pensable.
It has been said earlier in this article that service
as a District Officer is helpful to a Civil Servant
who later may be engaged solely in magisterial
work. The truth of this proposition is demon-
strated daily in the police courts. Some years ago
one of the police courts in a large town in Malaya
was presided over by an ex-District Officer whose
work had lain chiefly among Chinese and who
knew the Chinese language well. One morning a
party of Malay police were escorting from the
gaol to the court for trial a gang of Chinese va-
grants and other petty offenders. On the way to the
court one of these broke loose and escaped. The
Malay corporal in charge foresaw trouble if he
were to arrive at court without one of his pri-
soners He consulted a Chinese detective who
was with him The calling of these people de-
velops resourcefulness, and this man solved the
difficulty by promptly seizing a Chinese coolie of
the loafer class who was passing by and putting
him in the place of the missing man. On arrival
at the court the man protested that he was
brought there unlawfully, but it was not the sort
of story which would be likely to awaken the in-
terest of the minor court Officials. They said they
had heard that kind of thing before. He was
placed in the dock with a number of vagrants and
 evidence of his arrest for begging in the streets on
the previous day was duly and circumstantially
given. The police corporal, in expectation of a
sentence of a few days’ imprisonment being pass
ed, was preparing to hustle the prisoner out of
court when he was petrified by hearing the ma-
gistrate entering into a conversation in Chinese
with him. The magistrate had been struck by
the sincerity of the man’s protests and decided to
dispense with the interpreter and to inquire him-
self further into the matter. The result was that
the coolie was released and some members of the
police force were put on trial upon a charge of
conspiracy.
Yet it was once seriously suggested that some of
the senior magistrates in the towns of Malaya
might with advantage be barristers brought out to
fill these, posts from England instead of Civil
Servants!
The principal, underlying the establishment of
the District Officer system was that the central
Government should look to senior District Officers
for advice upon land adminstration, and that they
should take the initiative in such matters as the
construction of roads and the projection of irriga-
tion and drainage works, etc. The development of 
various technical de ailments throughout -the 
Malay States has relieved the District Officer of 
some of his responsibilities in these respects, but 
he still is, or ought to be, the principal adviser to
the Government on matters touching the walfare
of his district. It has been stated that within re- 
cent years over centralization in administration
has threatened to strangle the initiative of the up- 
country officer and to diminish that personal
influence which counts for so much in the ruling 
of orientals This menace, if it existed, has not
passed unnoticed, for an influential Commission which inquired into and reported two years ago , upon the general conditions of the Malayan Civil Service recommended that District Officers should be “endowed with greater personal authority wherever it is feasible. ” It is unlikely that such a recommendation will be ineffectual, and it may be expected “the man on the spot" will not be ousted from his rightful place in the Malayan administration.
Christmas Treat to Leper Camp.
His Highness the Rajah wishes to thank the kind
donors to the above fund for their contributions.
The total amount collected was $322, of which $190
has been spent. The balance will be kept for treats
and comforts for the lepers during the coming year.
The following is an extract from Miss Cubitt’s
letter to the Rajah:—
“On Christmas day each patient at the Camp received 1/2katis pork, one kati laksa, and a bottle, of aerated water and to keep his own bottle—on Thursday 29th. they are having a tea with cakes, sweets and crackers; and clothes, also towels, handkerchiefs and cigarettes, so I am sure this treat will last them for some time.
I think a letter of thanks must be sent from all in Camp and myself to all those who have so liberally given to the Leper Fund; the lepers have had a j most happy time and are all most grateful."
Malay Folk Lore.
The following is a report of the lecture on Malay
folk-tales and literature delivered by Dr. R. Q. Win-
stedt.
The lecturer said he had undertaken to talk of a
subject little known, but one which should appeal to
many of different races here. Malay folk-tales and
Malay literature were of the most fascinating family
of love legends of romance which Buddhism first
carried all over Asin, to Thibet, to Ceylon, to Siam,
from Mandalay to Yokohama. Then Islam circulated
many Indian tales among the Malays. Arabic and
Persian borrowed freely from the store house of
Indian Literature: the Malays had borrowed freely
from Persian and Arabic. There were Malay ver-
sions of many of the “Arabian Nights," of the story
of “Sinbad the Sailor,” of the Persian “Tales of a
Parrot," of the amusing and discreditable adventures
of Ambunawas, the vizer of the Barmecides, Students
of Tamil, Telugu, Sinhalese, and Hindustani would
be surprised at the number of stories they knew which
were to be read in a Malay dress.
The printed catalogues of Malay manuscripts at
Leyden and Batavia alone fill over 1,200 pages, &.
very respectable contribution from a people whom
popular. tradition in Europe had regarded as pirates,
bristling with krises and running amuck as a hobby.
But even Malays knew little of the history of their
own literature. Perhaps only a tired civilisation
turned to the study of folk-stories; only people who
could no longer invent them.
There was a seventh century inscription at Kota
Kapor, in West Bangka, Sumatra, commemorating
an attack on Java by the Buddhist kingdom of Sri
Vijaya, which, centred at Palembang, dominated for
centuries, Sumatra, half of Java, part of Borneo and
the north of the Malay Peninsula. That inscription
was Malay or a closely cognate language, but it was
written in a script of Southern India. Apart from it
there was no Malay writing in other than Perso-
Arabic script and there were no records of the Malay
language free from Arabic loanwords.
The Malay had reached the highest point of literary
craftsmanship and verbal felicity in the Pantun.
The following was the form of the Pantun.
The fate of a dove is to fly
It flies to its nest on the knoll.
The gate of the true love is the eye;
The prize of the quest is the soul."
Whatever its origin the Malay Pantun at its beat
fulfilled a great critic's definition of true poetry. The
following was a couplet that had always seemed
entirely original and particularly happy.
“Bukan Mudah bercherai kaseh
Sa—bagai wau menanti angin.”
How the divorce of love and lingering.
Like a kite that waits the wind."
Most of the Malay classics were translations. In
the Bodleian library at Oxford there were luanti-
acripts dating from 1600 of a Malay translation of
the Persian “Tales of a Parrot.” In I601 Cambridge
obtained a manuscript of the story of Joseph and
Potiphar's wife.
Laws, perhaps, were not literature but there were
seventeenth century Kelantan Port laws which re-
sembled closely those of the Moguls Old Malay
literature owed much to the pre-Islamic influence of
Java, especially to the 12th. century cycle of Panji
tales named after a prince who, tiling of court life,
fled and served as a simple soldier, undergoing many
transformations and marrying many brides Wore he
was joined on the field of battle to his betrothed
Princess, who had follower! him. Some of the Ma-
lay versions of Javanese tales were founded on old
Javanese models and antedated the modern Javanese
texts. But Islam brought a change of taste and
introduced the romances of the Deccan. Even these
last were reprobated by Indian missionaries and in
1634, the Gujerati missionary, who translated into
Malay the Persian story of Alexander the Great as
a Muslim conqueror, condemned as profane the
Hikayat Indraputra, a Malay collection of Southern
Indian Tales. The insetting of tales within the
frame work of a longer tale is a device of which no
examples outside Indian Influence occurred except
Ovids “Metamorphoses.” It was common in Malay
works.
Even the sixteenth century Peninsular Romance
of Hang Tuah was effected by foreign elements.
Nor were those foreign elements entirely absent from
the “Malay Annals" of the old kingdom of Malacca,
written in 1612 by a Johore nobleman.
Nowadays there was a large and growing prose
literature on Islamic theology and jurisprudence,
tracts on the popular mysticism of India, Orthodox
works on the first principles of Islam and on the
whole duty of Muslims? on Arabic Grammar and
Shafeite law. There were, for instance, translations
of al-Baithawi's commentary on the koran, and of
writings of Al-ghazali. This branch of writing
being permeated with Arabisms, was marring Malay
literary style. The old Malay style perfect in the
“Malay Annals" was assailed by a well-known
Peninsular author, Munshi Abdullah (1796-1854), born
in Malacca, of Arab and Tamil descent, but he had
had no followers. He translated a Tamil version of
Bidfei’s fables.
Malay literary works were seldom dated and their
authors seldom known Generally it could not be
said what romances, poems and religious works were
done in old Malacca or at the courts of Kedah,
Trengganu, and Johore. But the Malays of the
Peninsula had certainly to their credit the romance
of Hang Tuah, the “ Malay Annals,” the " Kedah
Annals, ” and the works of Abdullah. It was a re-
spectable record as Malay literature went and perusal
of the vernacular press to-day would show that the
literary spirit was still strong in tire Peninsular
Malay, though ii was overladen with the tradition
of translation and groping in the dark for material.
(M. T.)
Sarawak Fifty Years Ago.
[Extract from Gazette of 1872.]
The year which has just ended can hardly be
called an eventful one in the history of Sarawak.
It is as free from startling improvements as it is
happily without serious disaster. Tracing the
course of legislative measures throughout it. we
find a new debtors’ law discussed at its commencement and finally passed in April, enacting that
from the 1st. of January 1872 any person imprisoned
for debt may, with the permission of the Resident
and consent of his creditors, be allowed to work at
a monthly wage of four dollars in payment of his
debt. A new Marriage law was passed in May, to
legalize unions by civil contract between persons
differing in religion. In September the Supreme
Council passed resolutions appointing Coroners
in each Residency to examine and report on all
persons meeting with sudden, accidental, or uncertain deaths in the territory.
A small tax on Lucifer Matches was levied in
October, and a wise and salutary enactment for
the encouragement and protection of sago manufacture in the country becomes law on the 1st. day
of 1872
The work of taking the Census was completed
in December, and the result published. The numbers are confessedly incorrect, and their inaccuracy
is supposed to be about 50,000 in defect of the truth.
The difficulty of procuring a sufficient supply of
rice in the country has been increasing every
month, until the majority of the people in this
Residency and a considerable number of those
living elsewhere are almost entirely dependent on
what is imported in the steamers from Singapore,
or in native traders. Prizes of some value have
been offered for three years in the hope of urging
the natives in Sarawak, where the deficiency is
most felt, to undertake rice-cultivation to a greater
extent. A scheme for growing it on a very large
scale under the superintendence of an European
manager with the help of imported coolie labour
seems likely to fall through from want of the capital required.
The ill-disposed Dyak tribes at the heads of the
Rejang and Batang Lupar rivers apparently want
the organization necessary before they can cause
any serious anxiety to the Government. Many of
those who were formerly hostile have made overtures for peace and been received into friendship,
A gallant little expedition against one tribe on
the Bangkit river at the beginning of August was
crowned with complete success, and it is hoped
that this will be the last required to reduce to
order the Katibas Dyaks. who have been rebels
for many years. It is satisfactory to know that
the Dutch officials in the neighbourhood of the
Kapuas river have shown a thorough willingness
to aid the Residents on the Sarawak side of the
Frontier in checking the incursions of the enemy.
Accounts received continually from the Brunei
districts shew that the reign of misrule and op-
pression is still as rife there as it ever was Forced
contributions from all traders, amounting to a
virtual prohibition of honest traffic; extortionate
usury; payment demanded by a sight of the
Sultan's seal, or the promise of murder (which is
not an idle threat) are the usual practices of the
Pangerans and Punurohs acting under the orders
of the young Rajahs. Sarawak subjects are
treated with especial notice - being refused per-
mission to trade, or work produce, or even to sue
for old debts until all revenue and imposts are
paid to the Brunei agents.
The new Governor of Labuan. Mr. Bulwer,
visited Sarawak in September Though his visit
was a strictly private one, we hail it as a good
omen of friendly* and cordial relations between
ourselves and the colony he is appointed to govern.
Some small improvements have taken place in
the town and bazaar here which have been notice
from time to time They are far from complete, and much remains to be done, but as far as they  go, they are an earnest of Sarawak possessing some day a handsome front towards the river, and a more orderly appearance than it now presents. 
The establishment of a Government School with a Chinese teacher and suitable buildings at Paku has done something to provide instruction for the many Chinese children who exist in Upper Sara¬wak. Several letters expressing a warm desire to sec intelligent and useful teaching offered in other places have appeared in the Gazette ; but the difficult problem of how to bring it to bear on the natives has not yet been fully solved. A few more years must probably’ pass over us before any School system can be thoroughly’ applied, or the natives brought to see the advantages of education.
Laughs.
Next time you hear anyone laugh, take note. There are laughs and laughs There is the horse laugh and the cow laugh, the cat laugh and the dog laugh. There is the deep booming laugh, and the high-pitched treble laugh. The single laugh and  the double laugh—even a married man laughs at times.
Listen—at your next dinner-party —between the aspic and the asparagus preferably after the -champagne (if any,. Ami then go away into one of the quiet places of the earth and repeat all the laughs you have heard.
You will he surprised.
There is the dinner laugh, and the after-dinner laugh. The breakfast laugh, and, yea even, the before-breakfast laugh—but men he isn't a nice man to know.’
There is the cackle, the smirk, the wheeze, and the shriek: the burble, the gurgle, the bellow, and the roar. The titter, the sitter, the smicker, and the chirp: The simper, the snigger, the gagger, and the screech The giggle, the sniggle, the spiggle, and the perk: the wiffle, the wjggle, the official, and the spurt
The jaunty laugh, the gloomy laugh- the beery  laugh, the leery laugh The wise laugh, the nervous laugh: the “jolly” laugh, the guilty laugh.
The villain’s laugh, the heroe's laugh— no, any- : thing but that. The boys' laugh, the girls’ laugh— : what they've got to laugh about—I—do—not—  know.	
The shutter, the cutter, the gutter, and the slum: the twitter, the splitter, the squitcher, and the swurk.
The jerky laugh, die turkey laugh, the “bright” laugh, the tight laugh, and the gerk: the breezy laugh, the wheezy laugh, the greasy laugh, the throaty laugh, and the choke. The Bridge laugh, the Poker laugh, the hollow laugh, and the croak
The hard laugh, the soft laugh, the light laugh, the heavy laugh, the lunch laugh, and the curry laugh.
The fat laugh, the thin laugh, the whisky laugh, and the gm laugh.
The short laugh, the long laugh, the narrow laugh, the broad laugh, and the yell. The- vapid laugh, the smug laugh, the mug laugh, the mild laugh, and the yowl.
The tactful laugh, the prudent laugh, the imprudent laugh, and the growl.
The loud laugh that speaks the vacant mind.
The artful laugh, the crafty laugh, the gushing laugh, the pushing laugh, and the bark.
The dusty laugh, the gusty laugh, the dry laugh, the wet laugh, and the splutter.
The ho-ho laugh, the haw-haw laugh, the ha-ha laugh, the hee-hee laugh, and the hen.
Then there is your own laugh, a type. of cacchina¬tion quite apart from any other.
“ Every man his own laugh! ”
The Judge’s laugh, the starter’s laugh, the ste¬ward's laugh, the owner's laugh, the secre	
(no, not to-day).
Besides, after all. what is there to laugh about? It's not over yet.
“And if I laugh at any mortal thing, it is that I may not weep.”
But as Cuthbert says —and as Mr. George Robey, c. B.B.. said, “He who laffs laffs laffs laffs "
A Letter from Perry.
My DEAR CUTHBERT,
You must have been peeved at not hearing from me, old Trout. But there’s been nothing to write about in our little nook, except I must tell you about the very jolly time we had the other day. It was Videos' birthday—his nineteenth.
We were all stood a three course lunch—Herrings and tomatoes. Fowl, and Milk pudding—and when we got back we all had a small bottle of beer each. Videns also had a pahit before he went because it was his birthday. O! we did have such a jolly time. That night we had a spillikin drive at the Club, but Videns lost the Final to Cappy because his hand was SO shaky after that pahit.
Thine own,
PERCY-
CORRESPONDENCE 
[The Editor is not responsible for the opinions of Correspondents. '
“On a Certain Matter.”
Hist. December, 1921. DEAR SIR.
Referring to the Editorial comment on one's article “On Several Matters" in the Sarawak Gazette of the 1st. December, it appears that the gist of one’s remarks has not been rightly interpreted.
The point is, to explain more fully, that Iha capital required for any pension is invariably less than the capital required for a permanent income of the same amount. This should be obvious for the simple reason that a pension—with widows and children thrown in—dwindles and eventually cease® altogether. A permanent income carries, on with¬out periodic diminution.
The question of the fairness or generosity of the Sarawak pension scheme as compared with other schemes did not enter into the discussion, for on that subject there is, or should be. no argument.
I am, Sir,
Yours faithfully,
VIDENS.
[We know of several people now on the look out for “a permanent income" which “carries on with- out periodic diminution.” However, “Peace." and “Good-will,” etc.—Ed ;
SINGAPORE,
20th. December, 1921.
The Editor.
Sarawak Gazette,
Kuching.
SIR,
I have been shewn some correspondence in your columns regarding pensions and annuities. Perhaps it might interest your readers to know that it would cost a man of fifty now-a-days approximately £10,700 to purchase an annuity of £700 per annum.
To secure an income of half that amount for his widow at his death, taking her to be ten years younger and that he lived to be seventy, would cost at least another £3,500—and I very much doubt if any Insurance Company would accept such risks. Provision for children does not, of course, come into the above.
Yours faithfully.
ACTUARY.
What does it matter ’
The Editor,	15th. December, 1921.
Sarawak Gazette,
Kuching.
SIR,
In the December issue of the Sarawak Gazette one notices that some reader is holding forth on the disadvantages of being un-married.
The article is not, one presumes, written by an un-married man, but it is very bad propaganda.
It is indeed hard to believe that a man's psy¬chological outlook is changed by not being un¬married, but the article certainly points to this. An un-married man would never allow himself to be offered goat at 75 cents a kati, bone included. Nor would he pay $3.85 a bottle for Black and White Whisky, when it can lie procured in Kuching for $2. GO a bottle, or $30 by the case.	,
The rest of the article is so hopelessly illogical and incorrect— and almost as involved as this letter, Ed.' —that it requires no answer except to remark that anyone not knowing it might, by-your corres¬pondent’s description, imagine Sarawak to be some view species of duck-billed platypus— "tame, innocent, dull, and unenlightened."
Yours faithfully,
BEN.
[This Correspondence may cease. We shall be very pleased, however, to have any letters from the outstations on the habits and life of a rhinoceros with its young, or some such non-controversial. and —possibly—safe subject.—Ed.;
Chinese Education in Sarawak.
UPPER SARAWAK,
The Editor,	
29th. December, 1921.
Sarawak Gazette.
DEAR Sir.
Will you please permit me a short space in your valuable paper for an appeal on behalf of the Chinese children for a better Chinese education.
Schools for Chinese education, managed and fully supported by the Government, have been established in Kuching and all districts for several years. Many masters without qualifications were engaged through the recommendation of some pro¬minent Chinese, and an enormous sum of money was incurred each year "for this purpose. Un¬fortunately very little progress was made during that period. In Kuching the Government Free Chinese School was abolished two years ago. A wise policy is now taken in granting gratuities to different schools under Chinese direction, and they have made good strides by this system. Should such a policy be extended to outstation schools, the children will owe their life long gratitude to the generous Government.
Yours faithfully,
A SARAWAK-BORN CHINESE.
Answers to Correspondent.
[The Editor is not responsible for anything]
We regret to announce that the Head of Our Correspondence Bureau has failed to return from his holidays. There is an enormous pile of envelopes- on his desk—but we think we know what they mostly contain—and we don’t mean Xmas Cards. We have however just received a caid from him emblazoned with the words "Peace" mid “Good¬will"— so he must be full to the brim—of plum- pudding and turkey. Really, if things go on like this, we shall have to get someone else to write our snappy pars—Ed.
MONTHLY REPORTS
SADONG.
November.
The Chief Clerk, Lau Loong Quee, returned from Kuching on the 1 th. whither he had been to obtain Medical advice.
Later in the month I received instructions to inform Lau Loong Quee that, in view of the Medi¬cal report on his health, His Highness the Rajah had decided to place him on the pension list.
I regret to report that Abang Bujang, the Native Officer at Sebangan, was taken seriously ill on the 12th. and was still laid up at the end of the month.
Owing to the mortality among the herd of buffaloes here I decided to turn them over to the Colliery, where there is more suitable pasturage. I also sold a quantity of the Government padi to the Colliery, keeping sufficient in stock for the prisoners, etc., until the harvest is due.
His Highness the Rajah was pleased to exempt ‘the Sebangan and Semrah Malays from paying royalty in future on the fire-wood they use in the manufacture of Nipah Sugar and Salt.
In the Courts a number of cases of criminal breach
of contract were dealt with, the most flagrant
instances. Wan Ahmat bin Kadir and Jenal bin Dris,
being punished with imprisonment. Tamit bin
Salleh was sentenced to imprisonment for assault
and Maharaja Lelah; Sing Hai for assaulting Chong
Sam; Ng Chok and Dulgani bin Haji Masedik for
theft of vegetables and tobacco respectively; Sleh bin
Mumin for cheating Dyaks. Kim Lai was fined for
trespass; Gangul and Tabekang Dyaks fined for
selling boats on which they had not paid royalty;
Teck Liaw fined for using a false daching and the
daching confiscated; and Tebin bin Leman fined for
failing to answer a summons which had been served
on him nine months ago.
Forest Guards Abang Daud, and Mahtar inspected
jelutong tapping and limber working at Sebangan
and Gedong, and reported several cases of royalty
evasion.
P. W. D. - A Contract was signed and work
commenced on the new Government Bungalow and
Court House at Tabekang. A Carpenter repaired
rotten parts of the flooring of the Simunjan Bungalow
and Court House, and the prison gang, averaging
32 men, war employed clearing the Kampong Sageng
road and ditches und the Government plantation.
The s. s. Che Foo, Captain Anderson, arrived from
Triso for coal on the 6th., and sailed for Kuching,
en route for Hong Kong, on the 10th
The s. s. Alice Lorraine called in on the 18th. for
coal with passenger Mr. Stewart, and the s. s. Sara-
wak and Lucile made two trips.
Seven Schooners cleared for Kuching with cargoes
of coal during the month
The trade returns are as follows: -
SADONG COLLIERY.
November.
The gross out-put of coal produced by the mines
during the month was 2,183.08 tons; 450 tons of
this were consumed by our boilers, and the balance
of 1,733.08 tons delivered to the wharf for export.
The shipments for the month were as under :—
The balance of coal in stock at the end of the
month was L674.Q6 tons.
Everything went well at the mines and various
departments. Drivages obtained in the new  mines
were good. The seam m No. 9, mine was rather
irregular, but the working faces of No. 8 and the
upper seam mines went through coal of a good average
thickness and produced well.
The railway line was extended, and the padi was
planted up during the month. A large quantity of
shale OR dumped on the railway, the swampy
ground behind the Malay Kampong, and the river-
bank at the wharf.
The s. s. Che Foo arrived here for coal on the 6th.
at 6 p.m., and caused a slight sensation by losing an
anchor and running aground some instance above
the wharf. The Che Foo refloated again on the high
tide several hours afterwards, and « reward of $35
was offered for the recovery of the anchor. 'I’he
loading of the cargo had been completed by the
evening of the 7th., but as the anchor had not been
found, the steamer was not able to leave. -A con-
spiracy for delaying the vessel until the offer of a
higher reward for finding the anchor was suspected,
and a gang from the mines in charge* of “Gindy,”
who piloted the Che Foo to Kuching on the previous
occasion, was employed in the search on the evening
of the 8lh. This party discovered the lost anchor
very early next, day, for which the Captain paid them
a reward of $50. and the steamer shortly afterwards
left for the Batang Lupar.
The District Officer very kindly spared us 1,000
pasus of padi during the month at the rate of $1.20
per pasu, which is being kept here in stock in case
of rice shortage in the bazaar during the monsoon
weather.
The rainfall for the month was 10-63 inches.
I returned from home furlough on the 10th , and
found everything in good working order.
J. W. EVANS
Manager.
SIMANGGANG
November.
The s. s. Chee Foo arrived at Triso on the 1st.,
sailing again on me 10th. with a cargo of timber
for Hongkong.
On the 4th Mr. W. E. Le Gros Clark, P. M. O.,
arrived from Kuching io examine the Hospital etc.,
returning on the 7th per s. 1. Lucile from Lingga.
During the month I visited Engkilili, taking
Court, when many cases were settled. The Dyaks
have cleared a road from Engkilili to Rating. Kaung
is someway above Lubok Amu, and the walk now
can lie done in three hours: by bout it would take
two days
On the 11th., Armistice Day, a gun was fired at
11a. m. when silence was observed for two minutes.
Penghulu Unji and P. Jabieng arrived from the
Saribas on the 14th. in connection with cases, and
one Ngelai was sentenced to four years R. 1. for’
committing a criminal assault on his adopted daugh-
ter. This man a few days later escaped from the
prison gang, and, up to date, has not been captured.
A great number of Dyaks from Lubok Antu
arrived during the month, asking to be allowed to
go to Mm I signed on 50 coolies only as requested
by the Sarawak Oilfields, Ltd.
The rest returned home, but only after a great
deal of persuasion. There being hardly any jungle
produce above Lubok Antu and no employment
for Dyaks in this District, it is hard for them to find
a means of earning money, unless employment is
found for them out-side this Division.1
Court.’—An Bah of Saratok was sentenced to
one year's R. I. for theft, this being his third
conviction. Sim Eng Lai, who had been arrested on
the s. s. Kuching, was sentenced to 6 mouths for
attempting to abscond. Ina case brought up from the
Court of Requests, Bong Sing Eng vs : Lim Ah
Quee, the appeal was upheld, defendant paying
costs. There were numerous cases Concerning
breach of agreements.
On the 28th. Mr. J. B. Archer, A. D. O, left for
Belong accompanied by Abang Dulrasid in order to
hold Court. They were still away at the end of the
month.
I received news on the 30th. from a Malay, Oneng
of Lingga, that Wan Laham. a prisoner who escap-
ed last month, has been arrested by the Dutch
Officials at Sananing.
Saribas.—On the 6th. the nacodah of '* Bintang
Beralih," a bandong owned by Chop “Peng Hak"
of Belong, reported that the handling sprung a leak
off Meranti and foundered. No lives were lost.
Kaleka. ~Umoi, a Malay, was arrested for theft
from a Dyak house in the Seblak, but he managed to
escape during the night, and is said to have gone to
Sarikei.
Ong Ah Choo with Ah See were returning from
Kabong to Robam by boat, and at Tanjong Kuba
the boat capsized. Ong Ah Choo, not being able
to swim, was unfortunately drowned. His body
was recovered four days afterwards and taken to
Roban for burial.
The Court Writer Saratok reports an epidemic of
influenza followed by dysentery, causing the death of
17 Dyaks in one house alone.
The following are the trade returns for the
Division :—
REJANG.
October.
Matu.—The Acting Resident 3rd. Division, Mr. H.
D. Aplin held Appeal Court on the 4lh., and also
enquired further into the petition against Haji Sait,
Tua Kampong of Bawang Ulu, with the result that
Haji Sait was fined $ 100, and relieved from his post
as Tua Kampong.
There were the usual number of case before the
Courts including a large proportion of land cases.
The Acting Resident and myself inspected the 
proposed new site for the station. The buildings 
have been inspected by a carpenter from Silin, who 
confirmed my opinion that they will have to lie '
replaced.
The Acting Resident and myself left for Daro early 
on the 5th. by s. l. Chamois.
The prisoners have been employed on general up-
keep of the station.
The trade returns for the month are as follows :
Daro.—I arrived at Daro towards midday on the
6th., the Acting Resident proceeding on to Sibu.
There were a large number of eases before the
Courts, including the usual large percentage of the
land cases.
I inspected several of the gardens at the back of
the bazaar, and found that they were in a filthy |
condition in spite of the warnings of the Assistant
District Officer and the District Officer.
The owners have been warned that if the gardens
are not cleaned by when I next visit the station, the
land will revert to Government, vide the Assistant
District Officer’s orders
There are several shops in the bazaar owned by
Kuching towkay* which are in a very bad state of
repair. I understand the District Officer communi-
cated with Kuching on the subject sometime last
May. Nothing had been done, so I gave the owners,
through the District Officer, Kuching, orders to either put their property in a proper stale of repair or to
demolish same within a given time.
The bungalow roof, which is of leaf attap, is in rather a leaky condition. 1 think it would be ad¬visable to replace this with belian attaps.
Mr. MacBryan called for me in the Chamois about midday on the 9th., and proceeded to Rejang
The prisoners were employed on general up-keep of the station, and whitewashing the buildings.
The trade returns for the month are as under: —
Rejang.—Mr. MacBryan and myself arrived at Rejang by s. 1. Chamois in the evening of the 9th. Mr. MacBryan left early the next morning for Sarikei.
 There has been a fair amount of work before the Courts during the month mainly consisting of cases concerning Breach of Agreement, Theft, and Fraud.
The Acting Resident, with Mr. Archer, and Captain Andreini arrived in the evening of the 14th. by a s. l. Chamois. They left again later in the evening for Kuching.
H. H. S. Zahora arrived here on the 24th in the afternoon with the Resident 4th. Division and Mrs. Douglas for Miri, the Acting Resident 3rd Division M. H D. Aplin. Messrs. Page-Turner, Lawrence, Archer, Andreini, Bruce, and Carpenter for Sibu, The Zahora cleared later in the afternoon for Miri.
The Chamois proceeded the same evening to Sibil ' with the Acting Resilient and party.
I visited Selalang on the 26th., returning here on I the 28tb.
The Resident 3rd. Division, with Mrs. Owen and I family, and Mr. Stooke arrived here by H.H.S Zahora ' midday on the 29th., and proceeded on to Sibu.
S. L. Chamois arrived with Mr. Page-Turner and Mr. Archer in the evening, leaving inter the mine day for Simanggang.
The prison gang averaging 19 has been employed on repairing, fencing, general cleaning and up-keep of the station.
The trade returns for the month are as follows :—
November.
Court.—There has been a fair amount of work
before both Courts during the month.
Awang Perbu. who was employed by the Island
Trading Co., Ltd., Selalang, as Juragan of one of
their motor launches, was sentenced to one year’s
imprisonment for theft of kerosine oil in wholesale
quantities.
There is also n case, of theft of opium, etc., from
a boat at Sari; this case still being unsettled al the
end of the month Two Lieu-chew Chinese, Tan
Ah Hong and Aug Kaw Watt of San are both on
remand in connection with the theft. Kaw Watt
has previous convictions against him for theft, both
at Matu and Kuching.
The remainder of the cases before the Court were
the usual disputes.
P. IF. D.—The prison gang, averaging 19 in
number, has been employed on general up-keep of
the Station.
It is hoped to construct a much needed boat shed
during next month, all timber and attaps now being
available. A wharf is verv much needed for the
Station. Low water makes it very difficult to get off passengers and goods on account of the mud. I think a strong wharf could be constructed at a low cost.
General. The Assistant Conservator of Forests arrived here in the evening of the 8th. instant by s. I. Chamois to await the arrival of Mrs. Stooke by p. s. Adeh from Kuching. The Adeh arrived late
in the evening next day. Mr. and Mrs. Stooke left 
by the Chamois late the same evening.
The Kuching fishermen, Chu Hai Ka and Cheng
Ah Su, both Foo Chows, arrived here from Paloh
on the 14th., having been wrecked off Paloh on the 
8th. and lost all their property. They were sent 
back to Kuching at a later date It is to be hoped 
that the Kuching fishermen will ceased coining over
during the landas, as they only get wrecked and
become a burden on Government.
The trade returns for the month are as under: -
R. D. St. J. HORTON, Officer-in-Charge.
Sibu.
November
Court.—A large number of cases were before the
Courts during the month.
A dispute arose concerning payments to be made
from the Estate of Ah Soh deceased under his
will, the son of deceased who should have made
the payments to Ong Cheo, the legatee, refusing to ,
do so and claiming that Ong Cheo’s father had
already received payment from the Estate. Judg-
ment WAS given in favour of Ong Cheo.
A number of charges of receiving bribes were
brought against P. C. Ee Teh. In no case was any
evidence adduced, and those making the charges
were fined.
Sugai, a Dyak, killed Katoi, his uncle, at Kapit.
Sugai acted in self-defence only, having been attacked
by Katoi with a parang.
Duing of Ngmah WAS killed by Legat, a Bukitan,
whom lie had attacked and wounded severely with
a parang	Duing has been subject to fits of madness,
and Legat acted purely in self-defence. There was 
no reason for the attack, which was utterly un-
provoked. Duing was well known to be dangerous. 
A Chinese thief and bad-character was sent to 
gaol for a year. He had previously been in Bintulu
gaol.
Another Chinese bad-character, who had previous-
ly been in Rejang gaol, was also sentenced by this 
Court.
P. W. D—The new market was finished and
opened; and now no pork, fish, beef or vegetables may
be sold elsewhere.
A new kitchen has been built for the unmarried
Rangers; and the old one on the bank of the river
together with the launch's store, pulled down.
The padi mill has been thoroughly cleaned and
whitewashed; and the ground in front of it, former-
ly a swamp, which has been drained, raised, and
levelled, can now be used as a drying ground for padi.
A new bridge has been built on the Kampong
PuIo road.
The Chinese, having at last demolished the Lam
Kiong school, the road from the wharf through to
the Island road has been put in hand. This has
drained and opened up a very unsanitary sport
The Mohamedan cemetery has been surveyed and
its limits properly defined, the title deed being de-
posited with the Datu Hakim.
The interior of the Fort has been thoroughly
cleaned and repainted by the crew of the launches
in their spare time.
The prison gang have been employed in general
upkeep of the Station, cleaning of grounds, and re-
gravelling roads where necessary.
The old coal shed has been demolished, and the
Coal is now stacked in the open.
The roads are all in excellent order, and well
mown.
General.—Trade has improved considerably of late,
and large quantities of canes, sago, rubber and
jelutong have been shipped. The a. s. Flevo is quite
unable to deal with the trade, and most of the pro-
duce cannot be shipped. An attempt to overload
her at Binatang on the 9th. after she had been filled
up at Sibu resulted in her return on the 12th. to
unload 400 piculs of sago, as she was unable to make
any progress owing to the heavy weather outside.
This vessel made two trips during the month to
Singapore, the 8.8. Sri Sadong two to Kuching, and
the s. s. Sarawak one to the same port. 
I visited Binatang and Sarikei on the 21st. The
former place is flourishing. A new sago factory is
nearing completion, and a sawmill and padi mill is
being erected at Kuala Beradong.
Messrs. G. B. Stooke and G. T. M. MacBryan left
for up-river on the 25th., and will probably be away
about a month.
The keeping of swine on the Island is to cease, and all swine will be removed to the mainland after Chinese New Year. At present these animals are kept in the hack of the bazaar, which does not make either for cleanliness or sanitation.
Mr. Aplin left fur Binatang and Sarikei to hold Court on the 30th
The rainfall amounted to 8 10" this being evenly distributed over the month. There has been but liuie ruin up-river, with the result that the Island has HOI been flooded. The actual rainfall amounted to probably 10", ns a big storm blew away the gauge, and the fall for that day was not recorded.
A large crocodile attacked a boatload of Dyaks at Kuala Sungei Merah, and all ten men women and children were thrown into the water. They lost all they had in the boat, and the women and children narrowly escaped drowning. Curiously enough, no one was taken by the crocodile.
Several crocodiles have been caught during the month.
A large number of cases of scabies have occurred throughout the District during the month. There are also several bad cases of yaws, which await the arrival of the new Dresser who will be able to treat these patients.
Trade returns for the month are : —
OYA
November.
Court.—No cases call for special comment this
month.
Chin Hong was sentenced to six months, and
Unang to six weeks R. I. for theft.
P. W. D.—Bad weather has interfered somewhat
with the usual upkeep of roads and Ornamental
Grounds by the prison gang. They have been em-
ployed, however, with general repairs necessitated
by frequent gales, which nearly demolished the
light-house quarters.
Several telephone posts, blown down, have been
re-erected, and the broken insulators renewed.
Penat bridge bus been overhauled, and the paths leading to it raised and widened.
Trade Returns:—
Five schooners entered and four cleared the port.
General.—One schooner, the Ghee Hong Ann, while awaiting an opportunity to enter, was caught by a very severe Westerly gale on the 9th. Dragging her anchor she was driven up the coast, and has not yet returned.
It is reported however, that she reached Labuan, without incurring serious damage.
1,0601/2  gantangs Imported Rice were sold ex- Government stock.
The Rev. Father Dunn, passed through from Mukah on the 3rd.
On the 4th. Ah Tam and others arrived from Sibu with a Cinematograph apparatus, and requested permission to visit all the Kampongs.
This was refused, but they were allowed to play in Oya and Dalat for several nights, where suitable buildings were chosen.
Thefts of small boats have been more frequent lately, and it is very difficult to trace either the thieves or the boats.
One culprit was marked down, and the boat re¬covered from Kampong Judan. The thief, however, has temporarily disappeared from his Kampong.
Forest Ranger Ahmat arrived on the 15th. from Sibu with books, etc, for the local Forest Guard. He proceeded to Mukah, and returned on the 21st.
Messrs. Lawrence, Aplin, Carpenter, Captain Andreini, Rev. Fathers. A. Mulder, Haider, Van Den Bergh, Quadekker and Brother Simon arrived from Mukah and Sibu respectively for a few days to witness a Regatta which took place at Dalat on the 16th.
Fair weather and excellent racing were enjoyed.
I visited Dalat on the 11th, for a week, and again on the 27th., being still upriver at the end of the month.
While there all Tua-Kampongs were called and invited to co-operate in the scheme for supplying models of articles, peculiar to their District, for the benefit of the forthcoming Malaya-Borneo Exhibition.
E. O. BRUCE,
Officer- in-Charge.
BINTULU .
November.
Upon my return from European furlough, I was appointed to do duty at this Station, and arrived by H. H. S. Zahora on the 1st.
On the 2nd. I took over the affairs of the District from Mr. J. C. Swayne, who left the same day by II. H. 6. Zahora for Kuching.
The m. t. Miri arrived from Miri on the 4th. with two letters to be sent to Kuching by H. H. 8. Zahora; but. as the latter had already sailed, these were sent through the mails by next opportunity.
The s. s. Gladys, returning from Miri, entered the river ou the 5th. and again on the 22ud. Un the first occasion she was unable to clear until the 11th. on account of rough weather.
Two schooners, the Kim Chin Soon and Kim Chin Swee, both owned by Chin Ann and bound from
Kuching to Mukah, arrived here on the 10th. and
were lucky to find a haven. The juragans reported
that, having anchored off Muknh, they were later
obliged to cut their cables on account of the high
seas. They have been waiting here for new anchors
to be sent from Kuching, and were still here at the
end of the month.
Mr. St. Vincent Down, who was here on business
concerning the manufacture of jelutong by a special
coagulant, left for Balingian by Isnit on the 5th.
Mr. K. Oseki, manager of of rhe Nissa Shokai
Rubber Estates at Samarahan, and a companion
arrived by p. s. Adeh on the 11th. He was inquiring
concerning the belian resources in this river, also
concerning coal They left again by next steamer.
The telephone to Tatau is very bad now, and the rentis considerably overgrown. I learn that it has been decided to abandon this old rentis, and lake a new line following the shore to the mouth of the Tatau and the river bank to the Fort, and that this has already been cleared.
I have sent the Inspector to measure this new line, as if it is adopted posts will be required also new wire. The present wire in use was the best of a rotten lot discarded from Mukah some years ago. and would not lie worth moving. The advantage of the new line will l>e that it may be more easily kept clear than the present one, which is carried through virgin jungle. The matter however will be referred to the Resident 3rd. Division.
There has been very little Court work during the month; Susek and Noh were fined $75 and $50 res¬pectively for ringing jelutong trees.
The prisoners have put in nibong gelegars in the Police Barracks, and have been employed in the Ornamental grounds.
Mails were received by H. H. s. Zahora on 1st., s. s. Gladys on 5th. and 22nd., p s. Adeh on 11th., s. I. Burong on 24th., and s. s. Alice Lorraine on 27th; and were despatched by H. H. S. Zahora on 2nd., B s. Gladys on 11th. and 24th., and s. l. Burong on 17th.
HENRY H. KORTRIGHT,
District Officer,
Baram.
November.
Eng Guan, a Chinese coolie, was imprisoned for interference with his Towkay’s wife and attempted suicide.
Taong, a Long Kiput, was fined for disobedience of his chief’s orders. His relations then brought a charge against the Chief Gumbang, but could not prove same, and it resulted in Ilun Pang being im¬prisoned and Libut, Lebat, Dapat and Oyau Malang being fined.
Gumbang then resigned, and his resignation was accepted. The Long Kiputs will in future come under the Penghulu appointed in place of Tama Saging deceasead.
Fines and fees amounted to $873.39.
I paid a visit to Long Palai from 11th. instant, to 15th. instant, and marked out a Dyak boundary at Long Temalla for the Dyaks to move to, if oil should be found at Buri in the Bakong.
The Kayans all agree to register a-new and and then only to collect nests every 3 .months. When the nests are ready for gathering they must report and a Government represents live will proceed up-river to sea same are gathered properly. This should allow this produce to increase, as at: present they collect whenever a nest is ready and never give the birds any rest. Also it should put a stop to the numerous cases of theft, which are always very hard to prove.
Dyak Penghulu Rhu left for Miri on the 3rd.
instant for medical treatment; he is suffering with
Dysentery.
I paid a visit to the Sarawak Oilfields, Ltd , at
Bakong on the 18th. inst., returning again on the
19th., inst.
Mr. Foien, the Driller, has arrived at Buri and
hopes to commence drilling soon, but at present all
the materials required have not arrived.
- Mr. Palfreman left on the 25th. inst. to inspect
the telephone track to Miri, returning again on the
29th. inst.
Tuanku Drahman, N. O., returned from leave on
the 25th. inst.
I left on the 26th. for a visit to the Tutan and Apoh,
and was still away at the end of the month.
The Resident 4th. Division and Mrs. Douglas
arrived from Miri on the 29th. inst.
The rainfall was 7 41 inches.
The prisoners were engaged in repairing Kampong
Narom Road and also in the Ornamental Grounds.
BROOKETON COLLIERY
October.
The gross out-put of coal was 1,917.5 tons ; of this 700 tons were consumed by our boiler, and the ba¬lance 1,217.5 tons sent to wharf.
Shipments to Labuan totalled 1,166 tons, and 91 tons were supplied to p. s. Adeh and local launches.
Balance of coal in stock at the end of the month was 199 tons.
Coal sales at Labuan amounted to 877 tons, 861 tons of which were taken Ly Messrs. The Straits Steamship Company's steamers.
Everything went smoothly in all departments. The new stack was brought into use on the 18th. of the month, since when a great improvement is shown in the steaming power of the boilers. Two of the Lancashire boilers now do the work of three previously, which enables us to have one constantly blown down for cleaning and repairs.
Buang Tawar.—The fall in the oil level—mentioned in my last report— was cleared, but meanwhile an¬other large fall had taken place further in the level, temporarily stopping the now of oil. We hope to have a passage through before the end of the new month.
The rainfall at Brooketon mine 1101 inches.
J. O. MADDOCKS,
Manager.
LAWAS AND TRUSAN
October.
Court. —Lamina, a Kedayan, was sentenced to imprisonment for theft of jelutong and adulterating jankar. Biliau Menudin, Tua Kampong of Awat Awat, and Jeludin were fined for smuggling. The former was dismissed, as he has for some time past hindered the customs clerk in the execution of ins duties. A charge of obtaining money under false pretences against Zakria by Guan Ek at Merapok was dismissed, as it appeared to be an ordinary trading debt.
General.—The Divisional Resident visited the sta-
tion from the 5th. to 8th., and several matters were
discussed. Mr. Cook of Merapok came lip to see him
in connection with a timber concession, and a site to
erect a saw-mill. The Resident gave him permission
to use the land formerly occupied by Mr. Brooke
Johnson’s bungalow.
By order of the Resident, Kilat a Tagal suspected
of murder was released, as there was not sufficient
evidence to convict him. Lakai Balking has gone
security that this man will not return to the ulu
without Government permission.
I accompanied the Resident on his return as far as
the kuala and then went on to Merapok with Datu
Pangeran Haji Matusin. The case of Musi’s inheri-
tance was settled. Whilst there I found that the
Chinese were in the habit of visiting the Tagal tribes
in the interior, and buying up their jungle produce.
As this tends to keep these people away from the
bazaar and civilisation, I-have prohibited all traders
from going to Tagal villages, with the exception of
Malays and Kedayans who may exchange goods or
cash for rice and padi.
I spent the night with Mr. Cook, whose saw-mill
is now in running order, and I hope will develop
into a large concern. There is no reason why it
should not do so, as there is a very good stand of
timber close at hand.
P. W. D —All the bridges in the bazaar and
kampong have been repaired or renewed, with the
exception of the long bridge over the Siloateng
stream.
Floods caused slight damage to the boats before
they could be removed.
The prisoners were employed in assisting the
Carpenter ON the bridges and various odd jobs.
I left for Kuching via Limbang in m. 1. Nancy
on the 10th. accompanied by Datu Pangeran Hj.
Matusin and Datu Pangeran Mohomat, who went to
attend the Council Negri, and did not return until
the 28th. The clerk reported that nothing of
importance had occurred during my absence. Dawat
Langub, a Murut chief of Pah Brayong who has been
detained pending payment of tax by his followers, has
been allowed to return, if he can find security, as
some of his people have at last come down.
A Chinese named Lim Ah Khay was fined and
ordered to deposit a sum in Court, for threatening
one Lim Liow with a chopper. He was arrested by
the police whilst chasing Lim Liow, and the weapon
taken from him.
P. C. Mattassan went on a round of jelutong
inspection, and reports that several Dyaks have been
tapping trees in such a manner that they will even-
tually be destroyed. It appears that the Dyaks had
permission to tap in this fashion, as they contend
that they always use this method in Sarawak Proper-
I am enquiring into this matter, and in the. mean-
time have prohibited anyone from adopting this
style of tapping, except in cases where it has already
been done.
The rainfall for the month was 19 55 inches.
The trade returns were :—