The Sarawak Gazette.
SATURDAY, DECEMBER 2. 1922
EDITOR’S NOTES.
The perusal of some of the; extracts from the “Sarawak Gazette 50 years ago" published in this edition cause one furiously to think.
The Rajah’s Arms must have been a very cheerful place to visit. The name alone conjures forth visions of jovial meetings where sherry at 10cents a glass and brandy ditto must have been consumed at a rate proportionate to their small cost.
It must be remembered, of course, that the dollar in those days was not the same face value as that of to-day but for all that, its purchasing power seems to have been 'extraordinarily great. One could
indulge in a pint of champagne of a “dry exquisite
flavour" for 60 cents whilst the thirsty could
consume a quart of the same brand for two dollars.
In these day of post-war whiskey which is
almost too weak- to come out of the bottle, it
makes us vainly regret that we were not born 50
years before.	„
The Police Court of those days must have had a
lively time. Sima appears to have been a fighter
of no mean quality. She first of all pokes her
adversary in the eye and then bites her cheek.
The peon, Nor, however, assures the Court that
both women “fell" and were “clutched" when he
parted them!!! What perfect ladies!!.
We also see that the Chinese were just as alive
to the possibilities of making a bit out of their
rice sales as they are to-day.
A letter signed “Animals' Friend" Will be found in our correspondence column.
We have already, in previous issues, touched on this subject and we heartily echo the sentiments expressed by the writer. ,**
Those who walk, ride or drive round the roads of Kuching cannot help noticing the state of some of the draught animals Big festering sores, lame all round, cracked art! broken hoofs—is there nothing to prevent the working of these animals?
We do not think the majority of drivers are intentionally cruel to their charges, in fact some of the animals are extremely well looked after and reflect this by their general slackness and condi¬tion The reason for the cruelty is, in our opinion, the callousness which most Eastern people exhibit towards animals in general. They are not- brought up with the idea that it is cowardly to be cruel to animals and they possibly do not realise that animals have any feeling at all.
The fact remains, however, that a number of beasts are used which are unfit for work and also that many drivers are in habit of punishing their animals with unnecessary violence, using their whips more as a goad than anything else.
The trouble is that most native policemen simply do not notice anything wrong with the bullocks— to them it is quite natural to see big sores under the yokes, and as for lameness the fact never enters into their mind—if they had beasts themselves they would treat them in the same way. It is not their fault, it is their nature and we cannot put all the blame on them. Would it not be possible for the Government to give two or three European Officers the power of stopping carts and taking their numbers? The Police Officers, of course,  have this power but they cannot always be on the spot. It might be argued that there is no
veterinary surgeon in Kuching who could advise the Court on the state of the animal. This is true, but the average Magistrate should be able to determine whether an animal is "obviously unfit for work or not and a few fines would, in our opinion, put a stop to these cruel practices.
Our usual story tellers have failed us this month but we endeavour to keep up the size of the Gazette.
Readers are entitled to a double number since the fortnightly publication was stopped and the price increased to 20 cents. We think, however, that readers will have no complaint on that score as inspection will prove that the Gazette is, if any¬thing, increasing in size. We fear to be charged with hastening on quantity at the expense of* quality. It has been our aim to, where possible, publish original articles inter larded with reprints of articles of interest to Sarawak, and unless local correspondents will send us copy it will not always be possible to publish such a big Gazette.
Incidentally, may we say that none of our appeals to outstationers have met with the slightest success.
There is another instalment of the religious rites and customs of the Dyaks, whilst the article on roselle fibre may interest many. Here, perhaps, is an opening for planters in Sarawak.
We warn our readers not to take some of the other articles too seriously. Dengue is well known to have a disturbing effect on the mind, whilst it is the fashion to rail at the Irish nowadays!!.
This will, perforce, be our Christmas Number and we shall not have, the opportunity again of wishing our readers a very happy Christmas. In spite of adverse circumstances most people try and keep Christmas with as much of the old custom as possible. Long may it remain so
NOTES.
ON the 20th what might have resulted in a most disastrous accident occurred in Kuching. It appears that Dr. -Reed left the Medical Department cur unattended on the’. top of tilt; Mission Hill whilst he went into Mr. Lawrence’s bungalow. For some reason or other the car started to run backwards down the hill towards the town and careering along fell into the ditch near the back entrance to the Rest House. From a cursory inspection the car seem-' to have suffered some damage: the near front wheel and wind screen were smashed to bits and the mudguards and hood partially wrecked. It is indeed lucky that no vehicle, or even pedestrian, was ascending the hill at the time as owing to the narrow road and" deep ditches a serious collision must have taken place.
ON November 21st, a Javanese coolie, named- Nasba, committed suicide in his- room on Chop Siang Hali Huai’s rubber estate. He had only been engaged on the 17th and appears to have been ill for at least, the last two flays. He had applied for work at other places before being engages on this garden. His room was locked on the inside and when called in the morning no answer was heard, and on looking through the cracks blood was seen. The Police were sent for and on their arrival, together with the M. O., the door was forced and Nasba found dead lying on his mat with a knife close by, the sheath in his hand
and a wound in his carotid artery.
THE Government Gazette announces the following appointments. Captain S. Cunynghame to be Acting Superintendent of Police, Kuching, in addition to his other duties, Mr. J. C. Swayne to be D. O. of Miri, Captain E. V. Andreini to do duty at Oya, Mr. R. D. Horton to be Officer-in-Charge of Lower Rejang, Mr. R. V. Palfreman to do duty at Mukah, Lieut. W. T. Clark, S. R. to be Acting Superintendent of Prisons in addition to his other duties and the Rev. Father A. Haidegger to be a member of the Kuching Sanitary and Municipal Advisory Board.
TRE two minutes silence on the anniversary of Armistice Day was observed as in former years.
At 11 a. in. a gun was fired from the Fort and on the lapse of two minutes the buglers of the Sarawak Rangers, who were stationed on the top of the Pavilion, sounded The Last Post.
A Service was held in the Pro-Cathedral and was well attended.
In the evening a subscription dance was given at the Sarawak Club where a most enjoyable time was spent.	—-
FROM the 22nd of November the Sarawak Steamship Company Limited started a weekly service between Singapore and Sarawak.
The steamers Kuching and Rajah of Sara¬wak will be used and will leave port every Wednesday arriving on Friday.
A record engkabang crop is expected and tire present cargo space has been found in¬sufficient.
It is many years since the weekly service stopped and it is hoped that the amount of cargo will justify the running of two steamers for some time to come.
AMONGST the passengers to-Singapore by s. s. Kuching on the 7th were Captain W. R. B. Gifford and Mr. Ardron they returned again on the 14th. ‘We understand that some of their films have been developed and are a great success. The party is now jn Kapit where it intends.to take pictures of the natives in that neighbourhood.	
WE are informed that the raffle for Mrs. Douglas’ piano was drawn on the 15th Novem-ber and was won by Mr. F. Sharpe of Miri with ticket No. 144.
Congratulations to Mr. F. Sharpe but. with All due respect, his name gives him dither a pull over the rest of us.	v
SEVERAL optimists have been noticed lately ruling out to the race-course with polo sticks and balls.
This is, we believe, the first time a polo stick has been seen in Sarawak and whether the game ever materialises or not it will only be one more freak of the mad Englishman.
MR. and Mrs. G. B. Stooke Were in Kuching for a few days during the month.
The latter, unfortunately, was obliged to put
herself under medical care and rejoined her
husband in Sadong towards the end of the
month.
WE omitted to include Miss Tait’s name
amongst arrivals in “Our Notes’’ of- our last
issue. No one welcomes Miss Tait back
again more than ourselves and we apologise for
the shortcomings of the editorial brain, which
are becoming all too apparent nowadays.
A SHOOTING case occurred on November 27th
on the sea, coast near Santubong whereby an
Arab trader, named Sheik Ahmat, sustained a
bullet wound in his head causing his death.
The perpetrators of the deed are still at
large.
THE Clergy, choir and many other worship-
pers of the S. P. G. proceeded in procession
from the Pro-Cathedral to the cemetery on All
Souls Day, where a Service was held, returning
to the Cathedral in the same order.
THE S. s. Kitching, which arrived on the
3rd, brought over Captain and Mrs. Cunyng-
hame and two of their children.
Captain Cunynghame again assumes com-
mand of the Sarawak Ringers.
FATHER L. van den Bergh left by s. s.
Kuching on the 7th en route for Europe.
The Reverend Father has been ill for some
time and we hope a long leave in Holland will
restore him to health.
OVERHEARD, not a hundred miles from
Kuching.
She—“Next Tuesday I shall celebrate the
completion of 10 years in the country;’’
He—“Yes ! you’re decayed (your decade).”
She—“How dare you !!!”
MRS. Ward and Mr. W. E. Le G. Clark were
passengers by the incoming steamer from 
Singapore on the 24th. Mrs. Ward has been 
on a visit to the F. M. S. whilst Mr. Clark 
was returning from leave spent in China.
MR. and Mrs. Collier, who have been on a 
visit to Kuching and staying at Snipe Cottage
with Mr. Ennion, left again for Singapore on 
the 29th.
MR. C. D. Adams, D. 0. of Miri, has gone
on seven months furlough and Mr. J. 0.
Maddocks has resumed charge of the Brooke-
ton Collieries.
MR. P. H. Hayward has been laid up for
some time at the Grange and will, we under-
stand, remain there for some time to come.
THE amount of dry rubber harvested at
Sungei Tengah Estate during October was!
approximately 91,000 lbs.
MR. W. F. Dick, who had been laid up, for
some time in Kuching, returned to Kabong on
the 3rd. 
Retirement of Mr. R. S. Douglas.
On the 20th of November Mr. R. S. Douglas handed over charge of the 4th Division to his successor, and on that day retired from the Sarawak Civil Service. Mr. Douglas joined the Service as a Cadet on 17th November 1896 and in April 1897 was appointed Extra Officer in Rejang district, transferring to Baram in October of that year. He was promoted Assistant Resident in June 1899, Officer-in-Charge of Baram Novem¬ber 1899. Resident 2nd Glass January 1902 and Resident of Barnin May 1904. In May 1911 Mr. Douglas was appointed Acting Resident of the 1st Division and in July promoted Resident 1st Class and a member of the Supreme Council.
From August 19U until February 1912 Mr. Douglas was Officer Administering the Government, after which he was appointed Resident of the 4th Division and to supervise the 5th Division. The latter Division was eventually-put under a separate Resident, and in November 1915 Mr. Douglas I was appointed a Member of the Committee of I Administration.
We need hardly say that Mr. Douglas' retire¬ment will be felt with regret by many, and the Government is losing a valuable servant.
Mr. Douglas spent practically the whole of his service hi the 4th Division and his knowledge of the natives and their customs was profound. He made many long journeys into the interior and some of his experiences will be found in the pages of the Sarawak Museum Journal. He saw the growth of what is now. the Sarawak Oilfields Limited from its infancy, and at all times gave his assistance in furthering their work and at the same time safeguarding the interests of the natives.
Mr. Douglas was most popular amongst the European community; he was an all round sports¬man and a staunch upholder of racing in Sarawak.
We understand that Mr. and Mrs. Douglas intend to pass through Kuching on their way home and we hope to extend to them our best wishes and a long life to them at home.
Sarawak Library.
THE following books have been added to the Library.
Biography: -
Hendrick. Burton. J. The Life and letters of Waiter H. Page /J360-G1 ( presented by Dr. Harrison W. Smith)
Donald McTavish lay dying.- He had been all
day about it, and his wife had spent 'weary, though
expectant, hours at his bedside.
When night had come, however, she felt that she
could leave the housework undone no longer. Ho she
went up to her husband and said—
“Aweel Don, I must gang along to the kitchen the
no. I’ll leave the licht by your bed. Ye’ll no be
takin’ your departure afore I come back. Bui if
ye should ye’ll no forget tae blow out the candle
afore ye dee, will ye?"
Little Arthur: “I say, father, it is true that Nature never wastes anything ?”
Father: “Yes, Arthur, quite true."
Little Arthur: “Then what’s the use of a cow having two horns when she can't even blow one ?” 
A Durned Dull Dengue Day.
Has it ever been your misfortune to be laid up.
even for only a few days, in a house in the vicinity
of that particular comer where motorists are
warned to "drive slowly ' and near where the
descendants of Robert Peels constabulary shake
the ground with their martial tread ?
As one lies dreaming in that delightful period
between sleeping and waking—dreaming perhaps
of the glorious east with its palm groves and
luscious fruits (always supposing one did not look
upon the wine when it was red the night before,
when dreams of the pink-and-purple-striped-
elephant c1imbing-onto-a-yellow -spotted-bus
type generally predominate) one is awakened by
the blare of bugles sounding the reveille (the echo
of the Fort buglers confirms one’s guess,—this may
or may not waken those for whom it is intended,
but the strains seem to herald the entry into
Kuching of an army of Chinese women trudging
along with vegetables for the early markets.
These good dames do not seem dispirited by the
dismal hour—indeed they raise their voices' to a
deafening crescendo, as with shrill prattle they
retail the local gossip and they are not ashamed
to let anybody else hear it either. Not for them
the story told in hushed accents—not a bit of it;
the delinquencies of Mrs. Ah Sam and the little
fallings from virtue of Miss Ah Fook are told to
the world in general with lungs of brass. The
cheerful chatter of these good dames dies away
and soon after the traffic of the day starts. With
a roar a Tamil-wreathed motor-lorry lurches
round the corner with a grinding of gears anti
strident blasts of the horn. The passengers are in
no way inconvenienced, however, and argue and
squabble with their customary morning-after-the-
night-before vim. The bugles, which have been
tooting most of the time, are now blowing
lustily and presently one becomes aware by the
strange noises that the Peelers have fallen in.
For the next two hours or so one is greeted with
those strange incoherent sounds with which drill
is associated all the world over. Little parties
move up and down and round and round the
parade ground in answer to the fierce staccato
snorts of the drill instructors, who seems to vie
with each other as to who can emit the biggest
roar and at the same time giving the most alarm-
ing and fearsome tone to their commands. There
is a forlorn little squad who are marched up and
down on the road outside the parade ground. I
have often tried to find out who this little band
arc: why are they not allowed inside the sacred
palings? Up and down, up and down, they go
treading in the macadam with weary steps.
One cannot help fancying that now and again
some of them cast longing eyes through the
railings on their more fortunate brethren secure
inside their palisade. I have often passed this
pathetic little company and have been tempted
to ask their taskmaster to open the gate and let
them in. but his fierce visage does not invite such
a request. Perhaps some day I shall know why
this lonely little squad are debarred from entering
with their fellows On certain days a bugle band
joins up and the whole lot, which has now
swelled to a battalion to judge by the commands,
marches oft to “green fields and pastures new"
returning later with all the pomp and pageantry
of war. The city is now aroused—Tamils, whose
talking apparatus appears to be made of rubber,
go chattering past giving free vent to their
opinions of those with whom they have fallen
out. whilst the bullock carts rumble along with
“Heath Robinson" wheels crazily squeaking and
complaining over the hard roads. Detachments
of school-children meander along with “laggard
steps," whilst an early motor cyclist eggs his
machine along by fits and starts in blissful
ignorance of the future. The motor traffic is now
starting and Malay drivers whisk past the “drive
slowly" sign with a wink as with groans and
wheezes they propel their Fords along with horn
accompaniment. The hum of the town is rapidly
increasing; a steam roller rolls up and down
opposite the house whilst more motor lorries
hurtle round the corner and pound up the hill.
A gang of grimy looking villians appear and
proceed to erect a concrete lamp standard amidst
the usual chorus of encouragement, threats and
questionable jokes.
About noon the motors begin again and Tamils
squat under every vantage of shade and noisily
masticate their lunch. The school-children,
released from their drudgery, meander back to
their homes and perspiring Europeans; who can’t
even buy a Ford, peddle homewards. One sinks
; into a coma which is rudely disturbed at 3.30 by
the bugles again warning all and sundry police-
men to robe themselves for the fray. At 4 the
performance starts again with the exception of
the forlorn little squad who have now disappeared
even from the road!!! whilst a line of Sikhs
in shirt sleeves go through, what is apparently,
aiming drill which recalls to many of us weary
days spent in the O. T. C. and other corps. As
the barks and yowls of the sergeants penetrate
our weary head the words of Gilbert’s immortal
song have a wonderful significance—
“Taking one consideration with another,
A policeman’s lot is not a happy one."
As the last echoes of this militarism die away and
the weary "bobbies" go to their well earnd rest
the motor-cycle club starts its perambulations: in
line ahead they sail majestically down the road
keeping perfect station from their flagship,, a
particularly noisome machine; one would' he,
indeed, a curmudgeon to grudge even a few
moments peace in order to deprive these joy riders
of their excitement. One hears them fade away
in the distance with the last few explosions
mingling with the odour of petrol which
unfortunately pervades the air.
A crowd of children are now rushing through
 ones garden in chase of a runaway kite, which
 shortly afterwards lodges in a rubber tree. The
 youngsters are untroubled by the phantom of
 "trespassers will be prosecuted" which all our life
 haunts even the most daring of us they take a
straight line too, such little things as flower beds
causing them to deviate not a whit from their
course. The eager gesticulating mob surround the
rubber tree whilst one of their number, divesting
himself of the major portion of his clothing, ascends
the tree. With much advice and cautions the
intrepid climber retrieves the kite and the yelling
crowd rush out again and go through the same
performance again in a few minutes; the scene
being now laid in the sacred precincts of tfie church
grounds The taxis are now whirling past cram-
med full of Chinese ladies whose faces seem to
contradict the obvious enjoyment they are deriving
from this particular occupation
The noise is now slowly numbing our senses,
the. passage of a hand cart full of steel bars which
protrude on the road either end merely causes us
to give a shudder. Night is coming on, cars whisk
their occupants back to their homes. Tamils in
various stages of exhileration zig zag homewards;
most of them are in the pugnacious mood peculiar
to that stage and their bellicose conversation is
only interrupted by the fall of the speaker who.
however, under the mysterious influence which
seems to safe guard the inebriate, invariably rolls-
into the ditch just in time to save annihilation by
the motors.
One of our neighbour's gramophones starts off
again ; it has been grinding out “ The Beggar's
Opera" at intervals since the morning whilst a
flock of geese, which somehow or other have
managed to instal themselves in a compound
nearby, quack and croak in opposition. The re-
vellers homeward bound are now in full swing.
A love sick Malay youth passes along bellowing
out his love song possibly intended for one person's
ears only, but only too apparent to all of us in
hearing. The energetic Chinese dames trot back
to their vegetable gardens extrolling, at the top
of their voices, the quality of their wares' and
decrying the stinginess of the public; scraps of
fuddled song reach our ears whilst away in the
Police barracks, or is it somewhere else?, the
native drums are banging out and accordeons
squeaking their amourous tunes A fiend with a
mouth organ passes, the gramaphone starts a new
tune and a heated argument starts in somebody's
dapor between a ‘"cook" and a “boy".
The noises are getting dimmer and far away in
the distance the bugles from the fort are sounding
“The Last Post" and so to sleep.
“0 sleep, O Gentle sleep,
"Nature's soft nurse. how have I frighted thee?”
The Kuching Sanitary AND Municipal
Advisory Board.
Report of Meeting held on Friday,
10th November.
Present :—
Mr. K II. Gillan (Chairman). Messrs.
Fenwick, Lam Chin Jee, Kon Eng Law.
Lun Chiu Ilian, Salleh Marican, Tan Sum
Gunn, and Haji Hassim
Absent:—
Captain C. P. Lowe and Dr. O. G. F. Lulin.
The retirement of members in accordance with the
provisions of the Municipal Regulations was under
consideration, when it was agreed that as all members
had served for an equal period the retirement should
be decided on the present occasion by ballot. On
this taking place the following members were
drawn
Mr. C. Fenwick. Mr. Lam Chin Jee and Mr.
Lau Chin Hinn.
A lengthy discussion took place on the proposed
application of a three standard system of sanitation
for Kuching and, on the proposal of the Chairman
seconded by Mr. Salleh Marican, it was agreed to
refer the matter back to the sub-committee for
further consideration and details. The general
principal of the system was approved, provided
compensation or alternative land were granted to
persona who might have to remove from one area to
another under the scheme and that sufficient time
be given to residents in which either to comply with
the requirements of sanitation in any area or to
remove to an area in which the standard required
was lower than that in which they had hitherto
lived.
A preacher who was conducting a mission
announced that he would speak the next night on
“Liars.” The audience were requested to rend up
in advance the seventeenth chaper of St. Mark,
Next evening, before opening, with piercing glance
he inquired how many people had read the chapter
suggested.
A score or so held up their hands. At which he
thundered:
“You’re the very persons I want to talk to—there
isn’t any seventeenth chapter of St. Mark.”
From The Sarawak Gazette 50 Years
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE.
No. 53. S'DAY. Nov*. 30th. 1672. 1'rice 5 (.’/*.
The latest telegrams received are dated
London Nov. 11th—	-
A Republican demonstration was held in
Hyde Park on Sunday Nov. 3rd, at which
thirty thousand people were present. The
object was to demand the release of Fenian
prisoners. The speakers have been summoned
for contravening the Park's Regulation Act
Grant has been re-elected President in
America. H e obtained 253,000 votes: Greeley
113.000. Republican majorities are reported
everywhere. France pays Prussia two hun-
dred millions immediately.
The following cases were tried in the Police
Court before the Hon'ble tire Resident on
Tuesday last:
Nona female ver. Sima, assault.
Mona says she told Sima not to beat a little
child in the house where she was living; she
thereupon poked her in the eyes with a stick,
she took the stick from her and hit her once.
Sima then attacked her and bit her in the
cheek. Both the women are well known bad
characters in the bazaar.
Nor, (Peon) No. 1, states that both the
women were abusing one another and then
fell, and had a regular fight, both were cl niched
when he went out and parted them.
Fined $5 each, or 14 days imprisonment.
Babu Tunjok, A pan and Seng What, Chinese
traders in the bazaar, having scrapers or
cutters tor levelling rice. Ac., m the measures
when sold ; the whole of these were found to
he curved inwards towards the measures so
that when rice or other dry goods were mea-
sured the curve cheated the purchaser of about
10 per cent
Fined $5 each party.
RAJAH’S ARMS KUCHING.
The proprietors beg to announce to the pub-
lie that they have for the present rented Capt.
Bacchus' house. South-hid villa, and are pre-
pared to receive visitors there, until the com-
pletion of the house which they are building.
Liquors supplied at the following rates:
The proprietors beg to intimate for the bene-
fit of outstation officers that they have a choice
selection of stores to dispose of suitable for
Christmas time as ham, bacon, and tongues,
sauces, sweets, Ac. These always will be sold
at a reduction on bazaar prices.
The proprietors would advise gentlemen to
avail of this opportunity of replenishing their
storerooms, as it is not the intention in future
of the proprietors to keep on hand a larger
quantity of stores than is necessary for their
own requirements.
Applications sent to the Manager of the
Rajah's Arms will be attended to. and the
stores if possible forwarded in time for Christmas.
Printed and Published at the Government
Press, Kuching, November 30th 1872,
Religions Rites and Customs of the
Iban or Dyaks of Sarawak.
(Continued.)
The Soul.
Until' the ceremony of Panah (to be explained
later on) is performed in the house of the deceased,
the soul is retarded in its journey by various
obstacles. The souls of women are tantalised
with a piece of gold by Raja Landak. The gold
is placed within reach and when grasped i t
receeds, again it is offered and again snatched
away. The souls of men are tantalised by Dara
Rabat Gruda. A piece of Nibong palm is dangled
before their eyes : when chopped at with the
sword it swings out of reach, and again and again
returns to invite another stroke.
For even* Iban a house is prepared in the
nether world. One advantage in the other world
is that although the farms are very small, punggai
lidi penyintang, (no broader than a weaver’s
shuttle), they supply an abundance of food.
There are many places in the nether world.
Those who die well i.e. in their beds go to Mandai'
Those who are killed in battle go to a country of
perpetual warfare against Sereginti there is no
rest from alarms, sharpening of weapons anil strife.
In the nether world the soul dies seven tiipes
after which it returns to earth in the form of dew
which settles in the maturing grain of the rice
fields and becomes part of its substance. Those
in this world who are nourished by dew once the
soul of the unfortunate, are also unfortunate, whilst
those who arc nourished with dew which was at
one time the soul of a brave or rich man will like-
wise be brave, rich and fortunate in this world.
Suicides who have taken Tuba poison have like-
wise a region to themselves: their habitation is
thickly covered with the binds of the Tuba climber;
they live a lonely mournful life sitting with hair
dishevelled biting their fingernails.
Those who are drowned by the capsizing of
boats dwell by the side of a waterfall. Those
who fall from trees, are prepetually constructing
a climbing rope. And these who die of an epide-
mic are always houseless, being sheltered only by
a leaf hut any are outcasts in the land of the dead.
Iban customs at Childbirth,
As soon as a child is born, whether male or
female, a fowl is waved over it and afterwards
killed. The reason of this is that the fowl's life
being offered for that of the child, the child may be
long lived. In the case of the son of a chief of whom
it has been foretold in a dream that the infant
would succeed the father, an offering called Piring
is made to the spirits that the guardian spirit of the
child may be always near, that richness and the
heads of its enemies may be easily obtained
After seven days the infant is taken to the river
for its bath. She who carries the child holds in
her hand a lighted torch of Selukai bark the smoke
of which renders evil spirits harmless. Again a
fowl is waved over the infants head and sacrificed
to preserve it from sickness
A sweatmeat called Rendai and an axehead is
offered to the spirit of the path, and to the river
spirit an armlet, necklace and spearhead all which
are thrown into the water that the child may
grow up lucky and clever.
only when the child has readied its 7th or 8th
year can the Piring Tigu (threefold offering) be
offered for him.
Marriage Customs.
When the young man has made the acquaintance
of a girl and proposed to marry her. he makes her
a present of beads or other ornaments. The mothers
of the young couple then discuss the match and if
it is agreed upon the ring, as it is called, is sent to
the future bride. This ring differs according to
the circumstances of the parties. If poor it consists
of a piece of brass wire, those better off give a
dollar, the richest class a gong
Should the party who carry the ring to the bride's
house hear a bird of evil omen on the way they
are obliged to return: hence two or three gongs
are beaten the whole way to prevent the cries of
birds being heard On the arrival of the party
fresh mats are spread out for a feast and the
people of the village gather together to witness
the delivery of the ring. The Belangkan (penalty
or fine) is then arranged in case of infidelity. -and
it is settled whether the young couple are to join
the household of the bride or bridegroom. In the
latter case the bride is carried off by the bearers of
the ring to the house of the bridegroom. In the
former the bridegroom will be brought by his
friends to the home of the bride. Arrived there he
must remain within doors for three days lest if he
। go abroad he may hear the cry of a bird of evil
omen. If during that time the cry of a bird or
animal of bad omen is heard by the inmates from
the house, the match is broken off and the young
man returns to his people. After an interval of a
month or two weeks the match may be taken up
। again. Should one of the contracting parties
have a bad dream during this time the marriage
is also broken off. In that case if the parties are
still anxious for the marriage, a pig is killed the
liver of which is examined; if the omen is good
the marriage may be proceeded with. if bad it must
be relinquished. Should no evil omen occur to
disturb the match the ceremony of Mla Pinang
(spliting the areca nut) is gone through. For this
the following things are prepared. A plate with
areca nuts, a plate of rice, other vessels containing
tobacco, brass armlets. And a chopper or sword.
These articles are divided among the assembled
company. A fowl is, waved over the heads of all
present and native drink served round.
The ceremoiw or Mia Pinang is not always
 performed.
 When a fortnight or a month has elapsed the
young couple are said to have Masok adat, i. e.
 the contract is complete, and should either party
 recced after this a fine of 15 dollars is imposed.
 Should the husband separate from his wife after
 a child is born, if the child dies he is fined 30
 dollars, should the wife separate she is fined 15
dollars. But if the child lives the unfaithful
 husband is fined 33 dollars for the sustenance of
 the Child, and 15 dollars for deserting his wife.
Should there be a reason for such desertion no
 fine is imposed. Adultery is such a reason. Should
the unfaithful one pay 6, to or more dollars to the
injured party he or she is bound to receive him or
her back. This, however, is not always exacted
and often the co-respondent only is fined.
 This is a general view of the Iban marriage
customs: but the laws are not stringent and the
Iban is very loose in carrying the laws out.
After a lapse of 6 or 7 years after marriage the
ceremony of Enselan Tikai is sometimes performed
in the case of well to do people. A feast is made
to which all the relations of husband and wife
are invited. The parents of the husband bring
with them Articles of value which are divided
among all. such as gongs, plates, cups, wearing
apparel, axeheads, swords, iron. blankets. women's
dress, pigs and fowls After the division of these
articles drink is produced by both parties and
interchanged and there is a rivalry as to which
party shall drink up its portion first.
The- fines mentioned here are those imposed in the 3rd
Division of Sarawak. The fines in the 2nd Division are
different. - [Ed S. G.]
Custom relating to deaths and burials.
Among the Iban there are many kinds of sick-
ness, and these sicknesses are attributed by them
to two main causes.
One of these is called Pansa Utai or the passing
of an evil spirit; the other Empa Ubat or effect of
sorcery.
All sudden attacks of sickness and those of an
ordinary kind such as fever, dysentery, etc. are
attributed to the evil spirit The sick man is said
to have been struck by a spirit sword, or to have
been wounded by an arrow from the spirit's blow- 
pipe. On the other hand those sicknesses which 
come on slowly and are of less known character. 
such as blood spitting, bleeding from the gums,
unusual swellings arc attributed to the malice of
someone who has brought the evil in the sick
man by means of sorcery.
When an Iban dies the body is dressed in the 
best clothes and ornaments of the deceased and 
laid out in the Ruai. i. c. public room of the long
house. The friends bestow rings for buying tire
in the nether world (see Preface). Other articles
of value are placed beside the corpse, more or less
according to the property of the deceased all which 
are afterwards buried with him. These articles 
are called Baia and will represent his property in 
the nether world.
A dirge is sung by the women seated round the
corpse throughout the night.
After death the men of the village immediately
set about making a coffin. Taking a fowl with
them they go in search of suitable tree. Having
found one. the fowl is waved about it and sacrificed.
The tree is then felled. Once felled it must be 
used, although it prove unsuitable: to change 
would be very unlucky.
The burial takes place in the early hours of the
morning, at the first sign of twilight. As soon as
the corpse is carried away from the house ashes 
are strewn over the footprints of the bearers. These 
ashes are supposed to prevent the soul of the
deceased from finding its way back again to the 
house, should it desire to return and haunt the 
living.
Arrived at the burial ground, the spot for the
grave is chosen, but before digging, a fowl is 
waved over the place, and sacrificed. No matter
what obstacle may present itself to the diggers a
change of place cannot be made after the sacrifice
of the fowl.
The grave finished, the coffin is lowered into its
place: should a leaf have fallen into the grave, 
they are careful to remove it for were it allowed
to remain, the deceased would return and haunt 
the living.
The burial over, food is cooked and eaten at 
some distance from the burial place. Nothing 
used either in making of the grave or cooking of 
the meal may be taken back to the house, all must
be left for the use of the dead
On returning to the house should the cry of a 
bird of evil omen be heard on the way, the party
cannot enter the house until a fowl has been waved
over them, the fowl is then sacrificed and every
inmate of the house is smeared with its blood
thus the lives of the inmates are made safe from
the evil omen which is diverted to the sacrificed 
fowl.
On the evening of the day of burial arrange- 
merits are made for the mourning. The relations
of the deceased take samples of the various articles
of. which it is forbidden to wear in the house 
during 'the period of mourning and bind them 
up in a piece of cloth: these are put away and not 
brought out again until the mourning period is
over.
When night has closed in the Manang (Medicine .
Alan) performs a ceremony called Beserara (the 
separation). A pole is erected in front of the room 
of the deceased's family, the medicine basket with 
its charms is placed at the foot and the whole is
covered in with a blanket: this is called the Pagar
Api tire fence). Round this erection the Manang
walks singing his incantation in a low voice:
presently he stoops and extracts from the mat at
the foot of the Pagar Api what he calls the Ava
or shade of the deceased; a piece of lathwork
from the flooring is also taken up and the wooden
trough in which gum damar is burnt to give light
in the evening; these articles are all thrown under
the house '1 his ceremony is supposed to separate
the soul of the deceased from those of the living,
it is thus made to forget the living and is rendered
powerless to return and take away with it the
souls of its living friends and relations.
The following day the neighbours bring food
to the chief mourners who have as yet eaten
nothing, for custom forbids the lighting of a fire
on the family hearth for two or three days after a
death has occurred From this time until the
period of mourning is over at each meal a portion
of food is thrown away as a share for the deceased.
On the first, second, third or fourth day after a
death the ceremony Muai Pana i casting food to
the dead) takes place. Various kinds of eatables
such as fowl, rice, vegetables, eggs, sugar-cane and
native drink are thrown from the verandah of the
house.
During the five or six months of the mourning
period, singing, shouting and the beating of drums
or gongs are not, allowed in the house. The
ordinary personal ornaments must not be worn
even by visitors. Nor can an old jar (a valuable
article among the Iban) be brought into the house.
The women put away their brass waist circlets
and wear instead circlets of black dyed cane called
Tina.
The ceremony of Rerak Ulit (closing the mourn-
ing period) is performed by one who has recently
returned from a long journey, either an inmate of
the village or of some neighbouring village. This
man enters the room where the deceased died,
opens the window and shouts the war cry; he
then severs with his sword one of the back Tina
or waist circlets of every woman in the house.
The man is paid with a piece of brass wire and a
fathom of calico and the day is closed with a
feast.
Should death occur from accident, the body
cannot be brought into the house until a pig has
been killed and each inmate of the house has been
smeared with the blood, otherwise a curse would
fall upon the house and it would be unsafe to live
in
The victims of an epidemic such as cholera and
small pox or leprosy are hurried in silence to the
grave, they are neither wept over nor mourned for,
lest the disease should spread
In the case of those who die faraway from their
own country, as soon as the news arrives at the
village. the clothes, ornaments and other articles
of the deceased are heaped together in the Ruai
(common room' and covered over with a blanket
so as to represent a corpse laid out. This is called
the Rapah and every thing is now carried out as
in the case of an ordinary death. In the early
morning the Rap'-h is taken to the burial ground
and the articles of dress are hung about among
the trees
The last ceremony in connection with the dead
is called the Sungkup-Feast. The Sungkup
is a miniature house or monument placed over
the grave. One or two years after death this
monument of rudely carved ironwood is constructed
and taken to the grave and is the occasion of a
solemn feast
The evening before the feast the women come
out of their inner rooms carrying eatables for the
dead; their beads and other personal ornaments
they carry in their hands, these they hang up near
the Penyurai (front part of the common room);
here they sit and wail as though over a dead body.
The men a little distance off beat drums, this is to
informs the inhabitants of the nether work! that
they are invited to the feast. Next morning a$
the guests from the neighbouring villages begin
to arrive, the carved monuments are erected in
the verandah under a leaf covering. The women
are busy weaving miniature hats, mats, baskets to
place in the monument for the USE of the dead.
The men amuse themselves with cockfighting in
which sport the souls of the departed are supposed
to take part. Throughout the night the women
again chant a long dirge the burden of which is to
tell how the dead journeyed up from their neither
world to the feast, how they strove with their still
living brothers in the cockfight but were ignomi-
niously beaten and how they consoled themselves
on returning by taking away with them the mini-
ature articles and eatables prepared for them by
the women in the Sungkup. In the earlv morning
after the feast the monuments are taken to the
burial ground and placed on the graves.
On that day the widow or widower of the
departed is declared free to marry again. Up to
that time a widow cannot wear any ornaments;
her dress must be plain and well worn, she is not
allowed to pull out her eyelashes and eyebrows
nor to use soap for washing Now a new dress of
many colours is put on her and various ornaments
are handed to her making the cessation of widow-
hood. A widower likewise before the Sungkup
feast of his deceased wife may us? no personal 
ornaments and must wear only old and plain 
clothes, nor is he allowed to cut his hair or shave.
Those not observing these customs are liable to be 
fined by the relations of the deceased. In the case
of a widow or widower marrying again before
the Sungkup feast has taken place, a fine of 50 or
Go dollars is imposed.
(To be continued.)
Appointment of New Residents.
In the latest Sarawak Government Gazette will
be found the appointment of Mr. H. L. Owen to be
Resident, 4th Division, whilst two months ago Mr.
F. A. W. Page-Turner was appointed Resident of
the 2nd Division.
Mr. Page-Turner’s appointment is the first of its
kind as, to the best of our knowledge, there has
been no Divisional Resident there since His High-
ness the late Rajah who always retained that title. 
Mr. Page-Turner has had considerable experience
of Dyaks both in the 2nd and 3rd Divisions and
has, as a matter of fact, served in practically every
Government station in the Country.
With the inauguration of new departments the
duties of Divisional Residents will become more
onerous and Mr. Page-Turner's wide experience
will stand him in good stead in controlling such
an old and historic Division.
Mr. H. L. Owen has taken over the 4th Division
from Mr. R.S. Douglas, whose retirement is notified
in the Government Gazette.
Mr. Owen is a well known authority on - Dyaks
and their customs and was for many years in the
2nd Division. He has also had experience of
administrating Melanau districts and was for a
time Acting Resident 3rd Division.
Mr. Owen goes to the 4th Division lor the first 1
time.
She WAS engaging a new parlourmaid. “Of course,
madam," said the girl, “you won't expect me to
sweep?”
“Oh. no, indeed."
“Nor answer the doorbell ’’
“Certainly not.”
“Nor	”
“No, no,” the mistress interrupted graciously. “I
expect none of these things from my parlourmaid.
I only want her to look at, and for that you are too
plain."
Sarawak Regatta.
Monday, 1st January 1923,
Programme.
1st Race, 8 a. m.—BANDONG RACE.—For bona
fide fishing boats to be propelled by oars, steersman
only to use paddle Crews limited to 5 men. 1st
prize $7.50. 2nd prize $5. From Pengkalan
Dayang Atim to Stone Wharf. Entries to lie
notified by December 29th.
2nd Race, 8.30 a. tn.—B. C. L. COP. -Value
$100.—For any description of boat with crew*
limited to 15 men. 1st prize to crew $15. 2nd prize
to crew $7.50. Entrance fee $1.50. From Tanjong
Patingan to Stone Wharf.
3rd Race, 9 a. tn. —SHIP'S GIGS.—1st prize $G.
2nd prize $3. From Pengkalan Dayang Atim to
Stone Wharf.	
4th Race, 9.15 a. m.—FOK BOATS WITH CHEWS
LIMITED TO EIGHT MEN.—1st prize $10. 2nd prize
$5. From Pengkalan Dayang Atun to Stone Wharf.
Race, 9.30 a. m.—FISHERMEN'S RACE.—
(Dayong Ikan).— 1st prize $2. 2nd prize $1. 3rd
prize 50 cents. Men to wear 11 distinctive mark on
the left arm. These badges will he provided and
prize will only be given to men who have them at
the Winning Post. From the Judges box round
H. H. s. Y. Zahora’s mooring buoy, turning to the
right and return.
Race. 10 a. m —ARMY, CONSTABULARY AND
STEAMERS.—Crews limited to 15 men. Mixed crews
from steamers will not be allowed, each steamer
must run a boat containing members of its crew
who were signed on before January 1st, 1922. 1st
prize $i5. 2nd prize $7.50.' From Tanjong
Patingan to Stone Wharf.
7th Race, 10.30 a. m.—Office RACE.—For
employees in Government or Mercantile Offices
who shall be employed on inside or office work only.
A list of crews to be sent in before December 20th,
which will be subject pi the approval of, the Umpire
Limited to crews of 8 paddlers in each boat."
1st prize $16. 2nd prize $8. From Pengkalan
Dayang Alun to Stone Wharf.
8th Race, 11 a. m.—His HIGHNESS 'THE
RAJAH’S CUP. Value $200 -2nd prize $05.
1st prize to crew $80. 2nd prize to crew $10.
3rd prize to crew $20. Entrance fee $2 Open to
any make of boat unlimited as to size or number of
crew. From Batu Bliong to Stone Wharf
INTERVAL.
Racing will be resumed at 1.45 p.m.
9th Race, 1.45 p.m.—HER HIGHNESS THE
RANEE'S CUP.—Value $75.—Open to all bouts.
Crews limited to 30 paddlers. One flag-man and one
bailer may be carried in addition but these must not
use paddles. Entrance fee $2. 1st prize to crew $30.
2nd prize to crew $15. From Batu Bliong to Stone
Wharf.
10th Race, 2.16 p. m.—Value $50.—For any description of boat with crews limited to 15 men. Winner of 2nd race to pull with 12 and 2nd boat in 2nd Race to pull with 13 paddles only. 1st prize to crew $15. 2nd prize to crew $7.50. Entrance fee $1.50. From Godown Ban Seng to Stone Wharf.
11th Race, 2.45 p.m.—THE CHAMPION CUP.— Value $125.—Presented by the New Sarawak Farms ; Syndicate. 2nd prize $40. 1st prize to crew $80. ,2nd prize to crew $40. 3rd prize to crew $20. Open to any make of boat unlimited ns to size or number of crew. Entrance fee $2. From Batu Bliong to Stone Wharf.
 12th Race, 3.16p.m,—Farms DIRECTORS’ CUP. — Value $75.—Presented by the Directors of the New Farms Syndicate. Open to all boats. Crews limited to 30 paddlers One flag-man and one bailer may be carried in addition but these mist not use paddles. Winner of the 9th Race with 28 paddles only. Entrance fee $2. 1st.prize to crew $30. 2nd prize to crew $15. From Batu Bliong to Stone Wharf.
13th Race, 3.45 p. m.—CONSOLATION CUP.— Value $100.—$50 presented by the Sarawak Steamship Co., Ltd., with $50 added. Open to all boats winch have not won a race at this meeting. Crews unlimited. Entrance fee $1. From Batu Bliong to Stone Wharf
14th Race, 4.15 p. m —A CONSOLATION CUP.— Value $45. — Presented by the Sarawak Chinese Banking Co., Ltd., and the Kwong Lee Bank. Open to all boats which have not won a race at this meeting. Crews limited to 30 paddlers. Entrance fee $1. From Batu Bliong to Stone Wharf.
Note.—All entries except where otherwise stated must be received by the Hon. Secretary not later than Saturday, 23rd December, 1922. Entries received after that date if accepted will be subject to double the entry fees specified above.
. K. H. GILLAN.
Hon. Secretary.
“In Dublin's Fair City, etc.”
We have been shown a letter received by a resident in Kuching from a friend whose business necessitated a visit to Ireland. We have printed some portions of it ns they give a very good first hand account of the real conditions in “ Dear Dirty Old Dublin!!.”
One cannot help noticing that most Irishmen are comic even in their sterner moods. It is question¬able whether their reputed sense of humour is intentional or not—anyway their antics must at times exhilarate even the stolid Englishman.
Our correspondent says'
5th September, 1922.
I am back in England after a rather
curious time in Ireland. Belfast was quite quiet— armoured cars and armed policemen—but nothing else—at any rale while we were there !
Dublin was a little different.
Arrived there in the evening and eventually had to put up at one of the lesser hotels—the Allen in Harcourt St.; settled there at about 10.30 on Sunday ' night, they were sniping then and I thought I'd ! better get inside somewhere.
A most extraordinary race—business is carried on just as usual, all the shops open, ladies going about  in the usual way, in fact things appear almost normal—but they are not.
I was wakened every night by firing.
Friday and Saturday night were the worst. I was i held up twice by Free State Troops on my way home on Friday night—one chap suddenly poked a revolver into my side and told me to hold my hands up—I obliged him and he searched me. I hadn’t gone very far when a lorry load of them overlook me—some fathead threw a bomb not far away—the lorry pulled up with a jerk and the chaps jumped out and assumed fierce attitudes and held me up again—I wasn't sorry to get in, especially as they
; were firing all over the place—and the worst of it is i they are such damned bad shots and usually hit someone they don't intend to!
 On Saturday night the irregulars attacked Harcourt St. station which was just at the back of the hotel: that lasted from about 1 a. m. close ' on 3 a. m.—an awful dm all the time—machine guns, bombs and rifles and revolvers—it was impossible to sleep.
 I can’t tell you everything in a letter but it has a very comical side.
I The F. S. T. are a poor lot I think: they dash I about the streets in cars and lorries, rifles at the ready—and nobody takes the least notice of them. Occasionally they raid some place, but most of their time is spent in rushing round in cars—I am speak¬ing of the troops in Dublin of course.
I saw one lot pull up so suddenly that they all went flying; two or three rifles went off but nobody was hurt—not their fault though. I was close by and roared with laughter; the officer chap glared at me when he had picked himself up but I simply couldn’t help it and lots of other people laughed too.
The small urchins throw mud at them whenever they get the chance and then cut it for all they are worth.
All this sounds like exaggeration, but it’s not. , And lots of things happen that don’t get into the papers—cold blooded murders and even—oh well, never mind—I don’t go over there again- -its not the risk of being intentionally shot, but unintentionally: the sniping goes on and if you should happen to be in the way—well you’re for it.
The police have orders not to interfere with any-thing—they are there to direct the traffic!!! Oh things are in a pretty state I can tell you and yet business goes on just as usual—it is really a most extraordinary thing	”.
Poor Old Ireland—no one will ever take her seriously, even the little boys throw mud at the F. S. T. heroes—too bad!!.
Sarawak Regatta.
A meeting in connection with the Sarawak Regatta was held in the Residents Office on the 21st, those present were the Resident, C. Fenwick, H. A. Adams, J. B. Archer, K. H. Gillan, P. H. Hayward, R. E. Le Sueur, the Datu Temonggong, Datu Hakim, Datu Muda, Inche Mohd. Zin, Abang Suleiman, Hj. Assim and Inche Bakar.
The Resident, in the chair, put the usual motion that a regatta be held and it was unanimously decided to proceed on the same lines as last year.
The Resident proposed Mr. P. H. Hayward as Hon. Treasurer, seconded by Mr. Fenwick and carried unanimously. The Resident then proposed Mr. K. H. Gillan as Hon. Secretary, seconded by Mr. Archer and also carried unanimously. Discussion then took place and the Hon. Secretary was instructed to draw up a programme and a list of officials.
No further business transpired.
[The Editor is not responsible for the opinions of
Correspondents.]
Serious’ Bridge.
KUCHING,
1st November, 1922.
The Editor,
Sarawak Gazette.
SIR,
No doubt many were interested to read, in your 
recent issue, the details of a hand played at the New 
Club. I have been fond of bridge for a number of 
years and realise the benefit to be derived from a
little added variety or possible modification, lie- 
markable hands are always interesting, the cited one 
especially so. I note you do not state at what hour
the hand was played!
A slight analysis of the hands is illuminating.
We realise at once that each band holds 13 cards 
We find that of Clubs there are 13 and all tally! Of
Spades there are 14, with 9 small ones; of Hearts
some 12, with but 7 small ones, and of Diamonds,
while the number of cards is still confined to 13, it
is interesting to note 2 Kings and 2 10’s! Verily an
interesting hand. It is gratifying to note that Delta
bid—it is presumed the hand was played out—and
made five hearts.
I hesitate to take this hand seriously and have no
doubt that many readers might be able to suggest
"if this could have been stopped or not!" The
“Disposals Board" might help— before and after.
Perhaps it was that the comp was a little Hurried
in his excitement!
I am.
Your etc,
CUM GRANO SALIS.
CUM GRANO SALIS.—We printed details of the
bands as received—and, you will remember, invited
our correspondents to say if “this could have been
stopped or not.” Personally, we have heard of men
being shot for far less than this; 5 aces is bad enough
but 5 Kings too!!! a joke’s a, joke!— Ed. S. G.'
Cruelty to Animals
November 30th, 1922.
The Editor,
Sarawak Gazette.
SIR,
Can nothing be done to prevent cruelty to I
animals in Kuching*?
As a lover of dumb beasts I have been very dis-
tressed on many occasions to see bollocks worked in
an Unfit state—many with sores under their yokes,
and others ill-treated and lame.
Surely there ought to lie some help for those
creatures who cannot speak for themselves.
Yours faithfully,
ANIMALS’ FRIEND.
ANIMALS’ FRIEND. — Our remarks on this subject
will be found in another column. Ed. S. G.
Review .
BRITISH NORTH BORNEO. An account of its
History, Resources and Native Tribes by Owen
Rutter. (Published by Constable and Co., Ltd.
Price 21s. net.)
It is surprising how very little is known to those
in Sarawak of our sister state of British North
Borneo
For many years relations were not always
friendly anil, however unjust the allegations may
have been, to many B. N. B. was associated with
certain unpleasant rumours and tales of oppression.
Perhaps a perusal of Major Owen Rutter's book
will banish a lot of these ideas from our heads and
at the same time prove most interesting reading.
The book is written in excellent style and is a
plain and comprehensive account of the growth of
B. N. B. from its start up to the present day.
There is a chapter on punitive expeditions, the
difficulties of which will recall memories of similar
expeditions to some of those in this Service.
The writer makes a special note of his
appreciation of the work of District Officers, past
and present, and their, sometimes, unique
experiences are told with sympathy and a sense of
humour; indeed throughout the whole book there
is a delightful vein of humour which makes even
the most serious chapters easy reading.
The early history of the country is described
very fully and shows with what difficulties the
pioneers had to contend.
There was the usual opposition to wear down
and, as in the experience of Sarawak, many untrue
and wicked stories were circulated to the
detriment of the State. Time, however, has proved
that truth will prevail and honest endeavours
bring forth their fruits. The prosperity of B. X. B.
of to-day is mainly owing to the perseverance
and pluck of the early settlers and Major Owen
Rutter’s book gives the reader in a very attractive
form, the story of this work and what it has
achieved. We might mention that there are
many excellent illustrations, and the book .will
form a very necessary addition to one’s library
of this part of the East.
The Pepper Disease.
Mr. A. Sharples, the Government Mycologist F. M. S. S. S. who, it will be remembered, was in Sarawak some time ago examining the supposed diseases on pepper has sent in a preliminary report on bis investigations.
In the report Mr. Sharples say"	 	
Cause. The initiation of the disease is due to a minute Algae-Cephaleuros mycoidea (Karsten), even the most minute black spot showing the typical upright orange tufts, i. e. sporangiophores, which bear a whorl of spores at the apex. The later stages of the disease may show other destructive agencies at work but the above mentioned organism must be regarded as of primary importance.
Records of C. Mycoidea on other hosts.—This algae has long been known to cause a serious disease on Tea known as “Red Rust”. In many respects its attack on Pepper Vines is analogous to that on Tea.
Clove trees are also seriously attacked; the organism is known on rubber but does no damage und is a negligible factor in the economy of rubber plantations.
Possibilities of control of Black Fruit disease of
Pepper in Sarawak. For every sound reason, to
BE detailed in my final report, place this disease of
pepper in the list of PREVENTIBLE diseases. In my
opinion the disease should not prove a limiting
factor in the pepper industry from any point of view, I
if precautionary measures are undertaken.
Full recommendations must be left for my final
report owing to the limited time at my disposal, but 
two lines may be indicated:—
Suitable spraying methods.
General Agricultural Organisation.
A third line and probably the best might be found
in a combination of (a) and (b).
With special regard to (a) I intend to re-visit Bau
on the 28/9/22 to conduct a few small preliminary
spraying trials. 
At present, 1 view the spraying propositions with
some reluctance but it just possible that spraying
alone will prove of considerable value. Should this
be the case, the question of control should be accele-
rated .
In any case general agriculture organisation will
have to be undertaken if the Pepper cultivation in
Sarawak is to be placed firmly on its feet again.
The details in this connection are outside a preliminary
note of this nature, and will be dealth with fully in
the final report
• To conclude I wish to emphasize the opinion
stated above i. e. that there appears no reason why
the Black Fruit disease should be considered a vital
factor in the future policy of Pepper plantations in
Sarawak.
Precautions ate necessary, but once a routine is
established the "Black Fruit" disease should
cease to become troublesome except in cases of
neglect	"
This optimistic report will come as welcome
news to many; it is pointed out that the disease can
be eradicated fairly easily and at, apparently, small
trouble —of course the Government still awaits the
final report. but we hear that this is likely to cor-
roborate the preliminary one and doubtless the
Government will soon be taking steps to contend
with this blight which has caused so much loss and
injury to pepper planters throughout the State.
The Duke and Duchess of Dashshire were always
very original, mid at one of their grandest parties
nobody was surprised, in the concert that came after
dinner, to find a performing flea turn inserted
between an aria by Verdi and a classical dance.
The man with the performing fleas said he would
begin with an exhibition by James, his champion
jumper. He took James out of a pill-box and said :
•‘Jump, James I"
James jumped- -a tremendous leap. It landed
him on the duchess's broad white bosom
The man, of course, was very sorry, most apolo-
getic. He recovered James Then he said once
more:
“Jump, James I”
But James didn’t move.
"James, jump, I tell you !"
James still remained motionless.
The man was mystified. He frowned, shook his
head and muttered to himself. Finally, he took out
a magnifying glass and studied James closely
through it. Then he made the duchess a stiff bow
and said:
“Pardon me, your Grace, but this is not James."
A man culled at a village post-office for a registered
letter that lie knew would be awaiting him. The
letter was there, but the clerk demurred at handing
it over, as he had no means of identifying the caller.
“The caller took a photograph of himself from
his pocket, remarking, “I think that ought to satisfy
you as to who I am?"
The clerk looked long and earnestly at the portrait
and then said, "Yes, that’s you right enough. Here’s
your letter."
Roselle Fibre.

Hibiscus Sabdariffa Var: Altissima.
[By G. E, ’Henning, Manager, Sweet
Kamiri Estate, Sungei Siput]
The factors of primary importance in the cultiva-
tion of roselle are those of climate and soil. It is
urged that no success with this crop can be obtained
in really dry weather, although on the other hand,
excessive rain is liable to do injury by heating down
the plants in their young stage. Planting should be
carried out if possible at the commencement of the
rainy season.
Soil. It has not yet been determined what parti-
cular type of soil will yield the highest returns of
fibre but roselle is known to thrive on loam soils
which are capable of retaining a good supply of
moisture, and on any other good friable soil.
Laterite soils are, however, unsuitable ; as is also a
light soil deficient in humus. Steep hills should be
avoided as Roselle has a small tap root; consequently
heavy rains lire liable to uproot the plants; iii
addition to this. The crop is more likely to be
damaged by wind storms. Well drained flat land,
and gentle undulating ground, are suitable.
Planting. The area to be planted, which must be
thoroughly clean and free from weeds, should be
changkolled, or forked, to a depth of about 4-6
inches, and after being exposed for a few days to
the action of the atmosphere, any surface lumps of
soil should be broken up so as to form a fairly even
seed-bed. When the climatic conditions are favour-
1 able, the seed is drilled in rows about 3 inches apart
and the soil lightly raked over; the rate of sowing
being about 25 lbs. of seed per acre. By planting
close, one avoids side branches which break the
continuity of the fibre, and thus one obtains
better yields per acre,—as there is considerable
waste in cultivating for branch fibre. A safe estimate
on this system of planting is half a ton of combed
fibre, per acre. On Sweet Kamiri Estate up to
1,400 lbs. of fibre per acre from one harvest has been
obtained. The cost of upkeep after planting is
practically nil as weeding is discontinued after sow-
ing, any weeds that do appear during the early stages
of growth being soon shaded out It will be seen
from this that it is very necessary to have the land
free from weeds prior to sowing On Sweet Kamiri
Estate two consecutive crops have been obtained
over 12 acres without material decline in yield.
Stripping and Retting. The best time for cut-
ting is just after the plant has flowered i e. at about
three months from planting. When the time comes
for harvesting all fibre should be stripped from the
wood in the field before retting, as this is more
economical; saving big area of tank space: and
being less material to handle.
An effective method of stripping is to have about
six pegs of hard wood fitted tightly into a good beam,
say three feet long on uprights of about 4 feet in or-
der to allow it to be fixed firmly in the ground.
The method of stripping the fibre is to give the butt
end of the stalk three or four sharp taps until the
fibre at the butt-end is freed from the stick,—the ends
being gathered in the hands ; placing the fibre round
the peg and pulling, when the whole of the fibre will
strip from the stick. It is important not to harvest
more fibre than can be stripped on the day of ent-
ting, otherwise the material becomes dry and it is
then extremely difficult to separate the fibre from
the stick. It would appear that the best time for
harvesting is after ram, us the fibre comes away
more easily from the stick than it does during a dry
period. The retting tanks should be near a stream
to facilitate the washing of the fibre after renting.
Retting takes from eight to ten days. The material
should be inspected on the eighth day and re-
moved from the tank if sufficient retted, but if not.
left for another day or so until the process is com¬plete. The cultivator is warned of the danger of over retting which causes the fibre to be weak and brittle. A recent report by a London broker on one sample of fibre submitted indicates this danger. The broker in question stated	‘‘but part rather
weak caused probably by being over retted." The fibre while in the tank is kept submerged in the water; this is easily done by placing heavy jungle timber over the fibre. The fibre after being removed from the tank, is thoroughly washed in running water, if possible, and care taken to see that all foreign matter is removed during the process of washing. The next operation is sundrying, after which the fibre is combed and baled, when it is ready for shipment. It is not essential to comb the material but it is to be recommended as a very much higher price is obtained.
Costs. The following costs are basedon Roselle being grown as a catch crop with a yield of half a ton per acre, per crop.
Tillage to a depth of six inches, harrowing, sowing and other charges in bringing the crop into bearing
Above figures are the actual costs on Sweet Kamiri
Estates, but do not include the charges for erecting
tanks or the collection of seed, as this is infinitesi-
mal.
The freight on 1 ton of fibre from Sungei Siput to
London is as follows :—
Making an all-in cost c. i. f. London of $162.20 or $81.10 per acre. The above figures presume effective baling at 50 cubic feet per ton, which is the allowance given by shipping Companies. The ac¬quisition of a baler is therefore essential for economical marketing.
The reports received from London on sample of fibre submitted are distinctly encouraging. The following abstracts from reports may be cited as typical:—
London September 29, 21. “Material is of a jute nature but stronger. We value Samples as follows:—	,
A ‘Sample uncombed value about £‘20 per ton B ‘Sample combed about £‘30
Waste from ‘B’ value about £*15
The value of this fibre on the 8th February was about £28 per ton as against the value of jute at £*24 or so per ton, and you will remember that the Sample you supplied was not of first quality."
8.6.22. “The sample is of excellent colour, good length	 it (roselle) is always in demand
and present value is about £‘35 per ton. It should be shipped in press packed bales about 400 lbs. gunnied and roped."
The amount of combings is very small, not ex-
ceeding 12—3 per cent of the total crop. Preliminary
advice from London of the first ton shipment (Sent
on June 4th) states that the firm price would be
about £35 per ton.
The profit therefore amounts to $133 per ton or
about 75 per cent.
In further explanation of market price, it should
be pointed out that the price of jute has varied in
the last year from £24-£38 per ton, the price having
shewn a steady rise during the year under review.
Our readers may be interested, after reading the
above article, to see the following report which was
made by Mr. M. J. Kennaway, after a visit to Sweet
Kamiri Estate in August:—
For the purpose of gaining knowledge on the
growing, harvesting and manufacture of Roselle
Fibre (Hibicus Sabdariffa Var Altissima) I visited
on August 9 Sweet Kamiri Estate, Sungei Siput
odrned by Mr. Chung Tai Ping and under the
management of Mr. Henning who kindly shewed me
round and gave me considerable information.
The conclusion arrived at before the end of my
visit was, briefly, that Roselle offers very consider-
able attraction to those taking up its cultivation.
In order successfully to produce this fibre the
following essential points must I think be borne in
mind:—
Seed.—The present price of this obtained
from the Agricultural Dept, is $3 (three dollars) per
(an acre requires 25 lbs.) One cannot obtain
seed from plants grown for fibre owing (a) to the
close planting required, (b) to the age at which the
Roselle requires to be cut.
This question of seed will be I consider one of the
causes that may prevent Roselle fibre being planted
up on large scale for some time. Otherwise estates
with suitable land could plant their young clearings
fairly rapidly. If therefore a demand is created the
price of seeds is likely to remain for some time high
and to plant on any big scale it will be infinitely
cheaper to grow ones own supplies which will take
approx. 3 to 4 months to obtain.
Suitable land.—The following appears to
constitute suitable land for Roselle. A lay of land
even or gently undulating in the proximity of a
river or stream where retting pits can be made and
where the fibre can afterwards be washed in the
river. Without water close at hand the cost of
transport of the fibre for retting many be consider-
ably added to, at the same time I see no reason why
hilly land contoured with terraces from the start to
preserve all top soil should not with suitable cultiva-
tion grown Roselle equally as well though of course
the initial cost of preparing for cultivation would be
heavier and transport of the fibres to water an in-
creased item of expense.
Method of planting. Having prepared the
land by a light forking 6-8 inches in depth the seed
is sown in lines approx 6 inches apart. Care being
taken to avoid sowing before a dry spell of weather.
No further labour of any description is required un-
til 3 months later when the Roselle should be ready
for harvesting. From what I saw myself the plants
will then have grown to a height of 10 to 12 feet.
Possibly with a deeper digging in the first instance
a still greater height might be obtained.
The object of such close planting is to prevent
lateral branching which gives a stouter length fibre
and is more difficult to handle after wards. Apparently
very little is taken out of the soil as a second crop
in the same year off the same area has given on
Sweet Kamiri estate returns as good as from the
first.
Harvesting.—At the end of 3 months or
thereabouts coolies are put on to cut down the
Roselle and another gang is occupied in stripping off •
the bark. This is a very Simple process but it is im-
portant to have the stripping done on the same day
as the cutting- as the presence of the sap makes the 
task a considerably easier one. The stripped bark 
is then tied up into bundles and deposited in retting
pits.
(6) Retting.—Retting pits vary in size .accord-
ing to the ci op and should not be in running water the
object being to rot all green and soft growth away
from the actual fibre. Great care should be taken
to insure that pits are not. liable to run dry in non ,
rainy season, otherwise a whole crop may be ruined. 
At the end of approx 8 days the bundles are lifted 
out and washed in running waler being then con-
veyed to the store where the bark is hung up to dry.
A rough combing is then given and the fibre is ready
fertile market, and valuations mi samples prepared
as above and already sent to London have been 
placed from £24 to £35 a ton
Packing or Baling and shipping Freight.—This
question is at present being carefully gone into
Ilie first consignment to London having been pressed 
into Mom) cases which of course is recognised ns 
being an Un-economical method of packing. The 
question of special sea freights on Roselle libre is
also being taken up with the shipping firms.
Yield per acre.— Mr. Henning informs me that to
date he has on an average secured approx half a ton 
of dried fibre per sowing, the returns from the 2nd
crop being equal to the first. It would therefore be
reasonable to presume that other conditions being .
equal, one could estimate yield of one ton per acre per
annum.
F. O. B. Costs—Planted as a catch crop in young rubbier and On the assumption that one has first grown ones own seed the following are approx costs to date given me. by Mr. Henning on Sweet Kamiri Estate
Profit per acre per annum.—Taking one of the I lowest market valuations recently obtained of £26-0-0 per ton (or say 10 cents per lb.) and deducting 5.25 cents per lb. it leaves one with margin of profit of 4.75 cents per lb. or say $100.40 per acre per annum, 
In the above calculations while taking a low market price I have not included two possible sources of revenue from by products.
Combings which would appear to have a value of their own as a substitute for cotton waste which al present is retailed in this country at about 20 cents per lb.
The remaining sticks after stripping has been done are burned, but appear to me might make a valuable pulp for paper as the wood is a very soft one.
The F. O. B. costs given are those obtained with Chinese labour worked largely on the contract system and with Tamils these costs could probably be reduced.
Manufacture of rope.—During my -visit I was shewn this being made by hand and very' superior, rope of various sizes being mode with Chinese labour. 
General.—The conclusion arrived at as u result of this visit was as follows: That in Roselle we are probably on the threshold of a new agricultural industry for Malaya, now only awaiting development, which has vast possibilities and may yet become one of the main industries of the country.
I am of coarse fully aware that only a few tons
have-been shipped to London, but reports Pliaves
seen on samples sent and The advices tendered as to
the future market possibilities, may be described as
must encouraging.
Before closing I should like to add that if present
anticipation is realised credit must be given to Mr.
Mathieu of the Agricultural Dept, whom I believe
not only introduced Roselle into this country but
also strongly advocated planters to take it up.
Unfortunately only a very small amount of seed
was at that lime available for distribution with the
result, but a few estates attempted to grow it and
still fewer persevered with it, nevertheless I have
had personal assurances from several estates known
to the Agricultural Dept, to be experimenting that
they are all satisfied with their results to date and
have now every intention of growing Roselle on a
larger scale.
These assurances, nil received since 1 formed my
own opinion of the future possibilities of Roselle,
appear amply to verify what I believe to be the great
prospects for growers of Roselle in Malaya.
M. J. KENNAWAY.
Escot Estate, T. Malm.	(S. B.)
Swatow Relief Fund.
The following subscriptions are acknowledged
with thanks:—
SADONG.
September.
General.—Early in the month a letter was received
from His Highness the Rajah in which His Highness
approved of various changes among the Native
administrative Staff of the district. Included in
these were the retirements of Abang Bujang, Native
Officer, Sebangan, and Abang Haji Usop, Tua
Kampong Tabekang. Abang Bujang's son. Abang
Abdul Halik, was elected at Sebangan as a Tua
Kampong, and Abang Samsudin, Tua Kampong
Gedong, has been appointed Probationary Native
Officer Tabekang. Both appointments have received
the sanction of the Resident. Abang Samsudin will
proceed to Tabekang as soon as arrangements can be
made for his accommodation there.
On Sunday the 3rd September, the Police reported
that a woman had’ wounded her husband with a
parang. On investigating the matter, it was
discovered that the woman really meant to strike
a stray cat which had annoyed her, but the husband
accidentally got in the way. As the injured man
himself supported this account, no further action
was taken beyond calling for medical assistance.
The s. s. Sri Sadong arrived on the 6th, and
returned again to Kuching the next day. Miss
Sebborn of the S. P. G. arrived in her to pay a short
visit to the Station. On the 7th the -s. s. Alice
Lorraine passed through on her way from Sibu,
with Bishop Bickley and family and Mr. Street on
board.
The same evening Ah Song reported that One of
bis coolies had without warning left Sadong for
Sungei Bulu with some Dyaks, and he suspected
him of theft. The man was chased, and caught, but
as nothing incriminating was found he was allowed
to go on his way.
The s. s. Alice, Lorraine arrived again from
 Kuching on the 10th and left again on the 11th
 taking Mr. Street and Mr. Carroll back with her.
Miss Sebborn returned to Kuching on the 16th in
s. s. Sri Sadong.
The Conservator of Forests, Mr. J. P. Mead,
passed through on his way to Sibu in s. s. Alice
Lorraine on the 22nd.
The 26th, being His Highness the Rajah’s
birthday, the Government Offices were closed for the
day. A large tuba fishing was held at Muara.
Sampang in the Simunjan river, nearly 500 boats
bring present. Fish were plentiful.
From the 22nd to the 26th high tides flooded the
ornamental grounds.
Courts.—The only case of importance which came
up during the month was one in which Ho Seng,
a mandor at the Colliery, was charged with breach
of trust, found guilty, and sentenced to nine months
 hard labour in Kuching gaol. He was found to
have been systematically converting to his own use
 money which was the property of the coolies. Kongsi,
 and which should have been either expended on food,
 or it-turned to the coolies.
P W. I).— During the month a carpenter and
some prisoners overhauled the majority of the
bridges in the kampong. Minor repairs were
carried out in the Court House and Win less Station.
A shortage of convict labour rendered it necessary
to engage two mowers from the kampong. Owing
to the high rise and fall of the tides, the ditches in the
kampongs had worn to such a depth in some places
that the road was in danger of being undercut and
washed away by the current. A redistribution of
the drainage has been effected with a view to
relieving the pressure at such spots.
Early in the month a small blacksmith’s forge
was put up in the boat house and it has already
proved useful for executing running repairs to s. I.
Vava and for mending scythes changkols, parang, etc.
Forest Department.—During the in o n t h M r .
Carroll, Extra Assistant Conservator of Forests,
completed the demarcating of a proposed Forest
Reserve between Gunong Ngili and the Sadong
River, He also demarcated a small plot of camphor
wood on Gunong Ngili, and checked the Forest
accounts.
Forester Abang Daud visited Sebangan and other
villages down river. At Jai Laut he detected a
Dyak cutting and selling mangrove firewood without
a license. This man was convicted at Sadong and
fined one dollar.
Rainfall 11'24 inches.
G. BERESFORD STOOKE,
Officer-in-Charge.
SADONG COLLIERY.
OCTOBER.
The gross out-put of coal produced by the mines during the month was 1,529 tons; 372 tons of this was consumed by our boilers, and the balance of 1,157 tons delivered to the wharf for export.
The balance of coal in stock at the end of the month was 2,916.07 tons.
The. out-put was below the average for the previous months on account of the. poor yield of the No. 8 Drift pillars, and the barren area worked at No. 9 Mine.
There was better progress than usual made at the Adit of the new mines, as the work became easier with the gradual disappearance of the Conglom¬erates.
There were two train accidents on the railway about half-way between the Collieries and the wharf, this being due to the worn out state of the hue at these points where the rails in each case buckled up under the passing train.
The wharf was subjected to a deal of damage during the new moon tides on the down river side, which partially collapsed on the night of the 21st. The riverbank at the upper wing also sank to a depth of live feet.
Two old Malay houses and one of the old shops were demolished during the mouth.
1 was away in Kuching for medical advice from the 12th to the 18ch of the mouth.
The rainfall for the mouth was 16’86 inches.
J. W. EVANS,
.	Manager.
SIMANGGANG.
September.
On the 1st I left Kuching, accompanied by Mr. E. 0. Bruce, who has been appointed to do duty in this Division. Simanggang was reached at 2 p. m. next day.
The s. s. Alice Lorraine called in on the 3rd towing a tongkang loaded with rails and tip trucks for the Public Works Dept., Simanggang. The tongkang is still at Lingga in charge of three coolies waiting for a launch to tow her back to Kuching.
I visited Engkilili on the 7th and found the con¬tractor had got on well with erection of the Court House. Next morning I held Court and in the afternoon returned to Simanggang
On the 15th, accompanied by Mr. W. F. Dick, I left for the Kalaka. Kabong was reached next morning.
Roban was visited on the 18th, and the addition to the old Court House and Officers Quarters is a marked improvement. There were very few cases before the Court, Dyaks being busy planting padi. I returned to Kabong on 19th, which place was reached at 7.30 p. m.
On the 21st I left for Nyabor and reached there at 4 p. in Finding we should most probably run short of fuel we went on to Schilling and there spent the night. Next morning we took on board 10 cases of kerosine oil and left for Nyabor village which was reached at 3 p. m. The Tuah Kampong, by name Bujang, reported that this is the first time Nyabor had been visited by a Government Officer
since the time of the lute Mr. S Chapman, over 40 years ago. The Malays and Dyaks are prosperous ; plenty of good farming land is available and also excellent laud for planting up sago. We returned to Kabong on the 24th.
I left Kabong on 25th, leaving Mr. W. F. Dick in charge. He will visit Rohan, Saratok, . PUSH and Debak when necessary. Simanggang was reached at 9 p. m.
On the 30th I received news that Mr. W. F. Dick bad left for Kuching by boat suffering from fever.
Public Horka.—The carpenters finished the clerks' quarters, squared timber of Forest Checking Station and did various repairs to other buildings.
The prison gang, averaging 53, was employed on the upkeep of roads.
Abang Haji Buassan, accompanied by Penghulu Lambai of Undup, left for Lubok Antu on 17th visiting all houses as far as Jingiu. Whilst in the S. Delok a message was sent to Abang Haji Buassan that Jantieng of Itan’s house, S. Meniang, had returned from the Empran N. I. having killed  Ungkut of Undom’s house Sarian Bulu. Jantieng was arrested by Ibam, and the head of Ungkut was buried with the consent of his relations. Jantieng's explanation for murdering Ungkut is that he had courted two Dyak girls, but they would have nothing: to do with him. which gave him great shame. Jantieng is now in Simanggang jail, pending further enquiries from the Netherland Indies Officials.
Tuanku Ali inspected, and held half yearly examination of, all the Malay Schools in this Division.
Sipudin, F. G., visited all villages ns far as Lubok Ante collecting loyalty and informed natives and Chinese of various orders dealing with the Forestry , Department.
The various Courts were kept fairly busy, there being a number of land disputes. Kho Chai Chong was imprisoned for borrowing money from Dyaks contrary to orders. Kon Sip was fined $100 for falsification of books and $100 for breach of agree¬ment.
The 26th being the anniversary of the birthday of His Highness the Rajah, the Court was closed and flag-staff dressed.
F. A. W. PAGE-TURNER, Resident 2nd Division.
LOWER REJANG.
September.
REJANG.
Court.—There has been the usual amount of work before both Courts, no cases call for mention.
P. IF. D. —The prison gang, averaging 25, Inis been engaged on the general upkeep of the Station.
General.—1 returned from Main by the s. I. Mermaid arriving here at 1 a.m. on the 27th.
S. L. Mermaid arrived from Sibu in the afternoon of the 22nd and left early the next morning for Daro towing a tongkang joined with umber for the new Police Barracks and Gaul, "he returned again on the 25th and loaded up bako piles and nibong lantai,leaving at midnight for SIBU.
I left for Selalang by the Septimus in the after¬noon of the 23rd returning again OM the 26th having attended to and settled several small matters there.
The 26th, being His Highness the Rajah's birth¬day, the Court and Offices were closed, and the day observed as a general holiday.
Mr. Avery of the British Malaysian Manfg. Co.
Goebilt arrived by the Company's launch in the even-
ing the 27th, and left, again for Sadong on the
29th.
The Conservator of Forests, Mr. Mead, and the
Acting Assistant Conservator of Forests 3rd Division,
Mr. Miller-Hallett, arrived by s. 1. Chamois in the
morning of the 28th, Mi. Mead leaving by the
-Chamois for Kuching and Mr. Hallett by boat for
Sibu, later the same day. There was a very heavy
storm the same evening, during which an old woman
at Jerijeh is reported to have been killed by light-
ning whilst walking across the house to the dapor.
The end portion of the house was completely
demolished by the lightning. During the same storm
the stocks, on which the B. M. M. Co.’s lighter was
being built, gave way and the lighter fell to the
ground ; luckily no damage being done.
Mr. Avery of the British Malaysian Manfg. Co.
Goebilt arrived by the Company's launch in the even-
ing the 27th, and left, again for Sadong on the
29th.
The Conservator of Forests, Mr. Mead, and the
Acting Assistant Conservator of Forests 3rd Division,
Mr. Miller-Hallett, arrived by s. 1. Chamois in the
morning of the 28th, Mi. Mead leaving by the
-Chamois for Kuching and Mr. Hallett by boat for
Sibu, later the same day. There was a very heavy
storm the same evening, during which an old woman
at Jerijeh is reported to have been killed by light-
ning whilst walking across the house to the dapor.
The end portion of the house was completely
demolished by the lightning. During the same storm
the stocks, on which the B. M. M. Co.’s lighter was
being built, gave way and the lighter fell to the
ground ; luckily no damage being done.
MATU.
Court.—There was very little work before the
Court.
General.—I arrived here, accompanied by the
Auditor and Mr. Jacques, by a. l. Chamois midday
on the 1st having called in at Daro for the Court
Writer.
On the 4th in the morning, the Chamois left
with the Auditor for Oya and Mr. Jacques for Sibu,
the audit having been completed.
I lek for Rejang, via Daro, by the Mermaid at
midday on the 6th.
The Court Writer informs me that the Tua
Kampong of Tanjong reports the loss of schooner
Bunga Mas off Tanjong Sirik in a very heavy storm
on the night of the 28th. The vessel was bound
for Kuching from Oya, with a cargo of raw sago,
and carrying one passenger. The passenger is
missing, but the whole of the crew managed to get
ashore. The kampong people searched the whole
of the next day for the missing person, but with no
result. The schooner and cargo are a total loss.
There bus been an epidemic of chicken pox in the
kampong of Bawang, 261 cases are reported, 5 of
which have proved fatal.
P. W. D.—The prison gang, averaging 13, has
been employed on levelling up the new site for the
station and on general upkeep of the present station.
DARO.
P. W. D.—The prisoners, averaging 3, have been
employed generally on the station.
General.—In the early morning of the 1st I called in
with the Auditor, shortly after leaving for Mate
having picked up the Court Writer with the
Station Accounts for Audit.
I called in again on the 6th; having inspected the 
buildings which have been re-roofed and left the 
same day for Rejang.
R.D. ST. J. HORTON,
Officer-in-Charge.
SIBU
September.
Court.—Hii Chioog Chong was sentenced to four years for assault on and attempted rape of a Chinese woman. Two Chinese bad characters were sentenced to twelve months each for a violent assault on a Chinese sawyer in the jungle at Binatang. Ah Yong sentenced to two months for theft. Two prisoners were sentenced to additional terms for offences against the gaol regulations. The com¬plicated accounts of Jee Thai and Kim Chai, which were the cause of a claim in the Court of Requests and a subsequent appeal in the Resident's Court, took up a considerable part of the Court’s time. Other minor cases were numerous.
Public Works.—The prison gang levelled and prepared the site for the Doctor's bungalow and laid the rails for running the materials from the foreshore to the site. The Tamils were also employed in levelling and the upkeep of roads. The new Court House was painted by contract and was used for the first time on the 28th. The new offices in the Fort were nearing completion at the end of the month and the painters had commenced work on them. The Treasury Offices me now used entirely by the Treasury, Post, Shipping and Customs, the Land Office having been moved to new quarters in the Fort. Contracts were signed for the Court House and Quarters al Sankei on which work will commence next month.
Capt. A. S. Lowe came up from Kuching to arrange sites for the pumping station, water towers, etc., for the new water supply which has received His High¬ness' sanction mid work will commence on the arrival of the completed plans from Kuching. The intake from the river will be at a point well above the Bazaar where the water is not liable to any con¬tamination. Work on the new Rest House is pro¬gressing.
General.—H. H. Y. Zahora returned to Kuching on the 1st instant. S. S. Lorraine arrived from Kuching via Lingga on the 4lh with Dr. E. Marjoribanks who has been appointed Medical Officer to this Station. Mr. Street was' also a passenger by her The steamer left for Kuching on the 6th with Bishop ami Mrs. Bickley, Master F. Bickley, Miss Felton and Mr. Street. The s s. Sarawak arrived from Kuching in the 4th and left for Oya and Dal at next day. She returned from Oya to Sibu on the 15th and after taking in cargo here left for Kuching on the 17th The s. s. Flevo sailed for Singapore on the 14th and the s. s. Han Siong Hee on the 18th. S. S. A lire Lorraine brought a cargo of 113 tons qoal in on the 23rd. Passenger, Mr. ,1. P. Mead. The s. s. Sarawak .an ived the same day with Capt. Lowe <>f tne P. W. D
I was away at Mukah, Oya nml Dalat from the 6th to the 15th. As Mr. Lawrence was reported ill ut Mukab, Dr Marjoribanks went round in the Chamois on the 19th. He returned on the 22nd bringing Mr. and Mrs. Lawrqnce and child back with him. They remained here till the 30th returning to Mukah in the s i. Pren. Mr. Aplin was away in the Kanowit from the 20th to the 29th.
Mr. Calvert, Auditor, having completed the audit at Mukah and Oya proceeded to Rejang on the 25th where he caught the p s. Adeh by which vessel he proceeded to Bintulu. The p. s. Adeh arrived from the North on the 19th with the m. i. Daniil for the Forest Department and 15 head of buffaloes. , Mr. and Mis. Lawrence and child were passengers by her for Kuching. The Chinese prisoner employed at the Dispensary managed to relieve the Dre.-ser of a sum of $29 and make good his escape, and he had not been recaptured up to the end of the mouth.
The 26th, being the anniversary of His Highness the Rajah's birthday, the Court and Offices were closed for the day.
The Dyaks burnt off their clearings during the 1st
Half of the month and for several days the air was
so full of smoke and ashes that it was not possible to see the sun. A terrific wind storm swept over the Station on the night of the 27th from the N.W. Considering the force of the wind but little damage, resulted Chinese and natives have all been busy in their farms during the month. The fruit crop is a heavv one. Not for many years have fruit trees been seen bearing so heavily. Before the crop has ripened the trees are all in full blossom again and the second crop promises to be very much heavier than the present one. From every part of the District come reports of the promised heavy crop of engkabang which will ripen in about three months time. Even the smallest trees are in bearing, a thing which has never occurred before. When the crop ripens the quantity will lie so enormous that it will be impossible to collect it and hundreds of tons will lie rotting in the jungle. As this vegetable tallow is so valuable it is a pity arrangements cannot be made for its systematic collection, but I fear that such an arrangement is out of the question as collisions between the collectors of different laces would be inevitable and lead to certain trouble in the jungle. The last crop was collected in 1919 when export duty to the amount of $51,000 was paid in this river alone.
The rainfall for the month amounted to 1023 inches.
October.
Court.—Yek Siong Tak charged Taq Khin Tai with the abduction of his wife and two children whom he took to Saratok. Ah Kee and Ng Choi were charged with being accessories. Ng Choi absconded and the case had to be adjourned from enquiries to be made at Saratok. Three Foochows were heavily fined for keeping an opium and gambling den in the Colony. The place was raided by the Police and a very large quantity of opium confiscated. Previous attempts to catch them were failures. Seventeen of the Sibu Chinese were fined for keeping swine in the Bazaar centraly to regula¬tions. No swine were allowed to be kept on the Island after the Chinese New Year but the order has been ignored. Banyan, a Kanowit Dyak, was sentenced to eight years imprisonment fin the rape of a child of six years of age whom be seriously injured. The affair wits an unusually brutal one. Hj. Ahmat of Matti was sentenced to twelve months imprisonment for cutting and wounding his wife. She was seriously injured, her head having been laid open in several places with an axe. The man was very ill with malaria at the time, and had been for mouths past, and the illness appeared to have affected him mentally. Incidentally she was his 13th wife which fact may have had something to do with it. Bong Kam a thief was sent to gaol for six months, his second offence. A Dyak of Manggi’s house, Igan, named Inbit came down from the upper part of the bouse into Bubong’s room in the early hours of the morning and, failing to reply to a query from Bubong, was promptly speared through the body death being instantaneous. Bubong was fined and ordered to pay pati nyawa.
A Chinese thief named Chai Hok Soong stole a clock and gong from the Methodist Mission at Sungei Merah and wits sent to gaol for six months. A Chinese named Mee Sang and a Melano named Adin were sent to gaol for robbery. These two men stole property fi om a Dyak house in the delta some months ago but there was lack of evidence at the time and they were not convicted. This time they did exactly the same thing upriver and were caught by the Dyaks. Mee Sang has a very bad record.
Public Works.—Painters completed work on the new offices and commenced work .on the interior of No. 3 bungalow which was in a very bad state. The pillars of the Court House were plastered and white¬washed by prison labour. The Tamil gang com-
pleted raising and levelling the ground between the
new; Court House and the Club and the weeding,
of, _the kampong and Lanang roads. The prison,
gang were preparing the site of the new bungalow.
for the Doctor the, foundations of which, are now
finished. They also carried the' belian attaps for
the Best House, work on which building is pro-
gressing satisfactorily. The constant Hooding at
high tide twice a day from the 18th to the end of the-
mouth together with the inclement weather con-
siderably interfered with all outdoor work.
Telephonic communication with Dalat, Oya and
Mukah has been constantly interrupted by the
breaking of the line No fewer than 4 breaks were
located and 100 yards of wire across S. Retus had
been stolen. This is the second time this has-
occurred at the same place. The line requires a
thorough overhaul, but this has been postponed
since it seemed probable that wireless telephones
would shortly be installed. However, nothing more
has been heard of these recently though I under-
stand they are being the subjects of experiments in
Kuching, and it is hoped they will finally be installed.
The contract for the New Court House and
Quarters at Sarikei was signed and the site prepared
for the building.
General.— The a. s. Ban Siong Bee and Flew kept
up communications with Singapore as usual during
the month.
Mr. MacBryan visited Binatang and Sankei re-
turning via the Sarikei and Julau to Kanowit.
The s. R Sarawak made two trips from Kuching,
on each occasion going on to Dalat for a cargo of
sugo and returning via Sibu where she loads deck
cargo for Kuching. She arrived again towards the-
end of the month for a cargo of rubber for Kuching.
Passenger Mr. St. V. B. Down.
Dr. Marjoribanks visited Kapjt, Song and Kanowit
where he dealt with numerous cases and the
Treasure, Mr. Jacques, also visited these Stations in
connection with the accounts.
The s. s. Alice. Lorraine came from Kuching via
Sadong with a cargo of coal on the 7th, Passenger
Mr. R. V. Palfreman, who had been appointed to do
duty here. The new squad of Rangers arrived by
her and were sent on up to Kapit where they were
to be stationed and the steamer took the old squad
back to Kuching on the 11th, sailing via Sadong.
The Chinese celebrated the anniversary of the
birthday of the Chinese Republic on the 10th.
The District Officer of Mukah reported an out-
break of small-pox at that Station and as the
Divisional Medical Officer was away at Bintulu,
having proceeded thither by the s. s. Alice Lorraine
on the 17th from Rejang, the matter was reported to
the P. M. O. Kuching. The disease appears to have
been a mild form as no deaths resulted and up to
the end of the month S cases only were reported,
several of which bad recovered. Dr. Marjoribanks-
was still away at Oya and Mukah at the end of the
month.
Mr. MacBryan left for Kapit on the 19th.
The river came down in flood on the 18th and at
high tide the island was regularly inundated for ten
days from that date but, since the majority of the
roads have been raised, the floods did not interfere
much with locomotion.	'
The price of rubber began to rise during the
month and .continued to do so until .$42 a pikul
was being paid, and consequently a very much better
feeling prevailed amongst both planters and traders
generally.
The certainty of a record crop of engkabang ripen-
ing early next year has resulted in large sums of
money being advanced against the coining crop, and
traders are fearing, a shortage of tonnage for the
export of the crop, while there are likely to be
difficulties such as lack of labour for shipping and
shortage of wharf accommodation at Sibu. Itishoped
that these difficulties may be. overcome if the matter
is taken in hand in time and the necessary arrange-
ments made.
The Sibu—Kuching and Sarikei-Kuching  
have been tampered with en route anil registered
mid other letters ' opened but only one "registered
letter WAS missing. Enquiries made point to Re-
jang as being the place at which the mails were
opened.
The weather has been stormy and unsettled. The
rainfall amounted to 918 inches, and though there
was not ii deal of rain locally the heavy storms broke
upriver bringing the river down in flood.
DONALD A. OWEN,
Resident 3rd Division.
OYA.
August.
His Highness the Tuan Muda's birthday, on the
8th, was observed as a public holiday.
On the 1st I went with Mr. A. E. Lawrence to
Mukah in the m. 1. Leonora and returned the next
day ; 1 spent a further night at Mukah on the 17th.
The Very Revd. Mons. Dunn stopped here a short
time on his way to Dalat. Miss 8 way ne arrived
here on a visit by s. s. Alice Lorraine at the beginning
of the mouth.
Dalat was reached by boat on the 9th and 21st.
Several cases of theft and boundary disputes were
settled. Agok, an old offender, was sentenced to
six months imprisonment for theft of sago logs.
The prisoners were engaged in raising the height
of the main path from the bazaar to the down river
kampong. Pagang, a prisoner, suffering from beri-
beri was taken to Oya where his treatment could be
better supervised, and at the end of the month
showed great improvement. On the 25th I visited
Medong and purchased six belian posts; these were
formerly part of a half inhabited long house. In
•spite of the age of the belian. which must be at least
seventy years, it is sound. These houses, the floors 
of which are over thirty feet from the ground, with
the exception of two now partially used, have been
abandoned by the present generation, who no longer
suffer from the inconveniences of their predecessors
and prefer to live in single houses just above high
water level. The posts will be used for widening
the Penat bridge.
At Oya the Court of Bequests alone was occupied.
The prison gang was employed on the roads and
grounds near the station ; two men were employed
on the light-house keeper's quarters.
A supply of timber to be used in rebuilding the
coast bridges, which is being worked by Dyaks. will
not be available for two months on account of low
water.
The following figures relate to the trade of this
district.
The amount of raw sago exported was 330 koyan.
September.
I regret to report the death of Pangeran Kalimah 
the sitter of Pangeran Mohamat, Native Officer 
she was well known in the district.
News was received early m the month of the 
wreck of the schooner Bunga Mas off Tanjong Sirek 
on the 27th of September. Her cargo of 29 koyans 
of sago and 6,000 belian ataps was a total loss and 
Jubar, a passenger, was drowned.
I visited Dalat cm the 4th by motor launch Leonora. 
and by bout on the 18th. The usual number of 
cases came before the Courts. Pangah, an inhabitant 
of Kampong Dalat, whose behaviour had been 
causing alarm to his relatives, was detained and 
sent to Sibu for medical attention. Akup, a witch-
doctor bantut who had been accused of intimidation, 
was had up before the Court and warned.
I spend the night of the 11th at Mukah and
received plans from the District Officer' there for
Tamil coolie lines to be built at Judan and Benutus.
A house and kitchen were in course of erection at
the latter place at the end of the mouth. Timber
for the widening of bridges at Penat and Bulu was
sent to both places and the work at Penat nearly
finished.	•
The road to Bakong was cleared by paid labour;
the prisoners were employed on the sea-road and
ornamental grounds.
Telephone communication with Sibu has not been
satisfactory; a complete interruption took place for
two days, due, I understand, to a theft of wire on
the Igan side.
On the 25th I learnt I had been appointed to do
duty at Miri and that Captain Andreini was coming
to take my place. The latter arrived with Dr.
Marjori banks from Mukah on the 30th and were
both here at the end of the month.
His Highness the Rajah's birthday on the 26th
. was observed as a holiday with the usual honours.
' Mr. Calvert arrived from Matu on the 4th and
audited the accounts of this station and of Dalat,
he left for Mukah on the 11th. Mr. Miller-Hallett,
of the Forestry Department passed through here
on his return from Mukah. The Resident of the
3rd Division spent two nights at Oya, leaving for
Sibu on the loth.
Dalat was visited on the 7th by M. I. Leonora
and again by boat on the 20th Advantage was
taken of the launch to bring to Oya the six belian
posts, whose purchase I mentioned last month.
The usual amount of litigation occupied the Courts.
At Dalat Ah Bay’s estate came up for settlement
and it appeared that the deceased was an unregistered
money louder; as most of the debtors denied their
liabilities, the executor was willing, in most cases,
to comprise for less than the amount claimed.
A divorce case, of local interest, Su vs: Supan,
came before the Court on two occasions and a
divorce was allowed.
New lamps were received from Kuching for the
lighthouse and were lit at the end of the month.
These, 1 am informed, are visible considerably
further than the old ones. A now channel which
opened in the bar last month is closing again and
is not practicable for schooners.
The reduced gang of prisoners was only sufficient
for work in the immediate vicinity of this station
and Dalat. Two prisoners were still engaged on
the lighthouse keeper’s quarters, which 'should be
finished early next mouth.- Minor repairs were
executed in the Oya bungalow, including u complete
overhaul of the rain pipes and gutters. Furniture
for use here and at Dalat was received from Kuching.
The following figures relate to the trade of the
district.
Raw sago to the amount of 319 koyan was
exported during-the month.
J. C. SWAYNE, -
District Officer.
Mukah.
October.
Now that the roads and bridges from Mukah Fort
to Judan have been cither widened or remade and
those on the Oya side are being attended to, living
quarters for a small gang of 10 Tamil coolies have
been planned and put in hand. These Tamils will
keep in order and good repair all roads and bridges
over the 17 mile stretch between Mukah and Oya
and will consequently want 3 sets of coolie lines, so
that they can always live fairly close to the work
they happen to be doing. Sites have been chosen
NEAR Petanak mouth which is 3 miles from Mukah
between Judan and Penat and on the Mukah side off
Penutus, 3 miles or more from Oya. Materials have
been worked by the people of those kampongs who
will benefit by not being called out to clear or repair
these roads and bridges in the future. Unless this
means of communication, the only one during landas
weather between Mukah and Oya,
up, and that cannot be done with
it will not be possible to visit Oya as often as ’
desirable during the next few months.
Consequent to the discovery of 8 cases of modified
smallpox an isolation hospital and quarters for
contacts was hastily run up between old Mukah
month and the present quala, an uninhabited and 
very little frequented piece of land. Ail cases and
all inmates of houses in which they were found were 
moved there as soon as possible. Reports were sent
to the Resident and the Medical Officer of the 3rd
Division, the latter of whom arrived here by the
Adeh on the 26th on bis way back to Si bn from
Bintulu and, in addition to other work, examined
these patients and gave directions for their treatment,
lam happy to be able to say that, in spite of the
fact that some had been concealed for a long time
before they were discovered, no fresh cases have 
come to light and none have ended fatally.
For some years now there has always been delay in 
serving writs or getting other Government work done 
in Penghulu Sana’s holding and his conduct of cases
lately has not been by any means beyond reproach.
This Penghulu has now, after repeated warnings 
against doing so. moved up river above the Dyak 
limit at Nanga Kua and built a house there.
Some of his people have begun to follow his 
example and the Government notice board at Nanga 
Kun has been removed with his connivance. Sana is 
detained in the barracks here while Ins people move 
down liver within their proper bounds but will be 
allowed to return when this work is in full swing. 
Tua Kampong Kachang of Petanak has retired
and his post has been tilled by Lagoi, who I hope 
will have more authority over his people than the
man whose place he takes.
On the 11th, Capt. Andreini sailed for Kuching in
the motor Chin Teck Lee, returning on the 29th by
schooner. Next day he went to Oya by m. I.
Leonora to take over that station from Mr. Swayne
who is appointed to Miri,
The Medical Officer, 3rd Division, Dr. Marjoribanks, 
arrived here by Adeh on the 26th. when he was
brought ashore by boat, and left for Oya on the 30th. 
There have been a number of civil cases in the 
Court, including as usual a large proportion of land
ownership and boundary disputes. In the Court of
Requests there have been very few disputed claims.
The imposition of fines on all persons found to
have disregarded the Order and made-unregistered
sales or mortgages of land has resulted in a marked
increase of registration work. Titles to ownership
of land are closely scrutinised and many people have
now realised that registered deeds constitute the
best proof of such ownership that can be got here
until there has been a regular Government survey
and registration of all sago lands.
Vessels entering numbered 16, the same total
clearing also.
A. E. LAWRENCE,
District Officer.
BINTULU.
October.
Court work has not been very heavy during the
month, there was, however, one case worthy of men-
tion viz: a partner in a large Chinese Firm resigning
from the Firm, and having waited ten months for
a settlement, was obliged to take action in the Courts
to recover his share. The sum involved was some
$22,000. Needless to say, an appeal against the
decision of this Court was at once entered.
The p. s. Adeh entered the river on the 6th south-
bound, She took a cargo of jelutong for Kuching.
Passengers on her wire Mr. and Mrs. Baird,
Mr. Down and Mr. Robarts, General Manager of
the Island Trading Co. Mr. Calvert, Government
Auditor, who had finished his work here, also
returned to Kuching by her.
On the 9th, I went to Tatau in s. I. Elizabeth
returning again on the 16th.
There was a fair amount of work waiting but
nothing of any importance. The Dyaks and Punans,
as in the Bintulu, are very late this year with their
padi. In spite of the kamarau which lasted nearly
six weeks, most of them waited until too late and
ruin interfered with the burning of their farms.-
The engkabang crop in both rivers, is reported ns
being enormous. Trees of all sizes are bearing, and
should it fully materialize it is doubtful whether the
full crop can be gathered. Unfortunately it will be
falling at the same time as the majority of the padi
will be ready for harvesting, and 1 am afraid many-
will desert their padi to gather engkabang, only to
be obliged to buy expensive rice in the bazaars Inter
on. If all goes well the Chinese Traders, however,
.should do n good business; many are already making
documents for the delivery of engkabang.
On my return from Tatau the dresser reported an
epidemic of measles and chicken-pox in the bazaar
and kampong.
The s. s. Alice Lorraine arrived off the quala on
the 18th and dropped Dr Marjoribanks, Divisional
Medical Officer, who had come on a round of
inspection of his district. He took passage from
Kidurong to Mukah by p. s. Adeh on the 26th. The
Alice Lorraine also left the relieving guard of Rangers
at Kidurong and the returning guard was picked up
by p. s. Adeh on the 26th. Fortunately the sea was
dead calm, and after delaying the Adeh some hours
the men were got aboard. The idea of changing guards
on the coast stations during the landau is not a Wise
one, yet it is done every year, and the luck of
the weather seems to hold. It would, however, be
impossible if the sea was at all rough to move a
guard of Fortmen with their wives and children and
innumerable baggage from Bintulu to Kidurong to
catch a steamer, or likewise to fetch the relieving
guard dropped at Kidurong.
The month has been very wet; rain fell on twenty-
one days, a total of 20'09 inches being recorded, the
sea, however, has remained calm and fishing boats
have been out nearly every day.
MIRI.
October.
The usual amount of cases came up for hearing
in the Police Court, Fines and fees amounted to
$628.83.
On the 3rd instant it was reported that tank
contractor Wong Chiak had been murdered at
Lutong. I immediately left with Bangers and Police
and, after enquiries, found that deceased had been
assaulted by tank coolies Ham Tat and Lee Hen.
These men were arrested and tried before the
Divisional Resident on the 7th instant and sentenced
to 7 and 5 years respectively.
I left for Baram on the 9th instant, accompanied
by Mr. Fenwick of Messrs, the Borneo Company
Limited, returning again on the 13th instant.
A gambling raid took place at Lutong which
resulted in the arrest of three Chinese who were
fined; these men being unable to pay were imprisoned.
The Acting Governor of British North Borneo,
the Hon’ble Mr. F. W. Fraser, came ashore on the
12th instant and stayed the night.
Tua Kampong Janai of Sibuti arrived on the 17th
instant and reported that a Chinese gardener Wee
Ah Sin had been found murdered in his kitchen
about a mile inland from the bazaar. The detective
was sent to investigate with the result that three
Chinese have been arrested on suspicion.
Six Sikh Police recruits were obtained from
Singapore. The squad of Rangers were relieved on
the 18th instant, but Sergeant Atai still remains in
-charge.
This squad’s conduct was faultless during their
period of duty and could always be relied upon. It
is only hoped a squad of Rangers will be permanently
stationed here.
The prisoners were engaged in concreting the new
Market and repairing roads damaged by heavy rains.
The rainfall was 16'25 inches.
Eight tankers arrived and nine sailed. Thirteen
cargo boats arrived and sailed
C. D. ADAMS.
District Officer.
BARAM.
For the greater from the Station.
September.
part of the month 
was away
Mr. Palfreman left Baram for Miri by s. s. Gladys on the 7tb, he having been instructed to return to Kuching.
Mr. Carpenter was appointed to do duty in this District, and arrived on the 17th. I understand that the Gladys did not get clear of the river for 10 days after sailing from Baram, and that a certain amount of cargo had to be discharged before she ■could cross the bar.
I left Baram on the 6th with Dr. E. Mjoberg, who is making a trip to the Kalabit country in the interests of the Sarawak Museum. We were delayed on our way upriver by floods, and did not reach the Fort at Lio. Mato until the 19th. After re-arranging loads at Lio Mato we started for Tama Libui’s house, the first house in the Kalabit country, on the 22nd, reaching there on the 24tb. On our way there we were informed that the Kalabits were suffering from an epidemic, and it was with the greatest difficulty that we got our Kennyah carriers to go on. Eventually they deposited their loads within a reasonable distance of the house and fled. Peiigbulu Tama Tingang Wan of Long Akar and ten followers seemed to be unaffected by the panic and remained with us, as did the Government people and a party
of Dyaks employed by Dr. Mjoberg for the trip.
It was found impossible to induce Kennyahs to carry,
so it was decided to get a few Kalabits and store the
majority of the loads, to be sent for when possible.
On the 27th, Dr. Mjoberg’s small party moved on,
while I returned to Lio Mato, reaching Baram on
the 1st October.
The illness affecting the Kalabits appeared to be
influenza and there were a number of deaths during
our stay there. I understand that the epidemic was
brought over, or travelled, from the Ulu Baram.
I fear it will not be possible to communicate with
the Curator’s party as long as the epidemic lasts, but
as the more distant Kalabits appear to be free from it
I trust that the party will reach their objective
without further trouble.
On my return to Baram Mr. Carpenter reported
all well.
There was very little Court work during the
month.
Practically all upriver tax has been paid in. The
Silat tax has been collected by Tama Kuli Arang,
but he is still away up the Pliran after rhinoceros.
I have left a message ordering him to come down
to Marudi on his return.
The prisoners (average 28) were employed on
roads etc. with the exception of a small gang
employed at Baram mouth on erection of the new
light-bouse.
October.
Court work during the mouth has been exceptional-
ly light, as the natives have been busy on their
farms.
A party of Long Kiputs quarrelled while working on their farm, and attempted to settle the dispute with tugal, the result being a few cracked heads. The parties concerned were fined, and warned that this method of settling quarrels must cease.
There have been a few Dyak cases of no importance. An appeal was lodged against the decision of the Mohammedan Court in an adultery case. The matter is still sub judice.
Reports have reached me that timber has been felled and left to rot in the jungle. In one case no fewer than 53 large -many trees are rotting in the Ulu Ridan. Summonses have been issued and steps will be taken to prevent such waste in future.
S. 8. Gladys arrived on the 10th with a fair cargo, but I understand from the local Chinese that a quan¬tity of stores was left in Kuching. The Gladys sailed on the 13th, but was not able to carry all the cargo.
Notices have been issued to the up river people about the collection of the engkabang crop, which should be coming on in a few months time.
Chinese and other traders have been warned that the Weights and Measures Enactment will be strict¬ly enforced in the coming year.
On the27th, Penghulu Abun arrived from up river. He was admitted to the hospital suffering from pleurisy.
A large number of up river chiefs and followers arrived at Baram at the end of the month.
H. L. OWEN,
District Officer.
BROOKETON COLLIERY. 
August.
The gross output of coal amounted to 1,377 tons, and of this 597 tons were consumed by our boilers, and the balance of 780 thus was sent to wharf.
Coal shipped to Labuan amounted to 474 tons, and 111 tons were supplied to n. n. s. T. Zahora, p. a. Adeh and local launches.
Coal sales at Labuan amounted to 502 tons, of
which 491 tons were taken by Messrs. The Straits
Steamship Company's steamers.
Stock of coal at the end of the month was 1,1^3.75
tons.
One of the shallow mines took fire towards the end
of the month and had to be sealed off. Apart from
this everything went well in both Mining and
Mechanical departments
The rainfall for the month was 12*91 inches.
September.	
The gross output of coal amounted to 1,53*2 tons,
and of this 647 tons were consumed by our boilers,
and the balance of 885 tons were sent to wharf.
Coal shipped to Labuan amounted to 397 tons,
and 111 tons were supplied to p. s. Adell and local
launches.
Coal sales at Labuan were 450.25, of which 433
tons were taken by Messrs. The Straits Steamship j
Company's steamers.
Stock of coal at the end of the month was 1,530.75 I
tons.
The shallow mine referred to in my August report
was re-opened during the mouth, and is now produc-
ing coal again.
Everything was normal in both Mining and
Mechanical departments.
Rainfall for the month was 10 48 inches.
S. W. HARRIS,
Acting Manager.
LIMBANG.
September.
Court.—Fines and fees amounted to $319 10.
The people of Kampong Nuran were fined $40 for allowing their buffaloes LO stray. Oue Barak was also fined for a similar offence. Chin Chiang was fined for defamation of character, or in default three mouths R. I. Ab Hiong was given nine months It. I. for creating a disturbance in the Limbang Bazaar— by assaulting people with a piece of iron, and throw¬ing acid about. Burnt was fined $50 for theft of a buffalo: clemency was shown him on account of his age.
At Danau there were three cases of desertion brought by Bisayah women, one inheritance case, and two land disputes were settled.
Two additional police constables have been engaged for the Limbang district.
Travelling.—I went over to Sundar on the 17th. Here 1 met the A. D. O. and proceed with him to Trusan on the 19th. I returned to Sundar that same afternoon, and Limbang the following morning, via Brooketon.
Danau was visited from the 22ud to the 25th. The farming season being in full swing there was not so much litigation ns usual, nevertheless a number of outstanding cases were disposed off and numerous- summonses issued.
On the 29th, accompanied by Mr. Daubeny, I went
round to the Pandaruan for the day to select a site
for the new Customs and Police station.
Public Works.—The Limbang Customs station-
has been pulled down, and the new one erected in
the main bazaar between the steamship wharves.
The new site is more convenient in every way. The
old station had to be abandoned some months back
as there was serious danger of its falling into the-
river. The Native Court House was used as a
temporary station. Some of the timber from the
old Customs House was used for the new building.
The Junior Officers bungalow has at last been
demolished. Ah Piau has signed a contract for
$1,000 agreeing to have the new quarters finished by
the 20th December. The Government is supplying
all the material.
Goh Ah Seng has contracted to build the Customs
and Police station at Paudaruan for $000, and to
complete the building within four months. He in-
to supply all the material except the attaps, nails and
zinc.
Masons have finished the cement work leading
from the new bungalow to the kitchen, also the
floor and drains around the Customs House.
General.—Visitors to the station during the month
have Ireen: the British Resident in Brunei with
Mrs. Allen and children, the Acting Manager of
Brooketon Colliery with Mrs. Harris and child, Miss
Swayne who arrived by the Adeh on the 12th: and
Dr. Cleverton (Medical Officer Labuan) who called
in for a couple of hours on the 15tb.
Mr. Eric Humphery returned by the Adek on the
12th and resumed his duties.
The m. 1. Daniil, having been repaired after her recent accident, was shipped to Sibu by the Adeh on the 12th, consigned to the Forestry Department.
Shipping and. Trade Returns.—The p. s. Adeh made only one trip this month. The m. 1. Adele called in three limes, and the s. I. Peter Duff twice.
Twenty head of buffalo were shipped to Kuching, and ten to Sibu.
The rainfall amounted to 7*65 inches, recorded on eleven days.
October.
Court.—A number of defaulting tax payers have been rounded up. Four Bazaar Chinese were fined for a petty assault. Two of them have had to produce security to be of good behaviour for three months. Ab Tok was sentenced to three months R. I. in default of a fine, for assaulting another Chinaman with
a parang. Kai Chai was fined $5 for breach of -customs regulations, and Bakar and Dullah 10 days imprisonment, in default of a fine, for travelling without a pass. These two lust named eventually turned out to be two absconding coolies from Lawas, having stolen a boat from Mr. Allman. This information did not arrive until they had again •disappeared, but the boat was recovered.
General.—The weather has been abnormally wet throughout the month, 18 47 inches of rain having fallen on 23 days. A quantity of the young padi up river has, in consequence, been destroyed. It is therefore anticipated that the harvest will be poor compared with the last two years.
Mr. Daubeny went to Sundar from the 7th to the 4Jth to attend a tuba fishing.
The Acting Resident of Labuan, and Mrs. Eley, paid a visit to the station from the 16th to the 19th.
A party from Limbang spent the night of the 15th .-at Brunei.
I was away visiting Lawas from the 23rd—2Gth, •calling in at Brooketon for an hour on my return.
Mr. Daubeny left for Danau on the 29th. He found little doing there as owing to the floods the people were disinclined to move about.
Mr. and Mrs. Maddocks returned to Brooketon from Europe on the 29th. Mr. Maddocks resumed bis duties as Manager of the Colliery.
I left for Brooketon on the 31st.
Public Works.—Water has now been laid on to the New Residency Bungalow and kitchen. The Acting Manager of Brooketon Colliery kindly lent me a fitter for this work. The cementing below the bungalow continues. Good progress has been made with the Junior Officers bungalow and it is hoped that this will be finished about the middle of next month, practically a month earlier than the time contracted for.
Trade and Snipping.—The p. s. Adeh made two trips from Kuching, the s. I. Peter Duff called in once, and the m. I. Adele four times.
Only forty-two head of buffalo were exported, five to Miri, twelve to Sibu and twenty-five to Kuching.
F. F. BOULT,
Resident 5th Division.
LAWAS and TRUSAN.
September.
Court- There was very little Court work during the month. An application for divorce brought by a Murut woman against her Dyak husband was adjourned for the parties to think the matter over as the girl's parents had obviously influenced her; the matter has since been settled out of Court. Ah Tong was imprisoned at Trusan for nonpayment of fine. Several Bunting Malays were lined for breach of Forest regulations with regard to tupping jelutong. Barn Dan was imprisoned for three months for nonpayment of tux for three years.
General.- accompanied Lieutenant Col. and Mrs. Butcher to Labuan on the 4tb, and returned to Lawas on the 7th. The Divisional Resident visited Trusan and Sundar from 17th to 20th, when various matters were discussed. The Resident approved of Malays building bouses and planting gardens on buffalo land at Sundar. There is an increasing demand for land for this purpose, but a certain amount of opposition is shown by buffalo owners who have already got houses and gardens. It is impossible to ascertain how much land is sufficient for grazing the buffaloes, as both parties will say anything to gain their own ends: the only means of ascertaining is to experiment at the risk of the planters. This is being done and it is hoped that it will result in more land being taken up for planting.
Most of the Murats were lucky enough to be able burn off their padi clearing but a great many were not so successful.
A list of outstanding tax was compiled and an effort will be made to round up the delinquents, but it is more than likely that most of them are dead, or have paid under different headings.
The p. s. Adeh made one trip to load timber at Messrs. Vamco's sawmill. The manager of this mill hopes soon to be producing 10 tons a day.
Increases of pay to the Native Officers and Customs clerks were sanctioned also a grant of $15 per month to the Chinese school at Trusan.
The Forest Guard inspected the jelutong roads at Lawas and several summonses were issued against jelutong workers for bad tapping. P. C. Brahim reported, from Tengoa, that the infant child of Ngilo Apoi had been shot by Sakai Lun in the house of Apoi Singa Tai in ulu Tengoa. Sakai Lun is reported to have fled to Pah Matang B. N. B. P. C. Brahim will endeavour to bring down the parents and the Tua Rumah, and make further enquiries. Panai Buaya was bitten by a dog in the Lawas bazaar and died two days later. The relations of deceased were carefully questioned as to his death which was apparently due to blood poisoning. The dog, which has bitten people before, was shot.
P. W. D The prisoners repaired the swampy parts of the Trusan road which is now in good condition. The carpenter was ordered to strengthen the Siang Siang bridge at his own expense according to his contract. The stables were slightly enlarged, and the ditches on the plain were bridged to make a. miniature race course. Instructions were received from the Conservator of Forests to erect a bungalow for the Assistant Conservator, who is to be stationed here in the near future. At present I have been unable to find a carpenter capable of doing the work, meanwhile a site being levelled for the building on the hill behind the Fort. Various minor repairs were sanctioned at Sundar.
October.
Court.—What might have been a very serious affray occurred amongst some Chinese tobacco planters at Lawas, as a result of which Chan Ngee and Lee Wha were fined $25 and $15 respectively for assaulting Ah Koi with changkols. Several jelutong workers were fined for irregular tapping. Samsu and Sinin were imprisoned of nonpayment of tax. No cases of importance were brought before the courts at Trusan or Sundar.
General.—On the 3rd I visited the Lawas Damit valley to round up belated tax payers. After spend¬ing the first night at Peko Ginat’s house ulu Gayah, I walked down the Beriwan valley to Labo Ateng’s on the main Trusan river, and the next day arrived at Trusan. Most of the people whose names appear on the books as not having paid tax there found to be sick or removed to other places, and many were reported dead.
Mr. Daubeny arrived at Trusan on the 7th to attend a tuba fishing at Sundar.
Bakar and Dullah absconded on the 11th stealing a boat from Messrs. Vamco.
Very little jangkar has been shipped this month whether on account of the new license fee or because the Tagals have been busy on their farms, is as yet uncertain.
I went to Labuan on the 18th and returned accompanied by Mr. Allman, on the 21st. It took 14 hours to reach the fort from the kuala, a journey which can be done by launch in 2 hours.
The Divisional Resident visited Lawas from 23rd to 26th.
P. C. Brahim and Jala were sent to ulu Tengoa to arrest a Murut accused of manslaughter.
The p. s. Adeh made two trips loading timber at the Vamco mill and them. I. Burong one. The mill is now working well and the labour staff is being increased.
I visited Trusan and Sundar again at the end of the month.
The relief squad of Rangers arrived/rom Kuching and the old squad returned to headquarters. The late squad behaved very badly towards the end of their time, chiefly due to the slackness of the Lance Corporal.
P. W. D.—A contract was made with Vong Kiau of Beaufort to erect the Assistant Conservator's bungalow at a cost of $4,000. The site for this building is being levelled on the hill behind the Fort The actual building will commence some time in December, and should be completed by the end of February. Most of the timber to repair the Trusan Fort has been collected, and planks have been ordered for the repair of the Rangers’ barracks. The erection
of a bungalow and court house at Merapok has been sanctioned, and the work will be put in hand as- soon as possible. The difficulty is to find a local carpenter ; outsiders naturally will not come unless- there is a chance of making a big profit.
All the blinds in the Lawas Fort has been recovered with cloth.
The Siang Siang bridge and another smaller one, were badly damaged by floods which were continuous. The former will not be ready for horse traffic for some time, but the latter has already been repaired.
Sago ataps have been ordered for the re-roofing of the clerk’s bouse at Trusan.
The prisoners were employed on ornamental grounds and in extending the ulu road to the Gayah river, with a view to later on extending it still further up the Lawas Damit valley. It is merely a question of enlarging the existing Murut track, and very few bridges will be required.
Rainfall, Lawas 26 07 and Trusan 37'68 inches.
P. M. ADAMS, Assistant District Officer.
Rainfall, July and August 1922.
