The Sarawak Gazette.
SATURDAY, SEPTEMBER 2, 1922.
THE DISTRICT OFFICER.
We have deceived a copy of the Administration Report 1921 on the State of North Borneo. This is a very complete and interesting publication and in concluding his last report His Excellency the Governor, Mr. A. C. Pearson, C. M. G., remarks:—
“A feature of the progress of recent years has been the necessity for the gradual surrender to professional officers of many technical duties which in the pioneer¬ing days were performed, and ably performed, by
that ever willing amateur, the District Officer. The Court has now an efficient corps of professional officers, engineers, surveyors, accountants and other experts who work alongside, and in harmony with, the Cadet Service. Though originally engaged on agreement, many of the ablest of these technical officers have applied for and been granted permanent pensionable appointments, a sure sign that service under the Chartered Company is attractive and that its officers receive considerate and liberal treatment. The Cadet Service is now moving more and more into its proper niche in the scheme of things, and its officers are specially selected and trained for district duties, which include among many others land ad¬ministration, and responsibility for the local treasury, post office, magistrates’ Court, police station, and protectorate.
The life of the District Officer (in which term I include his senior, the Resident, and his junior, the Cadet} has undergone a marked change during the last two decades. Formerly he was a care-free pioneer, unfettered by telegrams, telephones, and fre¬quent mails, in his office five or six days a month to clear his scanty correspondence, bis “monthly letter" and his accounts, and for the rest touring his scat¬tered districts, gaining the friendship of his headmen and villagers, righting petty wrongs, and dispensing simple medicines, ready justice and advice on a hundred subjects. There are still a few districts where this paternal form of Government survives today, but in many others the District Officer is tied to his desk four or five days a week or more, by correspondence, reports, returns, and the routine work of his various sub-departments. Too infrequent¬ly is he able to break 14way and visit his distant villages, and natives who wish to see him must perforce come to his headquarters making their way through a disquieting array of orderlies, clerks and policemen. The disadvantages of this tendency are fully recognised, but in spite of periodical and drastic revisions of the schedule of reports and returns, the tentacles of the inky octopus are ever obtaining a fresh hold—an inevitable accompaniment of the march of progress. But, simultaneously with this transition, the villager has become more sophisticated, and less in need of protection. No longer can the travelling Chinese hawker hope to exchange a penny mirror for a load of valuable damar or gutta, and the empty tin or bottle has long since ceased to have an accepted purchasing value. Yet today, no less than formerly, the influence and personality of the District Officer sets the standard for his district. Many of his natives do not realise the existence of any higher authority and his word is law. Today, as in the early days, the young officer is often called upon to. be in himself a
tower of strength, and he must at all costs maintain the traditions of absolute integrity and fearless im¬partiality, which his predecessors and the present generation of officers have so jealously guarded. For many years to come scholastic qualification in a Cadet Officer will continue to be of secondary im¬portance, and the present system of selection by experienced judges of men will best serve to main¬tain the Cadet Service at its present high level of efficiency.”
This tendency, the surrender of many technical duties to professional Officers, is being felt in Sara¬wak although in a lesser degree. No longer can the District Officer and his assistants be expected to control all the Departments necessary for the administration of their district. Anyone who has visited the various outstations in this country can¬not but be amazed at the work which former officers have carried out. Buildings, roads, bridle paths, telephones, wharves all, with but few exceptions, planned and built under the direction of amateurs; revenue collected with, at times, the help of very inferior clerical aid; the people and their property protected with absurdly small Military and Police Forces. No wonder the native at times cavils at the introduction of new Departments, separated from that of their “Tuan Resident" and full of Strange customs and regulations.
Moreover there have been times when even the District Officer has felt aggrieved at, what he imagines, the interference in matters which up to that time have been his own particular concern. This is, however, to be expected and can be under¬stood. Where one man was once responsible for the complete adminstration of his district, and whose word on all matters was law, there now appears on the scene the professional man well versed in his duties who gradually relieves the District Officer of his cherished responsibilities, and who, perhaps un¬consciously, upsets old traditions.
The District Officer, however, will in time see that, if efficiency is to be maintained, a complete change must come over his mind. He must realise that even if progress is slow yet things must be continually changing. The day will come when he will fully realise the necessity for reorganisation and then will be his opportunity to advise the technical men, not in their professional duties, but in the management of their labour, in the customs of the district and on all those matters which are of the ut¬most importance and without a knowledge of which it would be impossible to carry on.
The day of the old fashioned District Officer is gone but in its place will be a brotherhood of men, all working together for the same cause, the advance¬ment of the State. Each man will have his particular work but if the details of the District Officer's work are altered yet the basis remains the same—the administration of the district as regards the peoples' rights, their customs and their religion. Nothing can alter this basis and even if we regret the passing of the old regime we see a future ahead when the progress of the State will remind us of the pioneer work done in past by that band of men who, in spite of loneliness and lack of technical instruction, worked and achieved their object, which was to open up and prepare the way for those coming after them.
NOTES.
THE nice course was opened again on the 1st August after having been under repair for some time.
The 3 furlong course had been cut and levelled and the gates and rails repaired.
The ponies were taken out in the mornings for training and those enthusiasts with stop watches had to be very early on the scene if they wished to record the times.
MK. K. H. Simpson left for Singapore on the 31st ultimo on his transfer to the Singa¬pore Office of the B. C. L.
Mr. Simpson had a very short stay in Sara-wak and we wish him the best of luck.
THE Kuching Police, under the command of Mr. O. Lang, paraded on the 8th on the occasion of H. H. the Tuan Muda’s birthday.
A salute of 21 guns was fired from the Fort and the men presented arms.
BETWEEN 2 and 3 a. in. on Thursday morning of August 3rd, the s. s. Gladys, off Tatau, was struck by what appears to have been a Cyclone. A strong wind struck her first on the port side Carrying away the fittings hung under the awning amidships, immediately after she was struck on the starboard side, the wind carrying away the whole of the forecastle awning, a substantial erection of wood covered with “genarco” roofing, the starboard side of the awning amidships made of planks and covered with “Malthoid” roofing and the two starboard ventilators to the engine room; the after mast Stays and the funnel gups snapped with the strain.
The sea was perfectly calm and the night warm and still until the wind rose.
So strong was the wind that all passengers were removed from the upper deck and accommodated in the Forecastle quarters.
We have interviewed the Juragan who says that the sea was fairly calm and that several shots were fired at. a sort of bright glare which seemed to surround the ship.
It is difficult to get accurate information, but from a personal inspection of the vessel it was quite evident that she had been very roughly handled and the Shipping Company may con-gratulate themselves that worse calamity did not befall them.
IT was reported that a tongkang full of sago which left Rambugan for Kuching on August 10th was caught in a squall off Mentawa and badly damaged. During a Hash of lightning a Malay named Salleh of S. Bilian, who was in the bows, fell overboard and was not seen again.
THERE was a story circulating through the Kampongs that on 3rd August there would be a fearful windstorm and that the dunia would terbalik.
We understand that many people believed this tale and stayed in their houses during the whole day—although why that should I save them when the dunia terbalik-ed we cannot say.
THE Schooner Kim Eng Hock, of 48 tons,
owned by Chop Eng Ann of Kuching, which
sailed from Kuching on 14th August was
wrecked off Rejang mouth on the night of the
18th August. She carried a crew of 8 and
2 passengers, all of whom were saved. Her
cargo, a small general one valued at a little
over 11,000, was lost.
A small mail consisting of 10 letters (two
of which were registered) and 2 papers was
lost.
Mu. Boult’s pony Blastit was taken ill in
the early morning of the day before the races
and died shortly afterwards.
Drs. O’Driscoll and Reed performed a post
mortem and found the cause of death.
Blastit was in class A and, in spite of his
size, was becoming a very speedy animal.
MESSRS. Hamilton and Hood of Miri were
in Kuching during race week.
TELEGRAMS may be accepted for transmission
to England by cable from Singapore to Cairo
and thence by Wireless, the charge is the same
as by cable throughout.
Should this service be used information is
to be given to the effect to the Telegraph
clerk.
A few members of the new committee of
the Jesselton Turf Club met at the Sports
Club on the evening of 29th July to discuss
the prospects of an Autumn race meeting.
It was suggested that the first week in
November would be suitable and that owners
should be “sounded” regarding entries, but
a definite decision was left to a frill committee.
Mr. C. F. 0. Macaskie undertook to carry on,
temporarily, the duties of Honorary Secretary.
A whisper reaches us that there may be a
race for lady jockeys at the next meeting.
B. N. B. Herald.
A buffalo got loose during the month and
finally had to be shot by the Police at Sim-
pang Tiga.
The beast during its ramblings killed a pig,
injured another and later on knocked down a
small child, luckily without much damage.
AN interesting trial of speed took place on
Sunday the 20th when Mr. A. B. Ward’s Billy
Buster, the winner of three events in the races
was ridden against Mr. J. B. Archer's Gila,
an Australian pony which has been in the
country since 1914.
The idea was to see in what time Billy -
Buster could do 3 furlongs when pressed.
Billy Buster was ridden by Mr. P. M. Adams
at approx. 10st. 7 lbs. and Gila by his Owner
at 12 st. 7 lbs. Billy Buster got a good start
and led for 2 furlongs when Gila drew up and
won easily. Billy Bunter's time was 48 se¬conds or 6 seconds better than his fastest race on the previous Wednesday. Although the event had not been advertised a big crowd had assembled on the race course.
THE report on the Public Works Depart-
ment for 1921 which is published in the
Sarawak Government Gazette of September
1st makes interesting reading.
According to the latest figures there are
over 49 miles of roads in the Kuching district.
The rainfall at Matang was 186 35 inches and
157,722,375 gallons of water were delivered to
the service reservoir from the Matang and 
Kuching Lower Reservoirs.
The S. G. R. did 21,900 miles during the
year and carried 105,594 passengers.
Those who complain of warm drinks will
note that 389,1661 tbs. of ice were sold during
the year.
From the 7th mile quarry the out-put of
stone was 12,607 tons and from Sejingkat 782
tons.
During 1921 1/2 an acre was reclaimed at
Sungei Gartak, the total amount of re-
clamation now being 1 a. Or. 12p. Parti-
culars are given of the preparations made
for the erection of an Electric Power Station
in Ban Hock Lane and Market Street. Two
Babcock and Wilcox Boilers and two Bellis
and Morcom engines couple to A. C. Gene-
rators each of 250 K. W. 3 phase were pur-
chased from the Borneo Company Limited.
ON the authority of a Native Officer we are
informed that an aeroplane, or some other dy-
ing vessel, came over Belaga fort about 8.30
p. m. on the 14th'August. We are told that
she turned a search-light on to the fort and
was flying quite low; the noise of her engines
could be distinctly heard and our informant
is quite certain about the matter.
If this story is true we imagine that this is
the first time any flying vessel has come over
Sarawak.
WE are asked to say that the Gymkhana
Club, Miri, are arranging a Sweep on the
St. Leger.
The race is being run on Sept. 13th and
the draw will take place on Sept. 9th instead
of August 30th as previously announced.
A Proclamation issued by His Highness
the Rajah in the Sarawak Government
Gazette of the 1st September gives notice to
the effect that His Highness has appointed
Mr. A. B. Ward, Resident of the 1st Division,
and Mr. G. 0. Gillan, Treasurer of Sarawak, to
beh is deputies during his absence from Sara-
wak.
CAPTAIN A. S. Lowe, M. C., B. SC., who arrived
by s. s. Kuching on the 18ch August has
been gazetted as Assistant Engineer in the
Public Works Department and Dr. E M.
Marjoribanks, L. R. c. r. s. (Edin.) who arrived
by the same ship on the 29th ha? been appointed
Divisional Medical Officer of the 3rd Division.
FROM a hand-bill circulated by a local cinema, we learn that for quite a small sum we may see a reel, length 305 feet, entitled “Going Going Gone” but what really fetches us is the announcement that it is “featuring Horold Lloyd, Harry Pollard and Babe Deniels. Two harmless tourists travelling on a bicycle with an awful nerve.'1
We quite agree that it would take an "aw¬ful nerve” for those “two harmless travellers” to travel on one bicycle but it does not say what happened to the third intrepid traveller.
Surely Horold and Harry did not chuck Babe off !!! 
WE understand that Mr. Archer has sold his Australian pony Gila which goes to Mukah.
FIVE ponies were shipped by the p. s Adeh which sailed on the 22nd. Gila for Mukah, Akhtiar and Jalan Rumput for Miri and Hopeless and Damit for Lawas.
Keliling and Pakeha were sent to Miri the day before by one of the Oil Co.’s boats.
THE S. S. Alice Lorraine, which arrived from Sibu on the 25th August, brought Capt. E. V. Andreini and Mr. G. T. M. Mac Bryan from that station.
YET another death amongst the ponies. On August 26th His Highness the Rajah's Bubble died after one day’s illness. We have not been informed of the cause of death.
His Highness is to be commiserated on the loss, as Bubble was a particularly nice animal winning the Farms Syndicate Cup in the races and running second in the S. S. Ct). Cup.
AMONGST recent Gazettings are Mr. F. A. W. Page-Turner to be Resident of the 2nd Divi-sion and Mr. H. A. Adams to be Acting Superintendent of Police, temporarily and in addition to his other duties. Both appoint¬ments dating from September 1st.
Mr. O. Lang, Superintendent of Police, has been granted seven months furlough from
MR. S. T. Ennion has taken the place of Mr. K. H. Simpson in the B. C. L.
MR. A. O. Thomas arrived by s. s. Kuching on the‘29th to join the P. W. D. as electrical engineer.
MESSRS. F. A. W. Page-Turner and E. O. Bruce left for Lingga by the s. 1. Lucile on the 1st.
AMONGST the passengers on s. s. Kuching sailing for Singapore on the 1st were Messrs. F. G. Day, W. E. Le Gros Clark, E. S. Holl and Major and Mrs. Harston.
DRY rubber harvested at Sungei Tengah during July was approximately 79,000 tbs.
Race Week.
Race Week began officially on Monday 11th and  li1risimd on Saturday the 19th, but before and after that period entertainments were given and we shall probably not be far wrong in saying that it has been one of the most successful weeks that has ever been held.
The p s. Adeh arrived on the 11th with Mr. and Mrs. H, H. Kortright and two children from Bintulu, Messrs. C. D. Adams and M. Hood from Miri, Dr. Reed, Messrs. H. D. Aplin, Miller-Hallett, and H. Calvert from Sibu and Mr. F G. Carpenter from Mukah. The same day the Lucile brought Messrs. W. F. Dick and H. E.' Cutfield from Simanggang.
H. H. S. Y. Zahora arrived on the 13th with Lieut. Col. and Mrs. Butcher from B. N. B . Mr. and Mrs. Boult from Limbang, Mr. and Mrs. Douglas from Miri and Mr. P. M. Adams from Lawas.
Dr. and Mrs. Andrew and children arrived from Miri on one of the 8. O. L. boats.
On the 7th the s. s. Kuching brought over Mrs. Nelson and Mrs. Ker, who were the guests of His Highness the Rajah, and Mrs. Calthrop-Calthrop who was staying al B. M. K.
His Highness the Rajah gave a ball on the I4th to which some 80 guests had been invited; dancing was kept up until late. On the next night the Resi¬dent and Mrs. Ward gave a ball at the Residency and a most enjoyable evening was spent. Earlier on the same evening the Race Lotteries were drawn for and auctioned in the Sarawak Club. On Wednes¬day the Races took place, an account of which will be found in another column. On Thursday Mr. Fenwick was at home at B. M. K. where dancing continued until a very late hour. Supper was served in the big dining room which was decorated with Mr. Fenwick’s racing colours, whilst the Miri Cup, which he had won the day before, occupied the centre of the room.
On Saturday His Highness again invited a large number of guests to a fancy dress ball.
The Astana was brilliantly illuminated by electric lights which, added to the wonderful costumes of the dancers, afforded a most gorgeous spectacle. Dancing was kept up until the early hours and just before daybreak the tired (and dishevelled) revellers reached their homes. Supper was served at one long table and His Highness health was drunk with the greatest enthusiasm. Afterwards congratulatory speeches were made and other toasts drunk.
The following is a list of those present and their costumes.
We must remind our readers, however, that this list was compiled with some difficulty and should there be any errors or omissions we crave pardon and hope it will be put down to the excitement of the moment.
It would be difficult to pick out the most success¬ful costumes amongst the ladies as they all looked so nice but in the men’s costumes we might mention those of Mr. Boult, Mr. Skrine, Mr. Dick, Dr. Clark, Mr. Lang. Mr. Stewart, Mr. Parnell, Mr. Mead and the Lowe Brothers.
The usual tennis, golf, billiards and bowls tourna-ments occupied the afternoons. An account of these will be found in another column.
The review of the Sarawak Bangers, which had been arranged for Friday afternoon, had to be post¬poned on account of the bad weather.
Most of the outstation visitors returned on Tuesday and were given a cherry send off as they sailed.
The Rajah Charles Brooke
Memorial Fund.
The Sarawak Club.
Tournaments.
The usual Tournaments took place during Race Week, the entries were numerous and the various events keenly competed.
Bawls.
The condition of the bowling alleys was not condusive to good scoring, temporary repairs are no longer satisfactory and it will be necessary to give the alleyways a thorough overhaul before this game will return to the favour of its many devotees.
The results were as follows:—
Kuching.	
Outstations.
(Our Correspondent does not give the details except to say that the 1st prize was won by II. E. Cut¬field.) -[ Ed. S. G.]
Mr. Cutfield is to be congratulated on his win as he had no opportunity of practice.
Billiards.
The final round, played on Saturday the 19th, created considerable interest but it is doubted whether the encouragement given by the on¬lookers to the players improved their play. It was considered that C. D. Adams’ handicap was slight¬ly meagre but he was by no means depressed by such a trivial matter as that!
Lang was not at his best but made some useful little breaks towards the end of the game his op¬ponent was not generous to him in the way of leaves.
Adams played his usual dashing game and had more assistance from Luck than he did from his handicap.
The results were :—
(Again details are missing except for the Quota¬tion scores which are as under.)
(There appears to be some mistake here or else one of the balls must have been trained to run to 81 only and then stop.)—[Ed. S. G.]
Lawu Tennis.
As in former years the entrants had difficulty in finding time to play their rounds owing to the many engagements during the week.
The Runners up had a strenuous evening, play¬ing 5 sets and the Kuching pair scored greatly by going to the arena fresh for the fray.
It was obvious towards the end of the 2nd set that the Outstation pair were wilting although perhaps the best games of the round were the 2nd, 3rd and 4th games of the 2nd set.
Failing light handicapped both pairs and players are to be congratulated on agreeing to continue to play to a finish in bad light.
Gillan was as safe as usual and his placing was very neat, Lang brought off some flash shots at the net and played a good game throughout. Boult was playing a fine game and his forehand drives were very powerful, Page-Turner played a strong game especially as his opponents put most of their returns at him.
The games were much more even than the scoring indicates and perhaps, had not the outstations pair already played 3 strenuous sets, results might have been different.
Final.
Gillan and Lang beat Boult and Page-Turner 6—5, 6—2.
Kuching Races.

The Race Meeting was held on Wednesday the 16lh of August. The weather, which up to the day of the races had been most uncertain, luckily turned out fine. The rain of the day before had made the course rather soft but, on the whole, conditions were as perfect as could be expected.
As early as seven in the morning the roads leading to the course were thronged with people on their way and as the morning progressed the roads presented a most lively appearance. Motor lorries, pony traps, rickshas and pedestrians hurried along in a never ending stream and by 2.30 p. nt. all the places adjacent to the course were occupied. As in former years rows of small huts had been erected on both sides of the course and their fair occupants had hung them with gorgeous gold cloths. Against the rails stood a crowd of all nationalities—dressed in their best clothes and in the greatest of good humour. Motor cars were parked in a space set apart for them beyond the winning post, and the absence of any disturbances and the manner in which the course was kept clear, reflects great credit on the Police and especially to Mr. Lang, who personally superintended the whole of the policing and traffic arrangements.
The band of the Sarawak Rangers played during the afternoon whilst the grand stand was packed with European and other visitors.
His highness the Rajah arrived at 2.15 and was received with the national anthem whilst His Highness’ flag was broken at the mast head.
Much surmise had taken place beforehand as to what sort of a show the ponies would put up but we think most of us will agree that, on the whole, racing was excellent.
Mr. Ward’s Billy Bunter proved himself to be by far the fastest pony on the course and his rider, Mr. Le Sueur, had an easy ride in all his three races. Even carrying 11st. 7lbs. he had no difficulty in win¬ning the last race.
His Highness the Rajab's Bubble, as was expected, won bis first race but was beaten by Damit, a very diminutive pony, in the 4th race. Damit was badly ridden in the 1st race and any chances he had against Bubble were ruined by his jockey’s antics.
In the 3rd race Mr. Crocker’s Hopeless beat Scots Grey rather unexpectedly and mainly owing to the good jockeyship of Mr. Bruce. He failed, however, to give Scots Grey 1 st. lOlbs. and Mr. Humpbery won a good race from Blazes in the 6th race. The winner’s handicap, as usual, caused much interest. Bubble was much fancied but was not placed likewise Damit who requires careful handling.
Paddy was 2nd in both his races and Mr. Bates had bad luck in being in the same class as such an exceptional pony as Billy Buster.
The totalizator, run by Mr. A. Merrells was ex¬tremely popular. So much so that many were unable to buy tickets owing to the press of people. No less than 2,358 tickets were sold, the highest number on one race being 550. Next year it will be necessary to make other arrangements and, if possible, have two totalizators.
There was the usual bar run by the Sarawak Club and also a tea-room arranged by Mrs. Stennitt and Mr. Hayward. The crowd had not been forgotten and the numerous food stalls could supply anything from a hot dinner to an ice cream at prices within reach of all pockets.
It has been suggested that proper railings be made round the paddock etc. and that another grand stand be built. This would greatly relieve the congestion round the present grand stand which makes it diffi¬cult at times to approach the paddock at all.
We should like to add one thing, that is to say that some of the native riders should be severely cautioned for unnecessarily flogging their ponies. One rides ’especially appeared to consider that the pony’s head was the correct place on which to in¬flict punishment—for being last!!.
We think, however, that the Committee and all the Officials who helped are to be congratulated on the success of the meeting. After eight years racing has been revived again and we hope that it will not to be allowed to lapse.
Wednesday, August 16th.
1ST RACE.—2.30 p. m.—The Farms Syndicate Cup.—V al tie $100. Presented by the Farms Syndicate. Second horse to receive $50, third horse to save entrance fee. A race for subscription Borneo griffins Class A. 12.21/2 hands to carry 11 stone with an allowance of 31/2 lbs. for every 1/2 inch under. Entrance fee $10. Distance 3 furlongs.
Damit lead at the start but was passed by Bubble
after crossing the road with Scooter third. Bubble
won by 5 lengths and Scooter, passing Damit, obtained
2nd place, beating Damit by a length. Timo (not
taken). Totalizator paid $1.80.
2ND RACK—3 p. M.—The Kuching Cup.—Value
$50. Presented by the Datu Imam, with $50 added.
Second horse to receive $50, third horse to save
entrance fee. A race for subscription Borneo griffins
Class B. 12.2 hands to carry 11 stone with an
allowance of 3.J lbs. for every | inch under. Entrance
fee $10. Distance 3 furlongs.
Billy Buster won easily from Paddy by 5 lengths,
4 lengths between 2nd and 3rd, Finance 4th and
The Rat last. Time 54} seconds. Totalizator
paid $2.30.
3RD RACE—3 30 P. M.—The B. C L. Cup.—Value $100. Presented by the Borneo Co., Ltd. Second horse to receive $50, third horse to save entrance fee. A race for subscription Borneo griffins Class C, 12.3J hands to carry 11 stone with an allowance of 31/2 lbs. for every 1/2 inch under. Entrance fde $10. Distance 3 furlongs.
A good race between Hopeless and Scots Grey the former winning an exciting race by lengths, Akhtiar third, 3 lengths behind Scots Grey and Bu¬rak fourth, Dempsey was last. Time 55g second. Totalizator paid $2.70.
4TH RACE—1 p. M.—The 8. 8. Co. Cup — Value $100. Presented by the Sarawak Steamship Co., Ltd. Second horse to receive $50, third horse to save entrance fee. A handicap for subscript ion Borneo griffins Class A. Top weight may be 11 stone Entrance fee $10. Distance 3 furlongs.
Hubble was unable to give Damit 2 1/2 stone and the latter won by 1 1/2 lengths, the same distance separating 2nd and 3rd, Snap was 4th and Keliling last. A good race all the first three lying well together up to the 2 1/2 furlong mark. Time 57g seconds. Totalizator paid to $3 90.
5TH RACE—4.30 P.M.—The Civil Service Cup.—
Value $100. Presented by members of the Sarawak
Civil Service. Second horse to receive $50, third
horse to save entrance fee. A handicap for subscrip-
tion Borneo griffins Class B Top weight may be
11 stone. Entrance fee $10. Distance 3 furlongs.
Billy Buster again won easily by 3 lengths from
Paddy who was 5 lengths ahead of Finance. Kluang
was 4th and Jalan Rumput last. Time 54J seconds.
Totalizator paid $1.70.
6TH RACE—5 P. M —The Miri Cup.—Presented
by the Sarawak Oilfields Ltd. Second horse to receive
$50, third horse to save entrance fee. A handicap
for subscription Borneo griffins Class C. Top weight
may be 11 stone. Entrance fee $10. Distance 3
furlongs.
A good race Scots Grey beating Blazes by
lengths, Burak was 3 lengths behind, Hopeless 4th
and Dempsey last. Time 55’ seconds. Totalizator
and paid $2.40.
7 T H R A c E—5.30 P. M.—The Sarawak Cup.—
Valuo $150. Presented by His Highness the Rajah.
Second horse to receive $25. A handicap for all
subscription Borneo griffins that have won a race at
this meeting. Top weight may be 11 stone. En-
trance fee $10. Distance 3 furlongs.
Billy Buster had no difficulty in winning by 3 lengths, whilst 4 lengths divided 2nd and 3rd. Bubble failed to justify his backers and Damit ap¬peared to be sulking the whole race and was last. Hopeless was left at the Post but made a good race for 3rd place. Time 54 seconds. Totalizator paid $2.10
CORRESPONDENCE.
[The Editor is not responsible for the opinions  Correspondents.]
The Rate of Exchange.
—•—
KUCHING, SARAWAK,
3rd August, 1922. The Editor,
Sarawak Gazette.
DEAR SIR,
As a statement in the letter in your last issue beaded '‘Advance Sarawak” is somewhat misleading, may I be permitted to explain. I refer to the state¬ment that an inquirer at the Post Office as to the franc rate of exchange was told that the Post Office would transact business at Fr. 25 to the pound sterling This is not so.
The Post Office here only transacts business -that is, issues Money Orders—in sterling, rupees or dollars. If a Money Order in francs is asked for it can only be issued in sterling through London to be converted into francs at the other end, but the sender must himself determine how much he remits in sterling as the Post Office cannot give any fixed rate of exchange.
Certain Post Office accounts with London which are reckoned in francs are converted into sterling at a fixed rate of exchange for mutual convenience and the inquirer at the Post Office was possibly told this and misunderstood what was said to him.
The franc rate of exchange per $100 can always be found in the exchange column in the Singapore -daily papers.
Yours faithfully, 
F. G. DAY
A Worthy Appeal.
MEDICAL OFFICES,
Kuching, 25th August, 1922. The Editor,
Sarawak Gazette,
DEAR SIR,
Many of your readers are not, I believe, acquainted with the little colony of some seventy odd paupers who dwell not far from the road at Batu Sapuloh. Most of these are men too aged to work for their living, some are blind and some are crippled otherwise they live for the greater part very happi¬ly, keeping a well-ordered garden from which they supplement their daily rations.. They are, however, in need of more clothes, especially now that the rainy season is approaching. I would beg leave therefore, to ask, through your columns, for any old clothes of any description that rare not wanted by your readers. If donors would kindly send such clothes to me, I will see that they are apportioned correctly to those who need them.
I am, Sir,
Yours etc.,
W. E. LE GROS CLARK.
Courtesy.
August Uth, 1929.
The Editor,
Sarawak Gazette.
DEAR SIR,
Reading the correspondence on the vexed ques¬tion of courtesy I agree with your reply to “Curious” although 1 cannot help thinking that his letter was prompted by one or more incidents not a hundred miles from your editorial chair.
While not professing to be an authority on etiquette I must say 1 have found it the invariable custom for a lady to bow in the first instance to a male acquain¬tance whom she intends to recognise, and I personally should be very diffident in raising my hat (if any) to a lady who did not spontaneously bow to me.
I suggest therefore that our social rulers the ladies settle the matter for us and Set poor “ Curious’ ” mind at rest by bowing (with a smile if possible) quickly enough to put us bashful men out of our misery.
Snip's letter appears to me quite pointless, and I cannot see his idea in writing unless for the satis¬faction of seeing his clumsy attempt at humour in print, but as an answer to bis own question on etiquette I can only suggest that his wife and mother-in-law burst into the house and behave as suggested by Snip in his letter.
Yours faithfully,
BASHFUL BILL.
KUCHING,
31st August, 1922. The Editor,
Sarawak Gazette,
Kuching.
DEAR SIR,
The letters from Snip and your goodself in your last issue are certainly facetious but not to the point.
Whilst bolding to my original contention that etiquette is sadly lacking may I state that I do not care to rush at any lady as Snip wishes. I am not complaining of having been cut but of the way my own countrywomen behave.
The reference to the mother-in-law is irrelevant and will be answered just as soon as my first state¬ment is definitely refuted. I own no book on etiquette nor do I wish for one since I have been fortunate in my schooling.
These letters are not intended to be personal and most certainly referred to the Kuching world in general only.
CURIOUS.
N.B.—This correspondence must now cease.— [Ed.S.G.]
Race Frocks.
It was indeed difficult to believe during ' Race Week” that Kuching had not got its “Worths" or at least its “Molyneux" tucked away somewhere, when one saw the galaxy of charming creations worn by our ladies.
It would be impossible to describe all the toilettes we were fortunate enough to see throughout the week, therefore I will only endeavour to give those 1 noticed at Mr. Fenwick's dance on August the seventeenth. Our hostess, Mrs. T. Fenwick chose a beautiful all-lace white frock tastefully trimmed
with wide black velvet ribbon. I think the most noticeable and impressive frock in the room was that worn by one of our visitors, although few of ' us are daring enough to wear “red" in the tropics, Mrs. Nelson showed her good taste in her selection of a red silk georgette frock which was both pretty and becoming.
Mrs. Calthrop-Calthrop wore an elegant dress, made entirely of gold and blue brocade.
Mrs. Ker and Mrs. Butcher showed us that black satin when cunningly arranged with costly black lace will not take a second place to any new colour in the ball room.
Mrs. Boult looked distinctive in green, the popular colour of the evening, prettily carried out in ninon and net That fascinating material "silk taffeta" also in green, was Mrs. Douglas’ choice.
Mrs. Geikie wore an attractive little frock of corn flower blue georgette, Mrs Andrews was wearing the ever fashionable foulard in a lovely- shade of green.
Mrs. Kidd’s pretty- grey silk, gown made a pleasing change in a room full of gayer colours.
Mrs Service was seen in a handsome black frock on this occasion.
Mrs. Lowe looked charming in a gold* brocade frock, untrimmed, except for an effective purple dahlia at the exaggerated low waist line which is now so fashionable.
Mrs. Adams favoured black, spirally draped with esoteric oriental embroidery.
Mrs. Barraclough in a novel little frock made of nigger brown georgette looked delightfully chic as usual.
Bright blue silk allied to pretty shadow lace of the same shade formed, Mrs. Mead's striking gown.
Mrs. Clark in red charmeuse with an over skirt of black lace may claim originality and distinction in' her selection.
Mrs. Griffith’s frock was composed of brown shadow lace, ingeniously adapted to a ceintre and was noteable for its new effective long sleeves.
Mrs. Baird also adopted the long lace sleeve and when worn with black satin, was most distinctive.
Mrs. Gillan wisely chose a lovely green crepe-de- chine with gold brocade for the corsage forming a most desirable frock.
Miss O’Driscoll in a pretty electric blue crepe marocain over cream lace introduced to us the charm of the sleeveless dress for such occasions.
Miss Doris Clark was most suitably dressed in a simple but extremely dainty frock of white net over pale blue silk.
D. O. S.
Editors Notes.
We would draw our readers' attention to the appeal for old clothing made by the P. M. O. Many of us must have old clothing for which we have’ no further use and which is generally ap¬propriated by the “boys". Lest anyone may- be hesitating to give for fear that the clothing is un¬suitable, we venture to say that the old paupers are not particular as to fashion or cut and any warm clothing will be appreciated.
For the first time in the Annals of Sarawak the wireless telephone has been used and apparently, to judge from the account given by Mr. Barnes in this issue, with complete success. We understand that in this venture Sarawak is ahead of her neigh¬bours and Mr. Barnes and the wireless staff are to be congratulated on the results achieved—We hope to publish further information concerning this in-teresting apparatus from time to time as it would appear to have solved the problem of communi¬cation in Sarawak without the use of wire. This has always been the drawback to the ordinary telephone; where the line passes through jungle it is almost impossible to keep it clear and the connection maintained without the use of a gang of coolies constantly clearing the rentis.
Bridge Tournament at the New Club,
10th August, 1922.
BY AN ANGEL.
PROLOGUE.
One eve as I was resting on a cloudlet I heard a rumour through the ether sent So down 1 flew to see what I could gather At the New Club where they held the Tourn¬ament.
As I stole round the Club so none could heat me I saw the wondrous sight of twenty four Humans all sitting round at little tables Bridging as if they’d never bridged before.
They played in competition for the prizes Presented by the Rajah’s kindly grace.
But in some minds; for I can read minds clearly His Highness’ supper held a leading place.
And suddenly 1 heard a violent clamour
As men arose and dashed into the Ban- Returning, weighted down with plates and glasses.
Which gave my astral body quite a jar.
Then back they went to all their little tables A worried-looking human hovering round Urging the sluggards on to greater efforts For some were far behind I shortly found.
As time went on t'was seen they did not matter So far behind in points as well as time Perhaps their thoughts went wand'ring off together,
Forgetting all, into a world subline.
But some played very fast and finished early; Me thinks if master had induced Scots Grey To run as fast as master played on Thursday He might have share in Billy Buster's day.
Sometime before the end I thought I noticed That Bates and Hayward had compiled a score Exceeding all the others by some hundreds. And still continued to compile some more.
Hundreds of aces round their shoulders fluttered All kinds of slams were struggling on the floor To get themselves recorded on the score sheet. I’ve never seen so huge a score before.
When all was done t’was seen their score, three thousand.
Was better by a thousand than the Meads’ And all the rest were nowhere, so they told me Perhaps they’d made mistaken calls and leads.
I flew away before the room quite emptied But ere I went 1 heard what people thought “T'was really jolly ripping of the Rajah" I heard them say—and so I thought they ought.
EPILOGUE.
Some nights ago 1 flew to the Astana 
And there I. saw an interesting sight I saw His Highness handing to the winners The prizes they had won the other night.
Departure of His Highness the Rajah.
A Health Resort for Jaded Workers.
His Highness left en route for England by s s. Kuching on the 1st September: accompanying His Highness was Mr. O. Lang, whilst on the same ship were Mrs. Gillan who is returning to England and Mr. and Mrs. W. Geikie who are leaving Sarawak for good.
His Highness met the Malay chiefs before leav¬ing and all the Europeans proceeded on board to wish His Highness good-bye.
There was some delay in starting and the Kuching did not sail until after noon.
We merely echo the sentiments of all when we say H>at we wish His Highness a safe voyage home and a speedy return to Sarawak ; we also wish Mrs. Gillan and Mr. Lang an enjoyable leave.
Partings are always sad and it was with regret that we realised that we were saying good bye to Mr. and Mrs. Geikie for good. We wish them the best of luck and hope that they will not entirely forget their many friends in Sarawak.
New Club Tennis Tournament.
A tennis tournament was held as usual at the New Club during Race Week and the weather being kinder this year than last it was concluded on Monday 21st when the final was played off.
The Kuching section of the tournament was played before Race Week and produced some very close matches, nearly all being taken to the third set.
In the Kuching section final J. P. Baird and Miss. O’Driscoll beat C. P. Lowe and Mrs. Ward after a very good match, thus qualifying to meet the winners of the Outstation section in the final.
In the Outstation section the matches were not so close and W. H. Geikie and E. O. Bruce came through fairly easily finally beating H. D. Aplin and W. F. Dick comfortably.
The final, Baird and Miss O'Driscoll vs: Geikie and Bruce, was curiously in and out.
In the first set the former couple played very' badly, and only managed to win one game.
In the second set. however, they pulled them¬selves together, Miss O’Driscoll especially showing much better from, and won a gruelling set 6-5.
In the third set Geikie and Bruce continued to play very steadily and the former brought off some very nice winning shots. Baird on the other hand missed several easy smashes towards the end of the set which probably made a good deal of difference, Geikie and Bruce eventually winning the set 6-4.
The winners deserved their win and it must be especially gratifying to Geikie who is on the eve of what is probably a final departure for Europe.
(Contributed)
A Health Resort for Jaded Workers.
To many Sarawakians the life of the interior has been shewn in the light of a hurried joy ride to Baram or Kapit, or a few days in Simanggang or some other outstation combining a visit to a native house and seeing the native life. Perhaps they may care to hear of the vast un¬inhabited parts of the jungle, the haunts of the jungle produce worker who helps to make our re¬venue, and of the less familiar wild beasts such as the rhinoceros, tiger cat, wild buffaloe, etc ,or again of the wonderful scenery in the side streams that abound in the ulus with their waterfalls and hanging creepers, their clear pure water in which fish of all kindscan be seen, their mossy banks and caves which seem to get more beautiful the nearer one gets to the source and the mountains which start them on their downward career. One sees a great river like the Rejang at its mouths or at Sibu, and one wonders where all this water can come from. Let me take you with me, if you care to fallow, and I will endeavour to depict a holiday trip for some tired office worker of Kuching or Miri who decides to go up the Rejang to its source and come back by way of the Balleh provided he is lucky in choosing a time when the water is low and progress fairly fast for, should he be unfor¬tunate and the water rise, he would not get very far. We will take a launch to Kapit, the last station up the Rejang, where a European is to be found. There we will hire a boat which must be strong and well made to withstand the great .rapids fur¬ther up, and select a crew who are familiar with up river paddling, poling etc. Leaving Kapit, the water being favourable, we are paddled, pulled and poled up to Balaga where there is a fort and a Native Officer, and a small Chinese and Brunei bazaar.
On the way to Balaga only one big rapid has to be negotiated, but as soon as we leave Balaga they come in quick succession, some short and some as long as a mile or so the worst perhaps being that known as the Prong, but rapids have been described so often that it is not necessary to do so here. Some ten days above Kapit, and four or five above Balaga, we leave behind the last native house, that of the Ukits, having passed on the way several large rivers on either side. Another five days of rapids and we leave behind even the old farming lands and come to the virgin jungle, the great river here having thinned down to about 100 yards across. Little rivers come pouring into it at nearly every bend ; the banks of the river here are green and mossy and great trees overhang on which monkeys sport. Some of them run away chattering on the approach of our boat and others merely look with curiosity. Often one comes across wild pig or deer feeding at the river side who give one startled glance and make for the shelter of their home, the jungle, or again catch sight of a bear, plandok or other wild animal whilst the boyaks dive from the trees with a splash into the water and one sees many of the tortoise family basking in pools. We will go up the Aput, which is the right hand source of the Rejang leav¬ing the left hand source which rises in Mt. Duru or Guntor. Proceeding up the Aput for a day we come to the Kliong, a right hand tributary, and proceed up this stream another day until in its turn we come to its right hand tributary the Ma. Here we must leave our boat, shoulder our be-longings, and start to walk crossing and recrossing the Ma which is a shallow' stream in low water until we come to its tributary, the Lium, and here the next day we start to climb to the range of mountains that runs East and West down between the Rejang and the Balleh from the great Bukit Tibang until it dies away in the little hills near
Kapit. A stiff climb this up onto this range where we will spend the night, and another hard days work,, out of our way a little, because we want to climb Mt. Tibang, from the summit of which we can trace the rivers and Mt. ranges of Central Borneo. There to the East stands Mt Bulan which with Mt. Tibang watches and guards sentinel over the sources of many great rivers and hills, towering above them all, their white stones shewing up clearly and their arms stretching away right and left in the form of a circle. From every peak a river starts running down between rows of mountains and hills, rivers great and rivers small, from the Rejang and Balleh or Markham and Uga or Batang Kayan down to the tiny Limn we have just left. Away to the north we can see the farm fires of the Kenyahs and hill people of Dutch Borneo and all around us the great uninhabited hills, the haunts of the rhinoceros. Mt. Bulan is the most striking looking of the Nit. Peaks, of which there are many, for right at its summit is a long oblong wall of white stone some 50 to 100ft. in length that stands up like a castle on the peak. Looking at it from Mt. Tibang it looks very difficult to climb being sheer precipice. One turns reluctantly to descend and start again the long climb back to the Balleh and two days climbing and descending peaks of the range brings us to the Mouth of the Souraga one of the uppermost tri¬butary's of the Balleh. Here we have a boat wait¬ing that will take us rapidly or otherwise, accord¬ing to our fancy, (one can be in Kapit in four days) back to Kapit. For sport we have seen pig. and deer abound which can be shot at the riverside or tracked ; rhinoceros are few and far between and are rapidly being exterminated by Dyak hunters : buffaloe there are in plenty or we can fish with rod and line or spear, and we can bathe in clear mountain water free from the fear of crocodiles. The exhilarating air of the mountains, the exer¬cise of climbing and the magnificent views that can be obtained will send us back to our office fitter than any trip to Java or Penang perhaps with the last impression in our minds that here is a beautiful country lying idle.—(Contributed.)
Letters to B. N. B.
MY DEAR PERCY,
Many thanks for your letter Percy old plank, the incident at the country railway station did actually occur so I suppose I ought to apologise— pour out the drinks.
When 1 heard that my friends the enemy were attacking in massed formation, I admit having the breeze up. One at a lime if you please. My retreat began in orderly fashion, and until it .suddenly occurred to me that you and your bunch of marauders from the hinterland might 'nave chartered a special train, in which case it would wait, whilst you descended to destruct me. The retreat then became a debacle and I fled to my lair in the wilderness where I—Huh ! pass the salt.
Yes I saw Pecksniff, such a dear little fellow and so well mannered.
I hope Gladys Cooper has quite recovered, I am afraid the shock of seeing you in your pyjamas was too much for her. Now we know where the flies go.
Of all the things which most impressed me Percy was to see the planters literally tearing up the work, and when I saw what they 'ad done I said —thanks, same again.
Of course I knew you would not believe that 1 was the victim of my friends, in spite of whom I did get out alive My one ambition now is to entice them to this quiet spot and utterly destroy them.
Well Percy old punter there is your pony get on to it, but don't blame me if you emulate the poor fellow who slipped in the hotel.
Ever thine,
CUTHBERT.
SALE OF BORNEO PONIES.
The 8 remaining Borneo ponies, now at the Astana Farm, will be drawn for on September 30th. The Price will be $100 each.
Should there be more sub¬scribers than ponies preference will be given to those who did not get ponies in the last draw, and should those subscribers exceed the number of ponies a draw will take place for the 8 subscribers.
Those wishing to subscribe please apply in writing to the undersigned.
Successful subscribers must re-move their ponies after the draw and the Government will not be responsible for their keep or safety if not taken away.
J. BEVILLE ARCHER, Hon. Secretary, Kuching Races.
A correspondent has sent us, but has omitted to say by whom it was published, the following sonnet.
We apologise therefore if we have cribbed from one of contemporaries, but as so much malicious abuse has been levelled at the poor rubber tree we feel that a word from the other side will not be amiss.
Sonnet to a Rubber Tree in Slump Time.
Much has been said, and will be said again About you, Rubber Tree, with latex white For planting you has been men's chief delight But now your little lite seems on the wane Unless some plan is formed to stand the strain. Can’t you assist by putting up a fight? Resist the tapper’s knife with all your might, Turn off the milky flow, right from the main. Or like the trees of Dante, from whose boughs Dropped Blood, fill you the cups below with Gore. Poor old Ramsamy in a funk would be; Planters would tremble, and with solemn vows Would swear not to produce you any more Until the world requires you,—
RUBBER TREE.
Race Week Golf Competition
The following returned cards. Several other mem¬bers made strenuous efforts to break the record for the maximum score over 9 Holes. As they hope to make another attempt next summer, they have refused to publish the result of their efforts.
The Borneo Company.
An issue of 400,000 Seven-and-a-Half per cent, Cumulative Preference shares of the Borneo Com¬pany, of £ 1 each at par, has been placed by Messrs. Helbcrt, Wagg, and Co., Limited. The present capital of the Company is £600,000 in Ordinary snares of £1 each. The original capital was a quarter of a million sterling. In 1899 this was increased to £300,000 the additional £50,000 shares being issued at a premium of 100 per cent., and in 1920 it was raised to £900,000 by the capitalisation of reserves and undivided profits The net profits of the company show from £88,401 in 1912 to £171,264 in 1920, and the average annual dividend on the Ordinary shares to March 31, 1921, was a little over twenty per cent. The new preference shares will be entitled to a fixed cumulative preferential dividend of seven and a half per cent per annum, which will be payable in February and August. They will rank preferentially on capital account, and holders will have the right to convert any of them at any time during the next ten years from October 1, 1922, into a like amount of Ordinary shares. Registered in 1856, the com¬pany’s activities consist of the working of extensive teak forests in Upper Siam and the carrying on of a general trading and agency business. Included in the company’s assets is a herd of 400 elephants. According to the latest figures available, the assets without calculating anything for g o o d w i 11. amounted to £2,315,555 and the liabilities to £1.130,442. The company has branches in Java, Singapore, Bangkok, and agencies or represen¬tation in Penang, Ipoh. Sourabaya and Sama- rang, a tea estate in Sumatra, brickworks in Singa¬pore, new wharves and warehouses in Bangkok, and a rubber estate and a gold mine in Sarawak. Three directors of the company are also directors
of the Bank of	W. Henderson,
 E. C Grenfell, and A., Whitworth. The new shares will not be dealt in till about a month ' has elapsed; because the Articles of Association of ' the company have to be altered to permit this I preference issue to be made. The proceeds of the  issue will be applied partly to repaying bankers’ I advances and partly to furnishing additional working capital.
It is proposed to subdivide the present shares of £10 each into 10 shares of £1 each: also that
in future ownership of shares shall be unrestricted, which means that other than the hitherto privi¬leged shareholders can be owners of shares.
(S. F. P.)
Radio Telephone in Sarawak.
The two sets received from England have been tested out for some four months with satisfactory results, but have not been used regularly owing to there being insufficient room for these additions.
The operating room has now been enlarged and the instruments permanently fixed. The sets, being small and having a working range of 100 to 150 miles on an aerial about 60 feet high, it is satisfactory that they have reached a much further distance—this was obtained, however, by some additions made up at the Kuching wireless Station and using the main aerial.
Speech and music from a gramophone have been transmitted to Singapore Commercial and Naval Wireless Stations for testing purposes on several occasions, the report from both being to the effect that the reception was quite good.
On the 30th instant the Superintendent of the former station asked for a half hour concert at 7.50 a. m. the G. O. C., Singapore, being present. His Highness the Rajah kindly allowed the Sara¬wak Ranger’s Band to perform in the Operating Room. Kuching, and the music, including speech, was received with evident satisfaction. Within a few moments of the finish a telegram was received stating that results were loud and clear.
There are six Radio transmitters and some new receiving sets now on order for bringing up to date the present Wireless system in Sarawak and for installing in Bintulu, Dalat and Simanggang, and there may be further developments later. Since the ordinary Morse key is attached to the instru¬ment it can always be used in bad weather in case articulation of speech is not good, the range is also further than telephony.
The stations should cost little to run since the engines are small and use kerosene' As regards reliability the land line is notoriously inefficient in the jungle and if the new stations prove as satisfactory as the present wireless plants at Ku¬ching, Miri, Sibu, Sadong and Goebilt they should be a boon to Sarawak.
J. R. B.
The following telegram was received by th6 Manager in Kuching from the Singapore Manager Station.
Manager— Kuching.
H. E. The G. O. C wishes me to convey to you and the Sarawak band his thanks and appreciation of the music rendered.
SUPT. V. P. W.
Sarawak Oil.
Over 1,000 TONS Daily From Miri.
Comparatively few people realise the import¬ance of these oilfields in Sarawak. The production is now 1,000 tons a day, it was formerly 700 and the resources of the fields would appear to be very great indeed. The prophecy of a year ago, that it would prove to be one of the best oil producing fields in territory under the protection of the British Government has been fully borne out, and the undertaking is another testimony to the activity and enterprise of the Shell group.
The present company, Sarawak Oilfield, Ltd., was incorporated in Kuching on July 20, last year to take over the oil interests previously adminis¬trated by the Anglo-Saxon Petroleum Co., Ltd., in Miri.
After many years of scientific prospecting, the Anglo-Saxon Petroleum Co. Ltd. were rewarded for their trouble and expenditure by the appear¬ance of large quantities of oil of good quality. The field already exploited in Sarawak has already given an extraordinary rate of production, and the oil horizons have proved numerous and extend over a large area. Each month the yield becomes greater and, as stated above, now approximates 1,100 tons of crude per day. The most noticeable feature of the field is average daily output per producing well, which, from figures published in the Petroleum Times dated January 29, 1921, is higher than that of most of the producing wells of the fields of California.
Situated as it is within three days of Singapore, and within reasonable proximity to the main trade routes from Singapore to Hongkong and Manila, and from Java to Hongkong, its geographical position—Long. 114 E. and Lat. 4.24 N.— is most advantageous both for purposes of supplying Eastern markets and for purposes of bunkering oil-driven vessels. Loading is done through two submarine pipelines carried out 2J miles from the shore, where there is ample depth of water for the largest vessels. We think we are correct in stating that these lines are the longest submarine oil pipelines in the world. A third line —14.550 feet in length—was successfully launched on August 16, 1921. These lines enable ships to be loaded and despatched exceedingly quickly.
The situation and development of Miri is unique. Instead of being, as one would expect, a very hot climate it is exceedingly cool and healthy. In accordance with the Shell Company’s usual policy, great pride has been taken jn providing adequate recreation and amusements for the whole commu¬nity, and Miri enjoys all the facilities of larger centres, including tennis, golf, sea-bathing, a good cinema, and a motor bus service to connect with the outlying oil producing areas. A large farm is in operation for the comfort of the com¬munity, an ice plant, vegetable gardens, etc., which permit the Colony being practically self-sup¬porting.
The Sarawak Government gives the company every encouragement in its unremitting search for this valuable product, and the • telegrams set out above are a happy indication of the good relations which exist,—(S. T.)
The telegrams were included in one last issue.-- [Ed. S. C7.]
The Kuching Sanitary and Municipal Advisory Board.
Report of Electing held on Wednesday,
26th July 1922.
Present: -
Mr. K. H. Gillan (Chairman), Messrs. C. Fen¬wick, E. Parnell. Lam Chin Jee, Lan Chin Hian, Kon En Law, Tun Sum Guan, Salleh Marican, Captain C. P. Lowe, Dr. O. G. F.
Luhn and Haji Hassim.
By-laws relative to Conservancy, Traffic and other Street regulations were considered and a dis¬cussion took place relative to the By-law prohibiting7 the use of Streets for the purpose of drying certain foodstuffs, medicinal herbs, cakes, and produce, when it was decided that the Chinese members of the Board should make enquiries of the shopkeepers and traders affected by the proposed regulations to obtain suggestions from them for any alternative arrange¬ment. The further discussion of the By-law was therefore deferred pending a report as above.
Part VI (Buildings) of the Kuching Municipal Order 1922 was then considered and the original draft submitted duly approved with certain slight amendments.
Dr. O. G. F. Luhn asked that a discussion lake place on the desirability of a No. 1 standard system of sanitation in certain areas notified by him in, letters to the Chairman,
The Chairman however suggested that before doing so that the consideration of a proposal by Captain C. P. Lowe that a Committee be appointed to discuss the advantages and disadvantages of a three standard system of sanitation for Kuching be considered and that if approved the question raised by Dr. Luhn be remitted to this Committee. This was duly approved.
The Chairman then proposed an amendment to Captain C. P. Lowe's proposal seconded by Dr. O. G. F. Luhn that a Chinese representative be in* eluded in the Committee as originally proposed. This was approved and the original proposal seconded by Mr. Tan Sum Guan that the Committee should consist of Mr. E. Parnell, The Superintendent of Public Works, the Chief Health Officer with the additional Chinese member as approved was there¬after passed for the approval of His Highness the Rajah.
Mr. Tan Sum Guan was asked and consented to act as Chinese representative on the Committee. It was further approved that the Superintendent; of Lands and Surveys be asked to attend meetings of the Committee in an advisory capacity as originally suggested in Captain C. P. Lowe’s proposal.
A proposal by Dr. O. G. F. Luhn seconded by Mr. C. Fenwick that all vacant land belonging to the Government within the Municipal area be kept clear of undergrowth and in a reasonable Sanitary condition was duly approved.
It was further proposed by Mr. E. Parnell seconded by Dr. O. G. F. Luhn that arrangements be made to prevent Buffaloes from straying from their grazing ground.
In connection with the inclusion of the cross¬river Kampongs within the Municipal area, it was approved that these should include all Kampongs from Kampong Tupong Batu to Kampong Pulo.
Minutes of meeting held on Friday,
11th August 1922.
Present;—
Mr. K- n. Gillan (Chairman), Captain C P Lowe, Dr. O. G. F. Luhn, Messrs. E Parnell, C. Fenwick, Lam Chin Jee, Lau Chin Hian, Salleh Mari can, Kon En Law, Tan Sum Gunn, 
and Haji Hassim.
The Chairman read a letter from Mr. Tan Sum Guan reporting on a meeting of Shopkeepers in connection with the drying of foodstuffs etc. on the public streets and submitting the following suggestions.
That all articles possessing an offensive smell, such as salt fish, fish roe, dried prawns, Blachan and cow-hide be dried at the site known as the "Fisherman’s Village" at Padungan.
That other foodstuffs etc. be dried on the River Embankment beyond the street limits.
It was therefore recommended that these suggest¬ions be approved and that space be allotted for Public Drying Grounds on the River Embankment the vacant land at the junctions of Tabuan Road, Cross Road and Wayang Street and on the land bordered by Market and Khoo Hun Yeang Streets.
The Streets By-laws proposed by the Chairman and seconded by Mr. Kon En Law were then approved.
In connection with the Building By-laws, it was suggested and approved that as these were of so highly technical a nature they should be remitted to the Superintendent of Public Works and the Chief Health Officer for preparation and when com¬pleted, they be re-submitted to the Board for its approval.
MONTHLY REPORTS
SADONG
June.
General.—I arrived at Sadong from Sebangan on the-lst of the month having settled one or two small matters.at the latter place. The s. s. Alice Lorraine arrived the same evening with Mr. Evans, passenger. Saturday the 3rd being a public holiday, the Govern¬ment Offices were closed for the day. The S. s. Chee Foo arrived that day and left again on the 4th for Serabang.
On the 10th I left for Tabekang, arriving there on the 11th. The s. 1. Vava had to be left at Ampungan as there was insufficient water in the river. From the 10th to the 20th the Dyaks were paying in tax. During that period I paid visits to Tabekang, Pichin and Kerosin Dyaks. Just before leaving 1 beard a report to the effect that Dyaks have lately been selling laud to Malays and Chinese but there was no time to investigate the matter properly. It will be looked into as soon as I can get up river again. The Tabekang Dyaks complained that Malays and Chinese were interfering with their burial ground. A suitably inscribed notice board has now been erected.
On the 21st I left Tabekang, paid a hurried visit to the Segaong Dyaks and thence to Ampungan where I spent the best part of the night with the Dyaks. They were very anxious that Sea Dyaks should not be allowed to invade their territory. On I the 22nd I arrived at Gedong where the Dyaks already paid in tax, and finally reached Sadong on the 23rd.
A number of Sea Dyaks arrived during the month from the 2nd Division with a view to settling permanently in this District. The local penghulus, however, state that there is now no room for new arrivals.
C. Voon of Chop Chua Hin, Kuching applied for [mission to erect a getah-leaf factory at Sadong. This was granted, subject to the covering ’approval of the Resident. Formerly leaves have been exported in bulk to Kuching, so that a local factory should not only strengthen and regularise the trade in this district, but should also result in lower cost of production
Courts. The Courts have been moderately busy during the month. Two men were imprisoned for breach of agreement. At Tabekang three Jennan Dyaks were found guilty of stealing bird’s nests and were ordered to pay compensation totalling $81 and were fined $25 each.
P. W. D.—Authority having been received from the Resident, the construction of a boat shed was put in hand. Unfortunately owing to a slight mis¬understanding the work was held up during my absence np river. It should soon be completed now. Minor repairs were carried out in the 2nd clerk’s bouse.
The prisoners, averaging 21, were employed on general upkeep of the station.
Rainfall for the month was 8 96 inches.
July.
General.—At midnight 30th June-1st July, the opium, gambling and arrack farm was turned over to Chop Jee Hak Watt, the stock transferred being 2,000 packets of opium.
On the 7th, s. s. Alice Lorraine arrived at 2.30 p. m. with Mrs. Mead and children and Mr. P. H. Hayward for Sadong, and Mr. Calvert and Dr. Reed for Sibu, for which place she left again the same night. Dr. Reed took the opportunity of inspecting the local hospital.
On the 10th, the Chinese junk King Poa Li left for Hangkow with a cargo of 784 belian logs.
The Pangara of Sagaong arrived on the 13th, and reported that Orang Kaya Daud had died. The deceased was a very old man.
Mr. G. T. Bates of the Borneo Company Limited arrived by the s. s. Sri Sadong on the 11th July and Mr. Hayward left again for Kuching by the same ship on the 15th. Mr. Bates spent about ten days in the district attempting to trace and recover various debts owing to the Company, and left again on the 26th, for Kuching.
The s s. Yuet Wah came in to load coal on the 21st, Mrs. Mead and family taking passage in her to Pending, for which port she sailed again on the 23rd.
A boating accident on the 23rd. resulted in the death by drowning of one Umbat, a Dyak, who was unable to swim. His companion Anjar was an in¬different swimmer but contrived to reach the bank. Umbat's body was recovered two days later.
Public Works.—The contractor completed bis work on the new boat house during the month, and prisoners have been busy constructing a slipway for the s. 1. Vava. The roads and ornamental grounds have also received the attention of a prison gang. A slight rearrangement of water pipes and taps was taken in hand by Mr. EVANS, Manager of the Colliery, and should result in a more efficient supply.
Courts.—A Chinaman named Ong Nga was sentenced to three months hard labour for living among, and interfering with, Land Dyaks at Beduk. Three Sea Dyaks from the Rejang were also sentenced to three months each for contempt of court. Last December they were ordered to leave Milikin but have
not attempted to comply. Of the remaining cases
which camo before the Courts, the majority concerned
breaches of agreements and debts, and none de-
serves special mention Fines and fees for the month
amounted to $405.61.
Rainfall 13*51 inches.
G. BERESFORD STOOKE,
Officer-in-Charge.
SADONG COLLIERY.
July.
The gross out-put of coal produced by the mines
during the month was 2,041.03 tons; 465 tons of
this was consumed by our boilers, and the balance
of 1,576.03 tons delivered to the wharf, for export.
The shipments for the mouth were as follows:—
The balance of coal in stock at the end of the
month, was 1,641 tons.
The dry weather experienced during the month,
was conducive to the successful stoping out of the
upper seam coal underlying the clay and sand cover
on West crop.
The West panel workings of No. 8 mine again
struck the old workings, to the South-East.
A fall of roof took place just inside the concrete
Arch entrance of the Adit at the new mines early
in the month, which, with difficulty, was cleared,
and the cavity arched with concrete by the 28th of
the month. The miners employed in the two Slopes
were engaged throughout the month on the concrete
Arches, where a total length of 96 lineal feet was
erected1.
A good supply of the timber which had been
worked and held up pending the completion of the
Branch railway line being laid into the jungle, on
the swamp side of the sawmill, was brought out
during the month.
The main water-service was re-arranged at the
Colliery junction, and also at the wharf with satis-
factory results.
The works of dumping shale refuse on the swamp,
behind the Blacksmith quarters was restarted with
the advent of the dry season.
One of the old cows, which belonged to the origi-
nal herd, was found dead near the cattleshed on the
morning of 11th.
Oue of the coolies who had been recruited in
Kuching last year, by name “Ngai Omi.” absconded
from the line on the 3rd .and was still at large at
the end of the month.
The s, s. Yuet Wah arrived on Friday the 21st,
and left on Sunday, the.23rd, for Hongkong via
Pending with 959J tons of coal.
The rainfall for the month was 9'31 inches.
Most of this quantity fell during the first half of the
month as the latter half was very dry.
J. W. EVANS,
Manager.
SIMANGGANG.
June.
On the 1st, tenders for the Saribas Arrack and Gam-
bling Farms were opened, and the tender of Chop
"Tong Shing" accepted at a rental of $260 per
mensem for three years, a decrease of $60 on the
former rental. The former Farmer put in a com-
plaint that he did not know on what date the tenders
were to be opened. He was informed that a notice
was published in the Sarawak Government Gazette.
The 3rd being the birthday of If. M. King George,
the Offices were closed.
Public Works.—The prison gang, have rebuilt the
road at the back of the bazaar. Many fruit trees
were cut down and in consequence the road is hard.
The Chinese were ordered to ditch and clean up
their back yards. The prison gang also cleared the
Simbau road and the short round
I arrived at Simanggang from Kuching on the
10th having been away since March 22nd.
On the 11th the relations of Mang reported his
after a short illness. This Undup Dyak was much
respected, and was often of assistance to Government.
On the 13th Mr. W. F. Dick visited Belong to
arrange about the auction of Chop “Chong Kee’s”
property. He returned to Simanggang next morning.
On the 14lh Mr. H. E. Cutfield walked as fur as
the Tisak, and on his return reported the Dyaks
had cleared the road fairly well.
The Courts were kept very busy during the
mouth, but no cases call for special mention.
Koh Ah Lak of Kuching arrived during the month
and reported that he had received information that
a great number of Malays living along the coast
were in possession of Kotak fishing nets. A search
warrant was issued and a number of nets have been
recovered. Proceedings are being taken against the
Malays.
On the 23rd Mr. W. F. Dick, accompanied by
Abang Zin N. O. and Draup of L. O., left for Betong.
I herewith append his report.
“I left Simanggang on the 23rd accompanied by
Abang Zin Native Officer, and Draup of L. O.
arriving at Betong at 11 a. m.
On Saturday the 24th an auction was held of all
the goods* remaining in Chop Chong Kee’s shop,
the auction lasting the whole day.
The following day a number of cases were disposed
of, the only one calling for mention being that of
Malina and Munggop (f.) of Paku who were fined
3 and 11/2 pikuls respectively for minor incest, and
Jang, Tuai Rumah, 11 pikuls for concealing this
offence.
The following morning we left for Pusa arriving
there the same day.
After settling a few cases we left at midday mi
Tuesday for Debak arriving there at 6 p. m. The
frame work of the new Court House has been
erected, but work is at present delayed for lack of
nails. There were only a few minor cases for.
settlement none of which call for special mention. 
The Malays were asked to suggest a new Native
Officer in place of Abang Udin resigned. The only
men suggested were Abang Gani and Abang
Dulkarim.
Two Chinese Silversmiths, Ah Meng and Liang
। Kui were warned about borrowing money from
Dyaks and giving no security.
We left Debak on Thursday morning for Pusa,
arriving there at 3 p. m.
On Friday there we e a few Debt Court cases.
Au enquiry was held concerning the death of a
Dyak named Gramong and the enquiry was
adjourned for further witnesses. The probable
cause of death was epilepsy.
In spite of careful enquiries into the death of P. C. Siew no clue is forthcoming. The movements of several people were enquired into but without any result.
On Saturday morning we left for Betong arriving there at 11.30. Abang Zin was sent to the Paku to arrest ex P. C. Kadir. This man's movements on the night of the murder are unknown.
On Sunday there were a number of cases at Betong which were disposed of. Abang Zin returned from the Paku, having been unable to find Kadir who is reported to have gone to Ulu Rimbas. I was still away from headquarters at the end of the mouth.
I left for Engkilili on the 28th by s. 1. One. Dyaks arc still bringing in timber for the new Court Bouse. When there is sufficient material the work will be built by contract. I returned next day to Simanggang.
Kalaka.—The Government stock of padi at Saratok has now been shipped to Kuching, having been taken over by the Prison Department.
The s. 1. Lupar called in twice and on one occasion lowed a raft of logs to Triso.
There has been an epidemic of influenza and a great number of deaths reported.
Reports on the pepper crop in the Roban district are bad; most of the vines have been attacked by Some disease.''
July.
On the 3rd, Mr. AV. F. Dick returned from the Saribas accompanied by Abang Indut, N. O., who had come over to attend Court concerning various appeals against the decision of the Native Court, Betong.
Court.—Work has been heavy during the month ; cighty-four cases cam? before the Courts mostly connected with land disputes and breach of agree¬ments, but none call for special mention. On the 15th, I visited Engkilili returning next day after having settled various cases which were brought be¬fore me.
Public Works.—The prison gang was mostly em¬ployed on upkeep of roads and the carpenters were on squaring timber for new clerks quarters.
On the 21st, I left for the Kalaka accompanied by Abang Dulrasid N. O., in s. 1. One. Kabong was reached the next day. On the24th, I held Court, and numerous cases which had been adjourned by Abang Bujang N. O., were finally dealt with. The same day I left for Saratok I found this place kept in ex¬cellent order and great credit is due to the Native Officer, Abang Abutalip, and the Court Writer Jerah. The Malays have also put their Kampong roads in through order. The Malays above the bungalow are extending the road for about one mile and new bouses are being built.
Dyaks and Malays have planted up sago palms on a great scale and I am informed that in a few years time the export of sago from the Kalaka will be three times greater than that at present.
On the 25th, I held Court. Chua Poh Liong an old offender was sentenced to one years’ R. I. for theft. Yap Hong Koon was sentenced to five years R. I. for rape on a young Chinese girl, aged fourteen years. There were numerous other cases dealing with land and Debt Court.
I returned to Kabong on the 26th and next day settled the case, in which a great number of Malays along the coasts had been in the habit of stealing the fishing nets used by Kotak fishing boats. They were all duly punished and nets returned to the owner, who came especially from Kuching to take action.
I left Kabong on the 27th taking with me $5,984.90 for Simanggang Treasury, on the way over I called in at Samaludam. also visited Triso, and arrived at Simanggang at 7.20 p. m.
The Forest Guard have visited most of the villages collecting royalty etc. Mohamat, F. G. Sebuyow, was ordered to visit Lingga each month.
On 31st, tenders for the Lingga Birds-nests Fann were opened, and the tender of Chop Sim Kee Chim accepted fora rental of $100 per annum, an increase of $32.
Towards the end of the month a spell of hot weather set in, and in consequence there was an epidemic of fever, causing many deaths amongst Malays and Dyaks,
F. A. W. PAGE-TURNER, District Officer.
LOWER REJANG.
June.
REJANG.
Court.—There has been a large number of cases before both .Courts. The only case of importance being one of criminal breach of trust combined with absconding under advances against Ng Hoh Bin alias Hoh Ah Kin etc. This man was sent by his Towkay, Ah Tow of Chop Soon Hock to the Sarikei branch with 1,100 packets of opium early in May this year. En route to Sarikei he absconded and was eventually arrested by some Dyaks of Ulu Sarikei and forwarded here on the 25th. Yee Foo a pepper planter, is charged with helping the abs¬conder to evade arrest and with receiving the stolen property. The case was still adjourned for further witnesses at the end of the month.
P. w. D.—The prison gang, averaging 24 in num¬ber, has been engaged on general upkeep of the station.
General.—On the evening of the 2nd an attempt was made to set fire to Tong Lee Wah’s timber godown ; fortunately it was found out in time other¬wise if the fire had got proper hold the whole of the sawmill buildings would have been destroyed. The culprit has not yet been found.
The Island Trading Co's, motor schooner Kim Soon Lee ran aground at Jerijeh Point, in a very heavy storm, in the evening of the 5th. She was refloated, with the help of the Kampong people, the next morning.
The Assistant Conservator of Forests arrived here by s. I. Mermaid on the 7th. He returned to Sibu again on the 9th.
Trade.—The Foreign Trade Returns for the month are as follows:—
MATU
This Station has not; been visited during the month. TheOmrt Writer informs me that there nothing of importance has happened during the month.
P. W.D.—The prisoners, averaging 3, have been engaged on the usual upkeep of the Station.
I have not visited the Station during the month. The Court Writer reports that nothing of importance has happened during the month.
P. w. D — The prisoners, averaging 5, have been engaged on general upkeep of the Station.
R- D. ST. J. HORTON, 
SIBU.
June.
Court.—Jawa, a Kapit Dyak, was lined $50 and sentenced to two months imprisonment for collecting a party in the Balleh with Uie intention of making a raid.
A number of new jars found their way into Binatang from Kuching having been brought by the s. s. Sarawak but not entered in the ship's manifest and consequently escaped payment of duty last year. This recently come to light and Gapor, the importer, having evaded payment of the duty brought a false charge against S. Francis concerning the matter and was sent to gaol for two months and ordered to pay double duty on the jars. How the jars came to be shipped in Kuching and to whom the freight was paid is unknown.
Thai Chiang was lined $75 for receiving stolen goods from a prisoner and the prisoner was duly punished.
A Sarikei Dyak was fined a pikul for setting a pig trap and slightly wounding a Chinese woman.
The juragan of the s. s. Plevo was fined $100 for carrying more than 12 passengers, the vessel having no passenger license. Owing to these steamers not being licensed to carry passengers considerable in¬convenience is caused to the community as every trip over 40 passengers could be carried each way and this is now impossible. The owners have applied for a passenger license mid are willing to carry out any improvements so as to secure a license and the matter has been reported to the Shipping Master Kuching
Public Works—The new road to Aup has been completed and all bridges constructed with the ex¬ception of the big one across the Aup stream the timber for which is not yet ready.
. Work on the new Court House is progressing satisfactorily.
The site of the new Rest House has been cleared and the material run to the site on trolleys for which a length of line was laid to the river.
The prison gang has been busy on various work weeding, carrying timber etc. etc., and the Tamil gang did a considerable amount of levelling.
General.—News having been received from Kapit that a party of Dyaks were in the Balleh preparing to raid the Punans, Penghulu Lidam was sent up "to stop them. They returned and Jawa, their leader, was punished.
I left, for Kapit on ,the 27th and while there re¬ceived news from Baram by wireless to the effect that a large party of Dyaks were in the Plirau stream and that the Kenyahs there, being suspicious, were preparing to attack them. Abang Aboi was sent upriver to find out about this and information was sent to Belaga. The report that a party of Kapit Dyaks had killed 15 Siangs was also investigated but there seems to be no truth in the rumour. Capt. Andreini went above Belaga and across into the ulu Balleh but neither he nor Abang Aboi could obtain any confirmation of the report which would appear to have been circulated with malicious intent.
Mr. MacBryan returned the Balui on the 8th He made a complete census of the tribes in the Balu, river and brought down some $3,000 in Kayan tax.
The Katibas Dyaks were visited by Mr. Aplin and Abang Elijah who returned to Sibu on the 21st.
The 3rd being the anniversary of the birthday of His Majesty the King, was observed as a Public Holiday.
The s. I. Mermaid broke down and was sent to Selalang for repairs in her engine room which were effected through the courtesy of the Manager of the Island Trading Company.
One of the wireless operators having become men¬tally deranged he was taken off duty and a relief Bent from Kuching.
The a. s. Plevo made two trips to Singapore and communication with Kuching was kept up by the s. s. Sarawak and Alice Lorraine and the motor schooner Chin Teclc Lee.
The rainfall amounted to 8 06 inches.
July.
Court.—P. C. Mir Singh was sentenced to a year’s imprisonment and dismissed the Force for an attempted indecent assault on a Chinese boy. A Dyak prisoner w’hq escaped from custody at Sarikei was recaptured and put in irons and a sentence of a further 6 months imprisonment imposed. Two Dyaks were fined a pikul each for settling a dispute by diving.
With the exception of these cases there were none of any importance before the Courts and work was very much lighter than usual, probably owing to both Chinese and natives being busy on their farms.
Public Works.—The Rest House site was cleared and the concrete foundation put in and posts erected by the prison gang, this work being finished at the end of the month.
The prison gang also weeded some ditches and paths and worked a quantity of stone. The Tamila weeded the Bukit Lima road to the Sawmill and did a small amount of levelling.
The Court House is nearing completion. The approaches were completed by the prisoners and next month should sec the building in use.
A new road from Sarikei for some miles inland through gardens was completed. This opened up a tract of country hitherto very difficult of access. The Chinese completed this work with little finan¬cial assistance from the Government.
A quantity of belian attaps and planks were sent to Daro for the buildings there.
General.—I returned from Kapit on the 2nd in the Chamois.
The s. s. Alice Lorraine arrived from Kuching on the 8th with the Rev. Father Dunn, Dr. Reed and Mr. Calvert, Govt. Auditor, who proceeded with the audit of the accounts here. Dr. Reed remained hero till the 9th having visited Rejang and then left for Bintulu by the p. s. Adeh.
Messrs. H. L. Owen and J. C. Swayne arrived from Kuching by the s. 1. Chamois on the 9th, the former on a visit and the latter proceeded to Oya by the Chamois on the 11th to take over charge of that Station from Mr. E. O. Bruce.
Mr. Bruce arrived from Oya by the m. 1. Leonora on the 16th and left for Kuching en route for Simanggang, to which Station he has been appointed, by the Chamois on the 22nd.
I left for Kuching with Mr. H. L. Owen by the s. s. Alice Loi mine on the 12th returning again by the s. 1. Chamois on the 17th.
The p. s. Adeh came from Kuching on the 19th on route for the North. Mr. F. G. Day arrived by her on a visit to the Station. She sailed the same day with Dr. Reed for Bintulu.
The s. 1. Chamois' masts being very rotten those were taken out and replaced by two new ones of bedaru wood
The s. 1. Mermaid was reported by the O.-in-C. Matu to have broken one of her connecting rods while entering Kuala Matu at the end of the month and arrangements were made to have her towed to Kuching for repairs. Repairs in her engine room were effected last month and again early this month by the Island Trading Company at Selalang. This little launch is constantly giving trouble.
The a. s. Flevo and Ban Siong Bee each made one trip to Singapore during the month, and the s. s. Alice Lorraine, Sarawak and p. s. Adeh kept up communications with Kuching.
The p. s. Adeh brought 15 buffaloes from Limbang on the 27th. Mrs. H. H. Kortright and two children were passengers by her for Sibu and she left next day for Kuching with Mr. F. G. Day and the Rev. Mother Mary.
As there has been considerable trouble caused through the Chinese padi planters borrowing Dyak land here for padi planting in the past an arrangement has now been made whereby the Chinese are given the land on the left hand bank of the river between S. Pau and Binatang for the purposes of padi planting only, the Dyaks being allowed to (arm on the right bank. The Chinese have been warned that should anyone plant anything but padi on this land bis land will be taken away and be himself heavily fined.
Only a few Dyaks and Malays farm on the left bank and these will remove to the other side after next harvest. This arrangement will put a stop to the constant bickering between the Chinese and the Dyaks over fanning land.
Messrs. Calvert and Jacques left for Kapit in the s. 1. Chamois on the 30th to audit the accounts of the upriver Stations.
Trade.—Jelutong is still very low in price and but little is being worked in consequence. Rubber re¬covered slightly and a somewhat larger quantity was shipped. Large quantities of malacca canes have been worked and are being exported and a very large quantity of sago flour—some 3,000 bags—had to be left at Binatang owing to the lack of cargo space and, with considerable additions, was still awaiting shipment at the end of the month. The s. s. Fievo and Ban Siong Bee are unable to cope with the export trade under present conditions though there is not sufficient import trade to fill more than a fraction of their cargo space.
The weather was stormy and unsettled till the latter half of the month when a hot spell started and from then onwards the heat was intense. Burn¬ing was going on everywhere and the air was thick with smoke.
All Chinese and natives have been busy on their clearings, they being much assisted in this work by the unusually dry weather. Although the price of rice has fallen to what it was in normal times the Chinese appear to have every intention of planting padi on ns large a scale as they did during the rice shortage and it is to be hoped that they will continue to do this in the future.
DONALD A. OWEN,
Resident 3rd Division.
OYA.
June.
Court.—A normal number of cases were heard-
during the month, none of which call for special
comment, except that of Madun, who was sentenced
to six months R. I. for burglary.
P. W D.—The usual upkeep of roads, ditches and
ornamental grounds has employed part of the prison,
gang. The remainder has been engaged in tran-
sporting earth from S. Dahlin for the use of the
Tamil gang remaking the main road at Dalat, with
which better progress has been made lately consider-
ing the recent inclement weather.
The site has been cleared and levelled for the
Police Barracks there, the main timber of which has
now been erected.
Seventeen schooners, one steamer and	cue	motor
schooner entered and cleared the port.
General.—H. IT. S. Y. Zahora, accompanied by the p. s. .4deh, called off the kuala on the 4th instant. Ln fortunately I was unable to meet His Highness the Rajah, having been instructed to proceed to Mukah.
Sergeant Dullah reported for duty on the 4tb after two months accumulated leave of absence.
1 left for Dalat on the 9th returning on the 16th, and visited Mukah on the 20th. for a few days to witness the Regatta.
J. Sulong, chief clerk, Dalat was granted three weeks’ leave on the 4tb, and proceeded to Kuching to visit his sick wife, who, I regret to say has since died.
There has been an unusually heavy rainfall this month.
E. O. BRUCE,
Officer- in- Charge.
July.
I arrived here on the 11th to relieve Mr. Bruce, who has been appointed to do duty in the Second Division and on the next two days took over cash and other matters at Dalat and Oya.
Court.—Two land cases and a few minor matters were settled.
P. IE D.—The prisoners were largely engaged on road-making at Dalat. Two prison carpenters have been employed on repairs to the kitchen and light¬house keeper’s quarters. Lack of material and labour have made it impossible to proceed with the erection of a new building as first suggested. Some progress has been made with the police barracks and a floating-stage at Dalat.
The telephone communication with Sibu was twice interrupted for periods of four days.
General — Owing to Mr. Bruce's new appointment a proposed visit to the up-river Dyaks has been postponed.
On the 20th the schooner Bunga Mas from Kuching ran aground on the bar, and with the assistance of the kampong people, was got off just before a heavy squall broke. The channel has now been remarked.
Mr. Lawrence visited this station on the 29th and brought with him the Mukah dresser who attended to various patients; Mr. Lawrence was unable to return on the 31st owing to a slight accident to the m. l. Leonora.
The following are the statistics relating to the
J. C. SWAYNE,
District Officer.
Bintulu.
May.
Mr. St. Vincent E. Down of Rubber Patents Ltd.
arrived from Kuching by s. s. Gladys on the 3rd.
and returned by p. s. Adeh on the 16th. He also
made a visit to Balingean from here.
The Labang people again complaining of Peng-
hulu Mei dan and the damage done by him and his
Dyaks in Sungei Labang, I sent P. C. Latip to
make a thorough examination of jelutong and fruit
-etc. In a previous examination made by P. C. Mat
there were shown some 79 jelutong trees in 11 clear-
ings; and consequently the Dyaks were forbidden to
farm in that locality. The second inspection, how-
ever, shows instead of 79 trees there were over 300
trees in these 11 farms, and that the Dyaks have
actually felled and burnt over 200 trees. Penghulu
Merdan stated that on his proposed farm there were
3 large and 5 small trees, and this was borne out by
the examination made by P. C. Mat: he was therefore
allowed to (ell these trees upon paying $40. com-
pensation to Government. Instead of these 8 trees
however, the second inspection shows that he felled
44. P. C. Mat has been dismissed the Force, as it is
admitted that he never inspected the farms at all,
but merely wrote down what the Penghuhi told
him. 
Penghuhi Merdan received permission to build
a house of 40 doors in Sungei Labang last year,
and is now about to move in. This move on his
part is really unnecessary as he has still plenty of
fanning land left at his old place in 8. Selezu.
The whole matter has been reported to the Resident
of the Division.
The weather has been very hot indeed all month,
and there has I teen a great deal of sickness in the
form of influenza amongst natives and others
throughout the District.
It is reported that ail the engkabang trees in the
various streams are in flower.
The prisoners were employed during the whole
month whitewashing and tar-ring the Government
building.
The 24lh being Proclamation Day was observed
as a holiday. On the 28th Hari Raya a fair
number of people visited at the Fort; as the day
fell on a Sunday the holiday was taken on the
following day.
June.
His Highness the Rajah was pleased to visit this
Station and, accompanied by Mr. F. A. W. Page-
Turner, arrived by p. s. Adeh on the morning of the
2nd. His Highness was met on the wharf by the
Native Officers, and other principal people of the
District.
His Highness visited the bazaar, entering several
shops, and also walked through the kampongs. On
the following morning His Highness met a represen-
tative gathering in the Fort when all persons wish-
ing to speak on any matters were invited to do so.
His Highness sailed that afternoon for Oya.
The matter concerning Penghulu Merdan and 40
doors of Dyaks in the Sungei Labang has been
settled; the Dyaks have moved out of the river, and
have paid compensation for fruit and jelutong trees
destroyed.
On the 9th a Chinese named Ah Chua, imprison-,
ed for nonpayment of fine for assault and who re-
fused to work, hanged himself in the jail with his
towel from a pak only four feet from the floor. He
was barely dead when taken down, but was an
opium-smoker and in such poor condition, that
although I worked over him applying artificial res-
piration for two hours it was without avail.
The.pce. Kim Chin Siang arrived from Kuching
on the 15th with supplies for the bazaar. There
was no kerosine oil and the little sugar left was
being sold at 27 cents per catty. The Chinaman
of course profiteering instead of losing by his lack of
foresight.
Law Hong Chai arrived as clerk on probation to
take the place of Foo Fook Loi of Pandan who has
resigned. 11 seems impossible to get a clerk who can
read and write to go to a place like Pandan.
If reports are to be believed, there should be a
large engkabang crop this year, as the trees are said
to be fruiting in all the streams.
July.
There has been very little Court work here this
month.
On the 4th the p. s. Adeh called to load attaps for
Limbang; passengers on her for the North were
Mr. and Mrs. Geikie, Mr. and Mrs. Service and Mr.
J. P. Mead. I went to Miri by the Adeh returning
by the same vessel on the 10th. The Adeh called
here again on the 20th, passengers were Mr. H. L.
Owen for Miri, Mr. P. Stewart for Limbang and Dr.
J. G. Reed, Divisional Medical Officer for Bintulu.
Whilst here Dr. Reed paid a visit to Tatau and
made altogether 42 N. A. B. injections for yaws and
muli, and several injections for dysentery. The
Dyaks came down in fair numbers to be injected,
but it was impossible to treat any more as the supply
of medicine ran out.
Two junks from China have called at Tatau
during the. month and have taken away full cargoes
of belian umber. The s. s. Sarawak, s. s. Gladys
and Pee. Sri Marion have also taken away cargoes
of belian from that place.
The month has been very dry indeed only 4 05 I
inches of rain having fallen.
HENRY H. KORTRIGHT,
District Officer.
MIRI.
June.
There were usual number of Court eases. The
Gambling Farmer was fined $250 for having his
house open after regulation hours. He appealed
but this was dismissed.
Fines and Fees amounted to $1,154.31.
The 3rd instant being the Birthday of II. M. King
George V, the Offices were closed and the flagstaff
dressed.
On the 5th instant a disturbance occurred amongst
the coolies at Lutong Refinery, but it was found
in the end to Ire of a tribal nature. Several
arrests were m: de and culprits fined.
The lunatics and lepers of the District were trans-
ferred to Kuching.
Pangiran Tajudin, T. K. of Poyut, reported that
he was moving two hours further up the Miri river
and he hoped most of his people would follow: he
considering it best to get further away from Messrs.
Sarawak Oilfields Ltd.
The Resident 5th Division arrived from Baram
on the 12th instant.
H.	I. J. M. S. Sata arrived on the 14th instant for
oil, but broke down several miles outside the moor-
ings, and did not sail until 30th instant.
The new light at Tanjong Lobang had to lie ad-
justed, the regulators being out of order.
I paid a visit to the Coast Stations from 21st
instant to 27th instant.
Junit Clerk at Baram was appointed Court Writer
at Nish in place of Rayup, whose work has been
very unsatisfactory of late. He has now been trans-
ferred temporarily here.
These Coast Stations should be visited at least
once a month, there is any amount of work to justify
this and the clerk can also be kept up to date
Some Niah people reported that they knew of some
new white and black Nest caves at Samalajau.
T. K Awang ltam was ordered to accompany them
and bring specimens here.
The prisoners were engaged during the mouth in
levelling the site for New Clerk’s house and carrying
wood for the Church
The rainfall was 4 01 inches.
Six tankers and twenty Cargo Steamers and one
schooner cleared this port.
July.
The usual number of cases came before the
Courts. Several persons were fined for being in
possession of forged ten cent notes, but it was
found that these had been unwittingly circulated
by Messrs. Sarawak Oilfields Limited and on refer-
ring to the Supreme Court Kuching, previous flues
Were annulled and the Company fined the nominal
sum of $1 and costs.
Fines and fees amounted to $1,257.12.
Mr. H. H. Kortright, District Office! Bintulu,
and Mr. and Mrs. Service arrived by p. s. Adeh
on the 6th instant. Mr. Service surveyed the
launches and lighters of Messrs. Sarawak Oilfields
Limited.
Mr. and Mrs. Geikie paid a visit on the 10th
instant sailing the same day.
Captain Lowe, Superintendent of Public Works
Department, arrived on 9th instant by it. H. s. Y.
Zanora and went to Baram mouth to make
arrangements for the erection of the new light-
house. He sailed again on the 12th instant.
The body of sonic unknown person thought to be
Chinese, was found in the sea off Lutong and it is
presumed he must have fallen overboard from s. s.
Kajang; at the Coroners Inquest a verdict of “found
drowned” was given.
The prisoners were engaged during month on
repairing bridges and carrying wood for the new mar-
ket. Half the gang are at Baram mouth carry-
ing material for the lighthouse.
Mr. H. L. Owen, who has been appointed
District Officer Baram, arrived by p. s. Adeh on
the 21st instant and left for that Station accom-
panied by the Divisional Resident, who returned again
on the 27th instant.
The General Manager of Messrs. Sarawak Oilfields
Limited left for Kuching on 26th instant returning
again on the 30th instant. He took this occasion
to congratulate His Highness the Rajah on the fact
that during the month the millionth ton of oil
had been won by his Company from its concession,
at Miri.
The rainfall was 7.91 inches.
Seven tankers cleared with oil.
Seventeen cargo steamers arrived and sailed.
C. D. ADAMS, District Officer.
BARAM.
May
A good many cases were brought before the Court during the month. One appeal case was brought before the Resident front a judgment passed in the Court of Requests. The judgment was upheld.
A disturbance took place at Bakong amongst 8. O. Ltd.'s coolies owing to a fight between a mandor and a coolie. Several coolies went out on strike, but on an enquiry being held into the case and the mal-contents sent to Miri everything quieted down.
Penghulu Abun Wan paid in the lax of the Kayans of the Lower Baram, as did Tapong Bala for the Kalabits in the Tatau District.
Fines and fees amounted to $793.96.
The Kayans brought down a lot of belian logs for Government use.
Mr. Calvert, Government Auditor, arrived from Miri on 9th leaving again on 16th. He checked the cash for the last two years and expressed himself very pleased work of the Treasury Clerk, A. Mows,
The Resident of the 4th Division arrived on the 25th.
On 28th His Highness the Rajah paid a visit to the District His Highness was accompanied by Mr. Page-Turner
On 29th His Highness sat in Court and listened to any petitions or complaints and afterwards walk¬ed round inspecting the station.
On 30th a ‘tuba’ fishing was held at Loagan Tujoh and a good haul was wade, especially towards the evening when the big fish began-to come up.
31st His Highness and party returned en route for Bintulu, making a short visit to the Sarawak Oilfields Ltd.'s sawmill at Bakong on the way.
On the same day Capt. A. R. Chancellor, In¬spector General of Police, S. S. arrived from Miri en route for Belait and Brunei.
Hari Raya was observed on 29th; the customary complimentary visits were paid by the Malays.
Wan Mohamat, Assistant Native Officer, was granted a month's leave to fetch his family from Simanggang.
The prisoners have been employed on the usual upkeep of roads and ditches.
It was very hot indeed for the greater part of the month, but the rains started at the new' moon on 28th and the river rose very quickly. The rainfall for the month was 9 30 inches.
s.s.Gladys and p. s. Adeh each made a trip here and the Lucile and La Follette made several trips to Miri.
June.
Court work has been very light and no cases call for special mention.
Tapu Buang, the Kalabit Penghulu of the Ulu Baram, arrived down on 27th bringing with him Lawai and Pai an Metu, the two Kalabits who were found guilty of manslaughter. These two men have been dealt with in accordance with His Highness’ decision and detained in the Fort until fines etc. have been paid up.
On the 26lb a letter was received from Tama Wan Bayer, Penghulu of the Uma Poh Kayans, stating that a report had collie downriver that a party of 100 Rejang Dyaks were on the warpath against the Kenyahs in the Silat District, and that he was proceeding upriver at once to investigate matters. On the 27th this report was confirmed by a letter from the Kenyah Penghulu, Wan Tingang, to the same effect. I therefore ordered Tuanku Drahman, Native Officer, to proceed to the Silat District together with Lanting, the Dyak Penghulu, and a ‘posse’ of police, to try and intercept the Dyaks before they encountered the Kenyahs, and order their, to return to the Rejang. Since this I have beard no further details.
Mr. Palfreman visited the Tutau and Apoh Dis¬tricts from the 13th to the 23rd. He reported nothing of importance, beyond that a certain amount of friction was going on between the Uma Poh Kayans and the Long Watts in the Apoh river over farming land. However, he ordered parties to appear in Court for the matter to be settled.
The Resident of the 4th Division returned to Miri on the 12th.
Certain irregularities were found in the Court of Requests deposit book and the auction sales book. These were adjusted and steps taken to avoid any future occurrence.
Bakong was visited by the Resident, who held Court and also selected the silo for the Government Station there. The contractor had already started work on getting tho timber ready for erecting the clerk's quarters and barracks.
Goh Ah Peng, the dresser for the Hospital, arrived on the 20th and has taken over his duties.
The prisoners have been engaged in repairing the
Limbang and Kampong roads and draining the valley at the back of the Fort.
Messrs. Joy and Higgins of the Sarawak Oilfields Limited commenced a survey of the banks of tho Baram river from Claudetown downwards, to get some idea as to the amount of "plai” wood in the District. There is any amount of this timber on the old farming land up to the Tutau river.
The District was also visited by Capt. Chancellor, I. G. P. s. S. and Dr. and Mrs. Stookes of Miri.
Dr. Stookes kindly inspected the Hospital and was pleased to give a favourable opinion on it.
8. S. Gladys made one trip here on 20th and took away a full cargo of rattans etc. She was delayed several days at Baram mouth owing to the heavy seas prevailing.
The Trade Returns for the mouth are as follows:—
The health of the District was good and very little sickness was reported. Several cases were at once admitted to Hospital on the arrival of the dresser, so this institution is certain to prove a great benefit to the District.
The rainfall was 5'48 inches.
The health of the District was good and very little sickness was reported. Several cases were at once admitted to Hospital on the arrival of the dresser, so this institution is certain to prove a great benefit to the District.
The rainfall was 5'48 inches.
R. S. DOUGLAS,
Resident 4th Division.
BROOKETON COLLIERY.
June.
The gross out-put of coal amounted to 1,275 Lous, and of this 615 tons were consumed at the Colliery boilers, and the balance of 660 tons were sent to wharf.
Coal shipped to Labuan by s. 1. L' Aubaine and lighters amounted to 741 tons, and 734 tons were supplied as bunkers to s. s. Hounslow, p. s. Adeh and local launches.
Coal sales at Labuan amounted to 525 tons of which 515 tons were taken by the Straits Steamship Company’s steamers.
The stock of coal at Brooketon at the end of tribe month was 635.75 tons.
S. S. Hounslow came in to Brooketon on the 11th and sailed on the 13th after taking 600 tons of bunkers.
S. L. L' Aubaine was laid up for three days during the mouth for cleaning her boiler and general over¬haul.
Everything went on well in both mining and mechanical departments during the month.
The rainfall was 6'55 inches.
S. W. HARRIS, Acting Manager.
LIMBANG.
June.
Court.—Mamin of Sengkarai was sentenced to 2 years imprisonment for breach of the Mohamedan Undang-undang, pasal 50. A number of Malays at Sengkarai were fined for creating a disturbance in their kampung. Prisoner Ah Kho, who escaped from Limbang last month was recaptured in the Lawas District, and returned here. He has received the usual punishment for this offence.
At Lawas, where I held Court in the absence of the Assistant District Officer, Charang, a native of Banjarmasin, was sentenced to 3 years imprisonment for house breaking by night with theft, and one Abdulsamat to 18 mouths for abetment. Charang was sentenced to a further term for twice having attempted suicide, and for assaulting another prisoner with a parang. This man has now been Bent to Kuching. Three Tagals were fined for assaulting another Tagal during a feast, and Tawang also a Tagal was sentenced to a year’s imprison men t for wounding one Akong. a Tagal whom Tawang suspected of having had associations with his wife. Dan and Kalong Dyaks were fined for theft of a boat.
General.—I was away at Lawas from the 9th to the 18th. During my stay I paid a visit to Messrs. the Vamco Timber Company’s premises at Kiangiran, Messrs. Allman and Cook kindly showing me round. They have certainly made great strides, as when I was there last March the site for the mill had only then been selected, and was covered with jungle, now a bungalow has been erected and the mill was practically ready for running.
During a short but sharp squall which passed over Lawns on the 11th. a tree, close to the landing stage, was blown down, and in falling damaged three of the Government boats, moored alongside, i.e., the in. 1. Damit, the prauh pakarangan, and the kajang skrat. The Damit's port and starboard bulwarks were both stove in. The motor-man had a very narrow escape, the tree missing him by only a fraction of an inch. The engines too escaped, the damage being just astern of them. I was lucky to obtain four boat-builders from kuala Lawas who repaired the Damit in six days, and made an ex-cellent job of her.
The new motor boat Sylvia arrived in Labuan by the s. s. Kajang on the 28th. I was there with Mr. Harris the Acting Manager of the Brooketon Colliery, a motor-man and crew to meet her. Mr. Merton Brown of Messrs. J. I. Thornycroft & Co., Ltd., was also in Labuan at the time. He very kindly gave our motor-man two days tuition on the engines. During her trials the Sylvia ran beautifully, and on more than one occasion since, in crossing to and from Labuan, in quite nasty weather has proved herself to be a good little sea boat.
Mr. Daubeny left for the Madalam, and upper Limbang on the 24th: he expects to be away about three weeks.
Mr. Calvert having completed the audit of the 5th Division and Brooketon returned to Kuching by the p. s. Adeh on the 24th.
Appointments.—Abang Draman has been elected Tuah .kampong of Pengkalan Tarap, and Brahim, Khatib of Limbang, both appointments are vice Inche Ahamat deceased.
Skipping.—The p. s. Adeh and the s. s. Gladys both made one trip during the month, and the s l. Peter Duff and m. 1. Adele two and three trips respectively.
Seventy buffaloes were shipped to Kuching, six¬teen to Sibu, and four to Miri.
The rainfall recorded for the month was 14’23 inches.
F. F. BOULT,
Resident 5th Division.
LAWAS AND TRUSAN.
April.
Court.—Charang a Banjarese was arrested at Trusan in connection with a burglary in which over $1,000 worth of jewellery was stolen from an old woman named Salia. During the search for the stolen property some rolls of black cloth were found amongst the Trusan Banjarese people. Charang subsequently confessed to having stolen this cloth at Sindumin B. N. B. Abdul Samat and Ali Usman were also detained in connection with this affair.
Piri Agong and Inat (f.) were fined for adultery and the latter divorced. Two Javanese were arres¬ted from Labu without passes.
General.—I was at Trusan during the early part of the month. All the kampong people wore ordered to clean their ditches and assist in tidying up the kampong. Datu Pangeran Mohamat kindly lent a buffalo to assist in drawing the timber for the new bridges. Having received instructions from His Highness The Rajah to proceed to B. N. Borneo to buy ponies, I left accordingly on 11th.
The Court Writers report as follows during my absence:—
Jala, Kamis Pasir and party who were sent to arrest various Muruts in the interior, returned empty handed, having found no trace of Tai Langub. After bringing five other Muruts, strongly suspected of murdering a Dyak, they allowed them all to escape whilst spending the night in a Murut house half way down. Had they tied them up as ordered this would not have occurred. The Ranger who accompanied the party, returned with another man, instead of remaining with the prisoners.
A Tagal named Kayu of Merapok was badly cut up in a drunken brawl.
Five Tagals were detained in custody pending trial. Rusdi a Javanese was detained for theft of kuronsangs.
I was still away at the end of the month.
The prisoners were employed in upkeep of ornamental grounds and draining swamps on the Trusan road. They were also employed on the grounds at Trusan.
The Trade Returns were:—
Rainfall, Lawas 9’42 and Trusan 13’34 inches.
May.
I was absent in B. N. Borneo daring the whole of the month.
Arab Ateng, chief of Tulit, reported that four families of Tagals had recently moved into his district. These people have been ordered to pay tax at once.
A Merapok Tagal named Ateng was severely wounded by one Tawang who suspected him of committing adultery with his wife. Ateng’s wounds were successfully dressed and his assailant detained.
H. H. The Rajah, accompanied by the Divisional Resident and Mr. Page-Turner, visited Lawas on the 8th and was met by Datu Haji Pangeran Matusin, the leading Chiefs and Chinese. Messrs. Allman and Cook called on His Highness.
His Highness interviewed the principal people but nothing of importance was brought to his notice. His Highness was pleased to sanction various necessary repairs to the station.
The Divisional Resident held court and disposed •of all the minor cases, there not being time to hear the more important ones.
H. H. The Rajah and party left for Brooketon on the 10th.
Two telephone repairers from Kuching overhauled the instruments at Lawas, Trusan and Sundar, which has greatly improved the communication.
Ah See was detained on a charge of theft, but succeeded in escaping custody. Chara ng on remand in connection with the Trusan burglary confessed to having taken part in the affair, and gave away the names of others who assisted him. This man has given a great deal of trouble in the jail, having three times attempted to commit suicide, once by hanging and twice by drowning himself. On another occasion he apparently “amoked” and attacked a fellow prisoner with a parang. For-tunately the weapon was blunt and by the vigilance and pluck of Lance Corporal Pangeran Omar he was frustrated in all these attempts.
The cowman was twice reported for being drunk and neglecting his duties. Five runaway Javanese coolies from Batu Apoi Estate were arrested at Trusan and four Kadayan coolies from Brunei at Sundar. These men have since been sent back via Limbang.
Loyan Ilo a Murut was brought down from the interior, but though Akai Angau went security that he would produce him when required he baa through gross negligence allowed him to return. Jala is also responsible for this man's escape. Loyan Ilo bad been spreading a story that the Government were going to attack some Tagals in the interior, with the result that they all fled leaving their padi which was almost ripe. Akai has been ordered to produce him or pay a fine of $25.
A Chinaman answering to the description of an escaped prisoner from Limbang was arrested in Lawas. Lance Corporal Bayang of the Trusan squad was reported for being drunk and disorderly in a Murut house, and interfering with the women. The Ulu Tengoa Mu ruts paid in their tux at Trusan.
The prisoners were employed in cleaning ditches and draining swampy parts on the Trusan road.
The carpenters have not yet finished the bridges
and appear to have been wasting their time for want
of supervision, this work should have easily been
finished by now.
Rainfall, Lawas 1114 and Trusan 7.97 inches.
June.
Court.—The following were fined in connection with a cutting and wounding affair, Maki $25, Inong $10, and Tawang $50. Ateng was fined $10 for interference with another man’s wife. Tawang Besar was sentenced to one year R. I. for cutting and wounding, Dan and Kalong were fined $10 each for taking a boat without the owner’s permission. Kim Tang and Bakar fined for fighting. Bachee was ordered to pay $100 to Lim Kui (f). Several Malays were fined for improperly tapping jelutong, and Si Ling for using a false Hatching was fined $25. Cherang who confessed to being the perpetrator of the Trusan jewel robbery was sentenced to 3 years and a further sentence for attempted suicide. Abang Samat who was Cherang’s partner in the robbery was sentenced to 18 months R. I.
General.—The Resident 5th Division accompanied by Mrs. Boult visited Lawas from the 10th to 18th, and settled most of the Court work. During his visit a large tree on the river bank was blown down and badly damaged the m. 1. Damit and two boats, these have been repaired.
I returned from British North Borneo via Kuching on the 21st.
The party sent to arrest various Muruts in the interior returned, but two murderers whom they were bringing down managed to escape on the way. Jala brought some of their property in the form of tetawaks etc. Tai Langub is still at large.
The Trusan Muruts now sell ail their produce at the shop at K. Tengoa, with the result that no tax is being paid in. Strict measures will have to be adopted by Government on this account.
Lakai Ballang reported details of a double murder which took place in the Meputeh about two years ago. The affair is being investigated.
Trusan was not visited during the month.
Health.—There has been an epidemic of influenza throughout the whole district and several deaths have been reported especially amongst the Muruts.
I The Lawns Kedayans accused one of their tribe of being responsible for the sickness, but the matter was firmly suppressed by the Divisional Resident.
P. W. D.—All the bridges on the Trusan road are now in order and should last for many years. A few swampy parts still require to be raised, but even so the journey can be easily be accomplished on horse¬back.
Rainfall, Lawas 15*98 and Trusan 14*76 inches.
P. M. ADAMS, Assistant District Officer.
