Price. KUCHING, SATURDAY, APRIL 1. 1922. 20cents
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE
SATURDAY, APRIL 1, 1992
Borneo Ponies.
In another column will be found a letter from Mr. P. M. Adams suggesting that Borneo ponies be purchased and that the Kuching races be started again in 1923.
We understand that a list has been sent round and that ten subscribers have been found in Kuching, including His Highness the Rajah who has subscribed for three ponies.
We are informed that probably thirty ponies will be subscribed for and that there is also a suggestion that that races should be held this year.
Races were last held in Kuching in 1914 when Australian griffins were obtained from Ipoh.
We quite agree with Mr. Adams' remarks about Australian ponies. Our own experience teaches us that they are most costly, of very little use, often unpleasant to ride and generally short lived. Of the twelve ponies which arrived in 1914, as far as we know, only four are still here, whilst the total number of Australian ponies in Ihe country, (barring a few old pensioners) is about seven.
During the past few years practically all en¬thusiasm for horseflesh seems to have died out.
have often heard the excuse that keeping a
inti pony is “so expensive” We are quite aware that
a pony cannot be kept for nothing but we do 'say
that, compared with other forms of amusement,
riding is extremely cheap in Sarawak.
All amusements cost money but in our opinion
there are few in Sarawak so cheap, and at the
same time so beneficial as riding.
We do. however, ask our renders to give this attempt a fair trial.
The expense will not be excessive and the ponies will be useful to their owners after the races. Once more we may see Europeans training and riding their own ponies, all good sportsmen and all in for the fun of the game.
There is no better exercise than a gallop before breakfast. Come on Sarawakians, put your names down for ponies or at least each have leg in one. If you want races this year you will have to be quick at making up your mind.
Don't let them say that Sarawak is behind the times. Wait until our B. N. B. friends bring their ponies down to compete with our lot. “The best thing for the inside of a man is the outside of a horse.”
Another Editorial Appeal.
There was once a man who was asked whether he could play the violin, he answered “I don’t know. I have never tried."
We have always regarded this man as the most wonderful optimist in the world. Although we do not by any means claim to share this wonderful optimism, yet perhaps we shall need a little of it before we, ensconced in the Editorial chair, put pen to paper.
They say that Hell is paved with good intentions; we wonder what sort of a road is prepared for us. We can only hope that the paving stones are firmly welded together and that no yawning abyss awaits our unwary feet.
We remember reading the pitiful appeal of our predecessor in the issue of the 2nd. May of last year; how we. in the snug security of the Hin¬terland. chortled and chuckled, blessing our luck, and pitying the poor Editor (When you have read up to here you will probably wish that we were  still chortling and chuckling in the wilds of the Hinterland) but this sort of thing is sent to try one and it behoves our readers to bear with us, if only for a little while Moreover if we beg a little of the optimism of the immortal would-be  violinist then we also beg our readers to look upon our efforts with a little of the spirit of Mark Tapley, overlooking our mistakes, smiling at our fancies and attempting to make the best of a bad job.
In conclusion (we seem to hear the sighs of relief already) we can only reiterate the appeal of our predecessor—send us copy.
NOTES.
(March.)
His Highness the Rajah, accompanied by Captain Lowe, P. W. D sailed for Sibil in H.H S Y. Zahora on the 27tb. February calling in at Lingga and picking up Mr. F. A. W Page-Turner. D. O. of 2nd. Division. His Highness returned on the 3rd. March. Mr. and Mrs. G. B. Stooke were passengers also Mr. Stooke has been appointed to do duty in the Resi¬dent’s Office in Kuching.
We understand that His Highness discussed the advisability of building a town at Gunong Ayer near the month of the Rejang with a view making a Port for big ships.
Mr. J A. H. Hardie sailed for Singapore by s.s. Kuching on the 7th where he is going to arrange preliminary details with regard to the Sarawak section of the Malaya-Borneo Exhibition.
We understand that, after the exhibition, Mr. Hardie is Proceeding to Europe on long leave. Some 40 Dyaks, principally from the Batang Lupar, accompanied Mi. Hardie; they intend to construct a Dyak house in the Ex-hibition grounds.
We are certain that all our readers will join us in wishing Mr. Hardie an enjoyable leave, and that he will return to Sarawak completely restored in health.
Mr. Hardie has done splendid work in con¬nect’ n with the Exhibition and at times it must have seemed a task sufficient to appal even one more fortunate in health.
As Editor of this paper Mr. Hardie tried to stimulate an interest in the history of the State whilst his lighter articles will be remem¬bered—we wish him the best of luck.
AMONGST recent appointments are Mr. C. D- Adams to be D. O. Miri, Mr. F. H. Kortright D. 0. Upper Sarawak, Mr. J. B. Archer Acting Magistrate Court of Requests Kuching, Messrs. J. A. H. Hardie and J. B. Archer to be Officers of Class II. Mr. R. E. Le Sueur to be an Officer of Class IV.
THE S. S. Alice Lorraine sailed for Sibu, via Lingga and Sadong, on the 8th. Passengers were Mr. F. A. W Page-Turner for Simanggang and Mr. J B Archer for Sibu
She returned on the 15th. with Mr. J. B. Aicher.
His Highness the Rajah paid a visit to Ban on the 14th. returning to Kuching on the 16th.
ON receipt of a telegraphic reques from Miri. H. H s. Y. Zubova was despatched to that port on the Kith with Lieutenant Clark and a small squad of Rangers on board.
The so all disturbance, which was the cause of apprehension eventually subsided, and the Zahora immediately returned.
H. N. M. S. Vos arrived on the 16th. and an¬chored at Pending. She sailed tin same day for Batavia having embarked five men ap¬prehended in Sarawak who were suspected of escaping from prison in Netherlands Indian Territory.
H. N. M. S. Vos is an oil burning Yarrow type destroyer built in Holland in 1914; She has a speed of 30 knots and a complement of 8 Officers and 90 men.
Day rubber harvested at Sungei Tengah Estate during the month of February amount¬ed to 74,000 lbs.
WE print below a short article from the S. F. P. It is possible, however, that these Dyaks are not. such “bumpkins’’ as they make themselves out to be.
DYAKS’ JOY RIDE.
The Sarawak Dyaks were given a motor joy ride round the town on Saturday. This is the first occasion any of them have ever left their country, and a number have never even been as far afield as Kuching. Their first shock was in approaching Anderson Bridge which appeared to be a gigantic rat-trap. “Akai indai," cried the headman, “Udahga Kami''—which literally translated means "Oh, mo¬ther! that's finished us!" Another thing that struck them was the enormous size of the local gaol, and, as they passed, they tried to compute the number of evil-doers there are hero to War runt this. The know-all of the party said there must be a “ mill-yoon." Having recovered their composure after nego¬tiating the Anderson Rat-trap safely, they asked if that was “ Sungei Pura a solution of the origin of the island's name which has not yet been sugges¬ted, and whether “Ayer Opa” was a bigger river than that.
Later a few of the headmen were taken into
Little's to look at some muzzle loaders which they
have permits to buy, and were much struck by the
extreme wealth of the tuans in this building, for if
they wished to dispose of such a lot of their beauti-
ful things what palaces their own homes must be!
Adam, their Tuai, interviewed by local reporter—
Suka Singapura?—was somewhat non-committal in
his answer. “Ka mil snapang,” being bis only
reply. What pleased them most in their drive was
the sight of an old she-goat with seven kidlets.
H. H. S. Y. Zahora left for Singapore on
the 24th. with passengers; Captain and Mrs.
Cunynghame and family, Mr. and Mrs. Lang
and child and Miss Tait.
Captain and Mrs. Cunynghame and Miss
Tait are proceeding on seven months furlough
whilst Mis. Lang is also going home.
There were also a number of Native Officers
on board bound for the Exhibition.
Our best wishes to Capt. and Mrs. Cunyng-
hame, Mrs. Lang and Miss Tait.
WE hope that the Municipal authorities will
give their attention to the number of dogs
suffering from disgusting skin and other
diseases. These dogs may be licensed and wear
collars but this does not alter the fact that
they are a danger to the community and
a revolting sight to most Europeans.
His Highness the Rajah accompanied by
Mr. A. B Ward, Resident 1st. Division, Mr.
G. C Gillan, Treasurer of Sarawak and Mr. F.
A W. Page-Turner. D. O of 2nd. Division left
for Singapore on the 27th. by s. s. Kuching m
order to attend the visit of H. R. H. the
Prince of Wales.
There were many salon passengers en route
for the same destination including Mr. C
Fenwick. Mr. E. Parnell, Mrs. Barraclough
and MIK F. H. Kortright. The ship was
crowded with Chinese, Malays and Japanese
passengers, and there were also on board the
Regimental Bund of the Sarawak Rangers
and another party of 2nd Division Dyaks in-
cluding twelve women from Penghulu Jaul’s
district.
Dr. Luhn returned from leave on the 24th.
and resumes his appointment of Chief Health
Officer—By the same steamer we welcome
Mrs. Lowe and Mrs. Stennitt. Mrs. Lowe
has returned to rejoin her husband and Mrs.
Stennitt is acting for Miss Tait whilst tin-
latter is on leave. Mr. E. S. Holl was a
passenger also
DURING the absence of the Resident 1st.
Division and the Treasurer of Sarawak, Mr.
H. B. Crocker and Mr. F. G. Day are appointed
to act for them.
Mining in Upper Sarawak.
The closing of the Gold Mines at Bau in August
last marked the finish of what has been for many
years a very flourishing and extremely interesting
industry in Upper-Sarawak.
To many now in the country the mines at Bau,
where all the mining activity "of the past twelve
years has been centered, represent all that is
known of this industry, so that perhaps a short
summary embracing some of the earlier mining
history may be of interest. An apology is due here
for the very- brief reference to, or omission of much
that has been done in the past. The difficulty
however of tracing the earlier work with the few
records available on the spot must be the excuse.
The actual date of the discovery and first
working of these deposits at Bau is quite unknown.'
though traces of work have been disclosed which
must have been carried out at least a hundred
years before the Sambas Chinese re-opened the-
mines in the beginning of the ninteenth century.
During this latter part of the Chinese occupation
a great deal of work must have been done. Large
dams were erected to conserve the natural water
supply that occurs in the mountains to the South
of Bau and in some cases the pogonip were linked
up. A very fine example of their ingenuity in
bringing water from place to place is the flume
that still leads part of the Bau water supply down
from the foot of Bau mountain. The actual flume
winds round the sides of the hills for nearly half
a mile, the total fall being only a few feet, and no
such help as is now-a-days given by modern survey-
ing was apparently required for its construction,
It is impossible to say what quantity of Gold
hearing clay and sand was actually washed but
from the extent of the old workings, the large
number of men employed and the thousands of
tons of tailings later on uncovered and treated by
cyanide, it must certainly have run to very large
figures.
Like many mining camps in other countries
they appear to have at limes had a fairly unrulv ele-
ment amongst them. In 1857 when the Chinese
insurrection started it is said that the flag of re-
bellion was originally raised in old Bau village
by the mining community, who were, apparently
the ring-leaders in the movement The spot where
the actual flag was hoisted is still to be seen
marked with a post After the debacle that ended
this ill-advised outburst of energy they seem to
have returned to the more peaceful pursuit of
mining and were still working in the early nine-
ties when the Borneo Company first really com-
menced to look into the gold prospects.
IFor many years before this the same Company
had been actively engaged in the search for
minerals, their main success at that time being
the working of the many scattered deposits of
Antimony which occurred over a wide belt of
country The earliest recorded figures* of the
output of this metal date back to the forties when
up to a thousand tons are saic to have been shipped
annually to England. The highest output on
record was in 1872 when 3.288 tons were exported
but after this the decrease was very marked and bv
1877 had fallen to 469 tons.
Most of the antimony worked has come from
the same mineralized belt of country that includes
the gold workings, the large quantities recovered
from Simungu in the Samarahan district and
Sikunyit near the left hand branch of the Sarawak
river being perhaps the farthest afield. A further
outburst of activity in the- search for antimony
took place during the Russo-Japanese war when
the price rose above what it had been for years
and several large shipments were sent home. In
Borneo—Posewitz.
1915 owing to the shortage of the metal for war
purposes values again improved steadily and fur-
ther considerable shipments were made, but the
high price offered brought so much on the market,
especially from China, that home requirements
were soon filled.
A very interesting occurrence of Cinnabar,
Mercury Sulphide, was discovered at Tegora, and
this was worked successfully for some years before
being shut down in the late nineties. This mine
was situated about five miles to the south of Bau,
the country being highly tilted sandstone and
shale and the ore a black shale and sandstone
breccia†. The Cinnabar occurred scattered through
this and from time to time rich lenses were found
and exploited. A very similar breccia occurs at
Gading near the Dutch border but in this case
Realgar, Arsenic Sulphide, unfortunately takes
the place of Cinnabar. Small amounts have been
found also near Gumbang, Busau and Poak but
none of these proved to be workable.
Whilst Tegora was being worked the Company
erected a small stamp batten’ at Bau to test the
gold ores, but no satisfactory results were obtained.
The site was just below the present Court House
where the remains of the foundations are still
visible. Curiously enough some very rich silver
ores seems to have been recovered as the writer
has been informed that a large consignment was
shipped at Pending on board the Alastor, a sailing
ship of some 1.000 tons homeward bound for
Swansea. Following on this many further at tempts
were made to treat the gold ores and finally, after
many trials and failures, the Chinese workers were
bought out together with all the flumes and re-
servoirs they had constructed, and a leaching
plant was erected in 1898.
This plant ran until February 1908 during which
time 158, 191 ounces of fine gold were recovered
The extractions however had never been very
good and these unfortunately continued to fall so
that by 1905 as a result of further experiments it
was decided to convert the mill to an all sliming
plant. This was done whilst ore was still being
treated in the old way so that there should be no
break in the continuity of the out-put.
The new plant was started in 1906 and with
various alterations and improvement from time
to time, ran continuously until last August. The
depth attained in the main ore working was ap-
proximately 210 feet and the total recovery since
the mill first started in 1898 amounted to 496.351
ounces of fine gold.
Amongst the many improvements that were
made perhaps the most noteworthy was, from the
technical point of view, the designing of a filter
plant capable of separating and washing the pulp
from the gold bearing cyanide solution. An ex-
pensive filter plant had been ordered from home
to treat this, but partly owing to the stickiness of
the mixture to be treated and partly to inherent
defects in the machines themselves, these were
never a success A completely different form of
vacuum filter was however designed at Bau and
the first unit made proved so successful that six
more were eventually installed. This plant gave
most excellent results and is in some ways quite
unique, although the same design has now been
adopted elsewhere.
Going back some years mention must also be
made of the old Chinese workings at Jambusan
lying at the foot of the range of limestone hills
some 4 miles to the East of Bau. These were re-
opened and cleaned out by the Company in 1901
and a shaft was sunk in the main working to
proved this in depth. The main vein sunk on
however and the smaller veins and stringers dis-
Report on Geology of Sarawak. 1905 Scrivenor.
closed, although shewing much free gold in places all tended to diminish in value with the depth. The quantity of water met with, as was to be expected in a limestone country, was very heavy, and work was abandoned some years later after a rather serious monetary loss.
A much more successful venture was the open¬ing of the gold deposits al Bidi some four miles to the West of Bau. Here also the Chinese had worked for many years, whilst silver and antimony had likewise been found in payable quantities.
After sufficient development work had been done a Leaching Plant was erected and formally opened by His Highness Sir Charles Brooke in April i960. This mill ran successfully for ten years for a recovery’ of 185.351 ounces of fine gold.
The ore workings at this mine were very widely' scattered, the furthest afield lying some four miles out towards Jaguay. Mountain 'on the Dutch border. To reach these a railway line carrying locomotives had* to be laid and the Sarawak 1 river spanned by a bridge carried on solid ma¬sonry pillars. To avoid risk from floods an ex-tension bridge fifteen feet high and s me hundred yards in length was carried from one end of this to the higher ground beyond. It is interesting to । note that this was the first and in fact only time this river has been spanned except by Dyaks ' bridges
. Many of the Bidi ores were found to contain a large proportion of Arsenic and not being amen¬able to ordinary cyanide treatment, they were stocked until some method could be discovered for the economic extraction of their gold contents. They were eventually brought over to Bau and successful milled after the workings there were closed, their treatment just occupying the last few months of 1921.
Both prior to the opening and during the working of the gold mines much prospecting work was done both in Sarawak Proper and other districts.
The difficulties attending such work can only be appreciated by those who have had to do it. With the whole country’ clothed in virgin jungle or dense secondary growth, actual distances covered in any one day are comparatively small whilst one's outlook is naturally extremely limited. Like all tropical countries with a heavy rainfall, rocks have been subjected to extreme weathering action and most are buried under many feet of clay, thus it is frequently only from stream beds or the sleeper hills that any indication of the under lying formation can be gained.
Upper Sarawak has naturally received most attention but many other expeditions have from time to time been sent to prospect such districts as Tanjong Datu, Lundu, Samarahan, Sadong. The Batang Lupar, Rejang and Bintulu. None of these unfortunately gave any very’ hopeful results.
It is very doubtful if Upper Sarawak will ever again become a centre of mining activity. Cer¬tainly no workable deposit of any size is known at present, and the district has been so well searched that it is unlikely that any’ large orebody would have been overlooked. That the Chinese will continue work in the district is almost certain. There are still places where a fair days wage can be made, and doubtless these will offer sufficient inducement to workers to prosecute the search for many a day to come, in the hope that chance or other kind fortune may someday reveal-a de¬posit at present hidden from view.—(Contributed.)
[ The Editor is not responsible for the opinions of Correspondents. ]
Racing in Sarawak.
LAWAS,
March 8th., 1922.
The Editor,
The Sarawak Gazette..
Kuching.
SIR.
It has often been suggested that the Kuching pony races should be revived, but we never get beyond the suggestion. Australian ponies are too expensive nowadays and are difficult to dispose of after tbc races. Borneo ponies, on the other band, are cheap and easy to look after besides being useful apart from racing. H. E. The Governor of British North Borneo would put no obstacle in the way of Sarawak people exporting ponies but would, in fact, welcome the movement with the hope that owners in B. N. B. might enter their ponies at the Kuching races and vice versa.
If a sufficient number of people are willing to take ponies, there is no reason why the picturesque Kuching meeting should not be revived in 1923. Borneo ponies which have not yet been timed are, I understand, obtainable for about $100 a bead; where¬as the Australian ponies run to about $800 and probably more. Details as to cost however could be  ascertained and made known through the medium of the Gazette provided a sufficient number of people 1 come forward to make it worth while. Any enthusiasts may send their names together with any ideas ' they have on the subject, to the undersigned.
Yours etc.,
P. M. ADAMS.
An Appreciation.
THE VICARAGE,
KUCHING,
13th. March, 1922. To
The Editor,
The Sarawak Gazette.
SIR,
Allow me to thank you for your very generous welcome on my return to Kuching, in spite of the fact that 1 had probably expressed my regret at leaving B. N. B. You were charitable enough to hope to hear that though I might be sorry at leaving B. N. B., I should also lie very glad to be hack in Kuching. It may sound paradoxical, but it is true. Remember
Sarawak is my first love, and it is also very pro-bable that the wonderful kindness and hospi¬tality which we experienced in B. N. B. was largely inspired by the knowledge that I was coming as a representative, in a sense, of Sarawak. Every kindness shewn to us was intended as a mark of appreciation of the Raj.
I do not love Sandakan less, because I dis¬covered a very lovely country and a very de lightful people in the North.
I have always been happy in Sarawak and the
mark of progress in Church and schools makes
me very happy, and glad to have a share in
the work if only for a short time.
I find the “Old Brigade” unchanged in their
loyalty to, and remembrance of old friends.
In many ways we are unique in the Raj, but
to note one only. We all consider ourselves
the Rajah's family, and that we may have
scraps amongst ourselves—it is a family affair
“ Hands off everybody else.”
You may be quite sure that we shall be very
very sorry to leave Sarawak, when it really
means good-bye.
We were sorry*to find your predecessor ‘dear
Hardie’ so seriously ill, but we trust that a
prolonged stay in the Homelands shall restore
him to health and vigour.
Sincerely yours,
ROBERT J. SMALL,
Archdeacon of Sarawak.
Kami Maleng.
14th. March, 1922.
DEAR SIR,
Kami Balau appear to be under the impression
that the big boat race at Sibu was paddled as a test
between Dyaks and Milanoes. The regatta was
organised at short notice and.no special racing boats
were built for it, and there was no idea of rivalry
between Dyaks and Milanoes. It was merely stated
that the Milanoes aud Kanowits beat the Dyaks—
they did.
Possibly had special boats been built they might,
not have done so, but the Rejang Dyaks never
pretended to be builders of racing boats. As the
race was not paddled as a test it of course proves
nothing—no one ever stated that it did.
As for the course, five miles was mentioned as
the distance and five miles it was. After all why
not? Cannot Sibu lie allowed to arrange a longer
course than either Kuching or Simanggang? Kami
Balau must remember that the Rejang is many
many times longer than either the Sarawak or Batang
Lupar rivers and Sibu has what neither Kuching
nor Simanggang possess, and that is a course over
four miles in length where they are in full view of
the Station all the. time. The odd mile they are
out of bight round a bend of the river.
As for the challenge—I very much doubt its ever
being taken up the Milanoes. Remember it costs
a considerable sum to take a racing boat and big
crew from the Milano Districts to Simanggang,
and the Milanoes thoroughly enjoy their own local
regattas and have no wish to race in rivers and
amongst people strange to them, so the Simanggang
cup is likely to remain where it is.
Yours faithfully,
D.A.O
Pony Races. 
The Editor,
Sarawak Gazette,
Kuching.
SIR.
1 am glad to see that there is a question of
starting pony races again in Kuching.
It is early days to start making suggestions but
may I be allowed to say that I hope the question of
amateur and professional riders will receive its
proper attention. Those who wore present at the 
1914 races will remember one or two unpleasant in-
cidents with regard to professional "Jockeys?"—
whilst they will also remember the ludicrous ex- 
hbition given in the last race of the meeting.
If the races materialise I hope that, if it is found
impossible to disallow professional riders altogether,
then at least some races will be reserved for amateurs.
I believe that the question of weights is the draw-
back to the scheme—but what does it matter if the
r ice is run slower. At least it would afford more
sport to have owners and other European riders up.
Yours etc.,
ROYSTON CROW
Malaya-Borneo Information Bureau.
The Committee wish to thank all those Steam-
ship Agents and others who have already sent in
their lists of sailings, passenger fares, cargo rates
and other information, and to ask those who have
not already done so and have any steamers sailing
from Singapore for any port during the first half of
April, if they will be good enough to send details of
same to the Bureau.
Hotels and Boarding Houses of any description
are asked to furnish details of their vacant accom-
modation and tariff.
All communications and information that may be
of service to visitors and the public generally should
lie forwarded as soon as possible to: —A. Roose,
Malaya-Borneo Information Bureau. Import and
Export Office, Singapore.
MINE MODELS.
Among the exhibits in the Minerals Section are
specimens of tin-ore, tin, and slag, shown by the
two great smelting Companies, the Straits Trading
Company. and the Eastern Smelting Company. In
contrast to the extensive and up-to-date operations
of these firms a Malay smelting furnace (relau) is
exhibited Messrs. Osborne and Chappel, of Ipoh,
are showing a model of one of their mines Another
model of a mine is being exhibited by the French
Sub-Committee.
The Japanese. Company working iron-ore on the
River Bahut, in Johore, are exhibiting a model of
their ground also, showing how the ore-occurs.
The Ranb Gold Mines have a stand specially made
on the lumps for the exhibition, showing typical
specimens from the lodes. Specimens from the
Bumli, and the Pahang Consolidated Mines are in
the section, and photos of other tinmines
Mr. A. H Flowerdew exhibits a model elevator
and Mr. Corbett a model of a water-wheel with
stamps.
From Selangor are a model shaft, kongsi house,
and puddlers with trucks on an incline, specimens
of coal from the Malayan Collieries and specimens
collected by the Selangor Miners Association and
Government Mines Office. Kramat Pulai Ltd. are
exhibiting specimens from their mines in Kinta.
From Borneo are specimens of oil and coal and a
large model of the Sarawak Oil Fields at Mid.
Various large mineral specimens illustrating the
produce of the Peninsula are shown on tables.
The most novel feature of the Minerals Section,
however, is the exhibit ‘arranged by the Malayan
China Clay and Pottery Works, now operating at
Gopeng, Here will be seen the China clay, raw
and refined, the mixtures used- for the pottery and
the actual processes of manufacture before burning.
THE NATIVE ENTERTAINMENTS.
Forces have been at work outside the ken of the
ordinary man who is working for the success of the
Malaya-Borneo Exhibition which commences on
March 31st. There will be an unique opportunity
of seeing the varied amusements of the native
people of Malaya and the Far East. Here special
attention may be called to the generous way in
which shows have been presented to the Exhibition,
without charge, and in a healthy spirit of camaraderie
and competition.
The Malay community of Penang have very
generously promised the following two very interest-
ing shows: -A Hathera and a Borsa, very rarely
seen in Singapore The Hathorn is Near Eastern
in orgin. I he party will consists of 30 singers and
dancers and the language will be Arabic. The
Borea consists of topical panegyric songs in Malay
accompanied by curious dances, the party being
attired in strange costumes. We are indebted for
these shows to the activities of Mr. Syed Salleh
Alsagoff, Inche Mohamed Hussein bin Halim, Mr.
H. G. Sarwar, Mr. G Hawkins mid Captain Noor
Mohamed Hashim.
Next comes an exceptionally interesting perform-
ance, one which Singapore has never before had the
opportunity of witnessing, Memora, presented by
Kelantan. The performance is half in Siamese and
half in Malay consisting of fairy and folk-lore stories
with lots of comic interludes and very graceful dances.
The dresses and head dresses of the players will be
most gorgeous.
Kelantan is also sending very generously our old
friend the Mayong with homely humour and remark-
able masks.
The Kedah Committee have been exceptionally
generous. They are sending to Singapore a per-
formance which people in Singapore have never
before had an opportunity of seeing, the Mek Mu-
long. This show is such an unique one, that people
may be left to find out what it is all about when the
Exhibition opens. His Highness the Sultan of
Kedah has very kindly consented to lend his musi-
cians, including a Gamelan Party. The Gamelan
is supposed to be one of the sweetest and most
pleasing of Eastern musical entertainments. Anybody
who has the good hick to visit in Java will know’
about this.
British North Borneo is sending down a party of
Sulu dancers. The party will consist of about 40
performers, men and women, who will do most
wonderful dancers, the men fully armed. This
party performed before Lord Northcliffe at Sanda-
kan.
No show would be complete without a Wayang
Kulit. representing the wonderful deeds of the old
mythological heroes Sri Kama, and his friends and
enemies. Singapore will be able to see the Hasumi
equivalent to the siege of Troy and other similar
heroics in a comfortable marquee. This pin performance
is another present by Kedah.
It will be curious if Singapore were to be silent
when distant States were so generously catering for
the amusements of its citizens, and the Malay Clubs
of Singapore have combined to present certain per-
formances to the Exhibition on special nights. On
another night there will be a play by the well-known
Nahar Opera Company of Galang, (Bangsawan)
The proprietor Mr. Syed Ahmad Alsagoff has very
generously grunted free of charge to the Exhibition
a performance by the Company.
On one night the Malay Clubs will present a
Ronggeng, on another Hathera. This will permit
of those interested, comparing the Penang and the
Singapore performance.
It was of course essential that there should be a
representation of Malay music by Malays and for
this purpose the Jawi Peranakan Club has very
kindly consented to play on several occasions during
the course of the Exhibition. The band is very highly
trained string band, and the music rendered will be
A collection of Malay and kindred airs.
It is mentioned above that Kelantan is sending a
Menora. Kedah not to be out-done, is sending
another troop for this delightful performance, so
again there will be an opportunity of comparing
the variations in language, costume, story and dances
in the West and in the East of the Peninsula.
Of course no presentation of Malay amusements
would be complete without the Ronggeng. It is
proposed that the Ronggeng will consist of the four
leading dancers in this part of the world. They will
present a perfect combination of skill, beauty, wit
and magnificent clothes. Two will come from
Penang, the other lady is one of the most famous
and prettiest dancers in Malacca, and the fourth is
a secret at present. There will be a great breaking
of hearts. Competitions will be held in singing
and dancing improvisation of pantun etc.
It is claimed not without reason, that this list
comprises the largest assembly of Malayan and kin-
dred theatrical amusements ever brought together in
the Peninsula. Yon may travel many hundreds of
times between Penang and Singapore without ever
having a chance of seeing a Menora, a Hathera or a
Mek Mulong, especially dressed and housed as these
performances will be. But beyond this again, it is
hoped that something more has been achieved than
a mere gathering of the theatrical troupes. It is
hoped that those interested will lie afforded a unique
opportunity of studying certain very interesting
aspects of Malay manners and music. For this
reason it has been thought only fair that everybody
should be given an opportunity of seeing these per-
formances, not once, but several times. With this
in view, certain of the performances will be free
performances for which, except for a small fee for
seats, no charge will lie made. For others a fee of
a few cents will be charged. Certainly a chance for
all those who are interested in the East, its people
and its manners, singing and dancing, and the old
stories which have been handed down through gen-
erations.
Special pains have been taken over the lighting
and the decorations of the pavilions in which these
shows will play and it is hoped to present some-
thing in both these directions which will interest
the public.
“SLOGAN" COMPETITION.
To find a fitting “slogan" for the Exhibition
beginning with the letters " M. B. E." for a prize of
$25, about 200 attempts have been received from all
over the Peninsula. Six competitors have sent in a
list, which is not according to the rules. Some of
the attempts are extremely ingenious, even to the
extent of endangering lucidity. Others are witty,
and a few have an interpretation, cunning enough,
but not suitable for general use. All sorts of langu-
ages have been employed. The Judge has awarded
the prize to Mr., C. R. Ferrers, of Kajang, for the
following: —
The one adjudged second in merit is “ May Busi-
ness Ensue,'' by Mr. Hagedorn of Pasir Panjang.
A third marked is “Must Business Enhance” from
Mr. W. Norman Prophet, of Win Jacks & Co.
PERMUTATIONS PROBLEM.
Asked how many combinations could be made
with ten adjectives, ten nouns and ten verbs (or any
other parts of speech for that matter) in phrases of
three, eight solutions only were received, of which
four, as was to be expected, are right, but of the
others one goes up as far as I followed by twenty
noughts. The sum was an easy one and the prize
was for the first correct answer in. It came from a
gentleman whose name we cannot decipher, but who
lives at 521-1 Kampong Bahru-rd, Singapore. If he
will identify himself to the Chairman of the Publicity
Committee, care of the Singapore Free Press, he-
will be paid for his figuring but not for his signature.
1000 is the number.
One other competition is open till the last post on
Saturday—guess the names of the two mam roads
in the Exhibition Grounds.
WESTERN ART SECTION.
Colonel Tyie, Hon Sec., has received a good many
enquiries from various parts of Malaya and one point
of doubt is what constitutes amateur, as compared
with professional work. It is intended to make the
Art Section representative as far as possible, of the
best Western Art to be found in British Malaya.
: There is no competition for prizes in any class, and
the committee are thus enabled to extent the condi-
tions SO as to include the work not only of bona fide
amateurs but of professionals as well. There seems
to be no need for any other condition, save that the
artists exhibiting are usually resident in this country.
By removing the condition that would have excluded
all but amateurs, the Committee are enabled to
invite local architects to exhibit specimens of their
work. Such specimens should lie confined to per-
spective drawings of buildings either already or
about to be erected in this country, oi purely
imaginary. A circular will be sent to local architects
dealing with this subject.
It is now found possible, owing to the space
allotted, also to remove the condition limiting the
number of exhibits from each exhibitor. A portion
of one of the new railway godowns has been reserved
for the art section, cool any and well lit, and several
hundred pictures can he hung, as well as the various
exhibits in applied arc, without crowding.
Intending exhibitors arc reminded that March 15th
is the last day for receiving exhibits, and that other
collecting stations are c/o Mrs. S. Codrington for
Penang and Kedah, and Mr. L Kesteven, Govt.
Architect, Kuala Lumpur, where entries close a
week earlier
ROAD-NAMING COMPETITION.
Competitors were asked to guess the names of
the two chief mails in the Exhibition Grounds.
They had already been named, but the names had
not been disclosed to anybody. The correct names
are:—
Prince's Avenue (main entrance)
Raffles Avenue.
Them is also a Guillemard avenue running paral-
lel to Revenue. No correct solutions were to be
found among the forty-four competitors (a dozen or
so arrived ton bite, one of them very near the mark)
but the guess of Mr. Tan Koh Tiong of (A) Guille-
mard Promenade and (B) Prince of Wales Avenue
have been adjudged sufficiently near to merit the
prize of S10.
The popular choice seems to be Exbibition-rd,
Prince of Wales-rd, Malaya-rd, and Borneo-rd, but
some of the competitors disclosed not a little origin-
ality. For instance among the names suggected
were Prince Charming-rd, Many Business Eu-
trance, the Road of Art, the Road of Knowledge.
In and Out, Sans Souci Garden and Pro Bono Pub-
lico Gate.	
A very good Malay suggestion (also too late)
was that the roads should be named Jalan Kama-
johan (Road of Prosperity) and Jalan Kerajinan
( Road of Energy).
AGRICULTURAL SECTION.
In addition to the competitive section of the
Agricultural part of the Exhibition, a special ex-
hibit is being arranged by the Staff of the Depart-
ment of Agriculture, in which numerous agricul-
tural products will bestow n, including samples of
oils of all kinds from the raw material grown in
Malaya, drugs, spices, paper pulp and samples of
paper and card board, peat and peat products, alco-
hol from the Nipah palm and other local raw pro-
ducts, such as tapioca, sweet potatoes, lalang etc.,
improved varieties of padi, fibres of various kinds
and ropes prepared from these fibres. In addition,
specimens of Hip living plants will be shown and
large photographs of the plants growing in the field.
The exhibits will also include a museum of excel-
lent models of various fungoid diseases and insect
pests of different Malayan crops, containing the
specimens sent to the International Rubber and .
Tapiocal Product's Exhibition held in London in 
1921. A number of interesting and important ad-
ditions have since been made to this collection of
models, which have been prepared by and under
the aide guidance of Mr. F. de la Mare Norris of 
the Department of Agriculture Federated Malay 
States and Straits Settlements.
Two very interesting useful and fascinating models 
will also be exhibited, one being a model of a padi
sawah with water flowing over the of a waler wheel
for irrigating land above the level of the bed of the
stream or river; the other model illustrating
different modern methods of conceiving soil and
moisture on hilly and undulating land, and illustrat-
ing the effect of allowing soil wash on such land
Both of these models have been prepared and de-
signed by Mr. Norris.
An illustrated Handbook, of Malayan Agriculture
is also in the press and will be sold at the office of
the Agricultural Section during the Exhibition.
Officers of the Department will lie available 
throughout the period of the exhibition to answer
enquiries in connection with the Department Ex- 
hibits and in connection with the possibilities of 
various crops.
The Departmental Exhibits will also include in-
teresting and instructive specimens of raw rub-
ber prepared by different methods, and exhibits to:
illustrate tins compounds employed in the manu-
facture of the various manufactured rubber goods,
showing the proportions of ingredients used in the
different articles.
THE PHOTOGRAPHIC SECTION.
Professional photographers in the Straits do not 
yet realise that they can get space free or the exhibi-
tion of their works, subject to the approval of the
Sectional Committee. Specimens should reach the •
Jlon. Sec. Camera House. Robinson-rd not later than
March 21st.
INFORMATION BUREAU.
The object of the Bureau is to assist visitors of all
nationalities to the Exhibition, with information as
to where to find all exhibits and amusements, as in
all probability there will be many who will be com-
plete strangers to Singapore and will be glad of some 
further information regarding matters outside the
Exhibition.
For that purpose the Bureau will have a Tourist
Section, where all enquiries can be made ae to travel,
passages, transportation of baggage, places of interest
to visit and easiest methods of getting there.
A Commercial Section will endeavour to assist
those whose business interests in this territory may
call for some assistance from Books of Reference,
etc., which will be found in the Bureau. H. M.
Trade Commissioner will lie in attendance at the
Bureau between the hours of 12 and 1 p. in. and
3.30 to 4 30 p. m. daily, to render all proper assistance
to enquirers interested in Imperial Trade.
A service of boy messengers will be attached to the
Bureau and will lie available for the use of visitors
within the Exhibition. Those desirous of obtaining
information regarding shipment of cargo, sailings,
freights etc., will be attended to in the Shipping
Section.
In order that the Bureau may be of use to visitors,
co-operation is asked for from the exhibitors, those
in charge of the amusements and all others interested.
A screen 3ft by 4ft will lie erected on the roof of
the Bureau, upon which can be displayed any in-
formation which exhibitors, providers of amusements
and others may wish conveyed to the Public. The
lantern working this will be able to produce letter-
press or pictures by daylight as well as by night.
Visitors will thus be able to see constantly what
exhibits and amusements their are and their exact
position in the grounds
Exhibitors and others who wish to avail them-
selves of this continuous screen display, and those
having information that may be of use to visitors,
should communicate with as little delay as possible
with Mr A. Roose. Inhumation Bureau, M. R. E.,
Old Post Office Building. Singapore.
A Singapore Benefactor.
Mr. Edward James Maher-Smith. of new Caven-
dish-street. W., and Waverley, Cliftonville, Kent,
formerly of Sarawak, who died on October 28th. has
left property of the value of £18.334. Subject to a
legacy of £100, the testator leaves everything in trust
for his wife for life and then for his children, failing
whom : —
£2,000 to the Boustead Institute for Seamen,
Singapore, £2.000 to the Straits Settlements Benevo-
lent Society. £2,000 to the Swansea General and
Eye Hospital. £1,000 to Guy's Hospital, £1,000 to
the National Lifeboat Institution, and one-fourth of
the residue each to the three first-named institutions,
and one-eighth each to the two latter.
The testator was the son of Capt. E. M. Smith,
who was a joint proprietor with the Into John Came-
ron of the Straits Times in 1861. He commanded
sailing ships sailing out of Singapore for many years
and was afterwards the first manager of Tanjong
Pagar Dock, leaving in 1881. but returning to the
Straits where be died in 1886Mr. E. J. Smith
was manager of the Borneo Co. in Sarawak in the
Nineties.—(S. F. P.)
Topical Topics.
opinion. The engine we should imagine to
be in excellent order. It is very silent—but
A striking instance of the profiteering which is
still carried on in Kuching is furnished by the hair-
dressing community. A day or two ago an inefficient
Malay hairdresser had the effrontery to ask a
European $1 in payment for a haircut. The only
argument he had in support of his price was that
all other Europeans paid him that amount. A
gentleman who was recently in Singapore informs
us that there you are allowed the privilege of
entering a palatial establishment, reclining in ease
with a selection of journals before you, and finally
having your hair not only cut but anointed too—and
all for 75 cents
There remain, therefore, two alternatives. The
first into let the price remain at one dollar, but at
the same time to insist on the production of the
latest periodicals for perusal during the ordeal, and
of some unguent for embalming purposes at the
conclusion. The second is to reduce the price. • The
first alternative would not be too satisfactoy—those
favouring ointment would probably find them-
selves deluged with coconut oil. The second is much
more reasonable, but we must have a concerted
effort. Will those interested please communicate
with the Hon. Secretary Society for the Suppression
of Profiteering among Hairdressers, C/o this paper.
There is a story, now over a thousand years
old. about a bird who in returning to her nest
found that a nightingale had deposited her eggs
there. The owner of the nest is supposed to have
felt so foolish that in time a name was given to
persons who find themselves in foolish positions
about the lime of April and especially (for some
apparently unknown reason) the first of April. ID
England such a person is called an "April Fool”, in
Scotland a "Gowk” whilst the French call him a
“Poisson d’Avril".
The first edition of the Gazette under our Editor-
hip is dated April 1st.
In another column will be found a short
account of the annual meeting of the Sarawak
Steamship Company. Our reporter, who was as
usual on the spot, informs us that it is untrue
that the Police had to telephone for assistance
in keeping back the rush id’ shareholders try-
ing to gain entrance.
We understand that a motion was put by
the General Manager that, as it was not
possible to distribute a bonus to the staff, a
vote of thanks should be passed for their la-
bours during the year. He pointed out that
such a vote would be far more highly appre-
ciated than a cash bonus.
Inmates of the New Rest House were asto-
nished recently by the discovery of a motor
car in one of the spare bedrooms. It is sug-
gested that some convivial diner accidentally
mislaid it one evening. In the event of this
catching the eye of the careless owner, we
give below a cursory description of the stray
automobile:—
General appearance striking—estimated to
have run at least 30,000 miles and good for 
another 30,000. The tires are missing but
can easily be replaced. So far as wo can tell, 
the paint work and upholstery are in fairly 
good condition, but as the car has no body or 
coachwork it is difficult to give an accurate 
opinion. The engine we should imagine to
be in excellent order. It is very silent—but
that of course is only to be expected as there is no chassis. The steering wheel, however, remain! and is in a first class condition. A little paint and polish would certainly improve it, hut we are convinced that it is good for at
least another 30,000 miles
Sarawak Steamship Co.. Ltd.
The Annual General Meeting of the Sarawak Steamship Co., Ltd. was hold in the Company’s Offices on Wednesday March 15th.
The Directors report was adopted and the Annual accounts passed.
Messrs. Ong Tiang Swee and Tan Ewe Chai were re-elected Directors.
Mr. Bateman was re-elected Auditor for the coming year.
A vote of thanks to the staff was passed.
A vote of thanks to the Chairman terminated the meeting.
Below we append the report for 1921.
The Sarawak Steamship Co., Ltd.
Kuching, Sarawak.
March, 1st. 1922, SIR / MADAM,
Your Directors submit the Report and Accounts I for the year 1921.
The depression in Trade continued for the first six months of the period under review; in the latter part of the year there was a decided improvement.
As in the Report for last year, comparisons are given below of the principal exports.
The total amounts of Exports and Imports
carried during these periods, represented by freight
values, are as follow:—
The rates of freight have remained as last year.
The profit on the year's working is $70,672.51 which, together with $6,023.77 carried forward from last year, totals $76,696.28.
Your Directors have allocated this profit as follows: —
Messrs. Chan Kee Ong and Lim Tee Chew
retired from the Board during the year. Your
Directors have appointed Mr Tan Ewe Chai to
sit in place of Mr. Chan Kee Ong.
Messrs. Ong Tiang Swee and Tan Ewe Chai re-
tire from the Board in accordance with the terms
of the Articles of Association and. being eligible,
offer themselves for re-election.
You are asked to elect a director to replace Mr.
Lim Tee Chew.
ONG TIANG SWEE, Chairman.
Extracts from the Annual Reports
2nd. Division.
Comparative Statements of the Revenue and
Expenditure of the 2nd. Division for 1921 are
appended, shewing that the nett Revenue amounts
to $82,307.93, a decrease of $4,253.23. The nett
Expenditure is $75,719.54, a decrease of $4,729.98.
In November, Dr W. E. Le Gros Clark, Principal
Medical Officer, arrived to examine the hospital;
he has now allowed the dresser here to inject for
yaws, with great success.
A sulphur bath was started for skin disease, and
has been most successful.
Total amount of cases treated amounted to
1.473. 368 N. A. B. injections were given.
Forestry Department.—Mr. J. P. Mead. Conser-
vator of Forests, arrived in March. His visit was
in connection with the erection of a Checking
Station at Sebuyow. The same was duly built by
contract in Kuching, and a Malay sent to Kuching
to learn his work in recollecting of Royalty. In 
September he was placed at Sebuyow as Forest 
Guard. It is intended to open a Forest Office at 
Simanggang, and Justo Lima, an educated Saribas
Dyak, was sent to the Forest Office, Kuching, on * 1
probation to learn the office work.
Church and Education.—Government Malay Ver-
nacular Schools were started at Kabong, Betong.
and Spaoh. The principal Chinese of Saratok
opened a school having obtained a Chinese teacher
from Swatow.
Court of Requests.
2,284 Summonses, 807 Warrants, and 537 Judg¬ment Summonses were issued during the year, the 1 fees amounting to $6,123 63.
1,187 cases were settled in the Kuching Court. $40,542 14 WAS recovered through actions in the  Court There were 8appeals from die Judgment of i the Kuching Court of Requests. 6 appeals were dismissed by the Supreme Court, one up-held, and One judgment in a case heard during 1920 altered in part
60 persons were imprisoned on Court of Requests  Warrants. 9 persons were imprisoned and Fines amounting l $67 imposed for Contempt of Court.
During the greater part of the year the proceedings of the Court had to be held in the Magistrate's Office, the former Court of Requests being occupied by the Municipality. Later it WAS transferred to the m w Police Court in the afternoons, causing much mutual inconvenience to the District Officer and Magistrate thereby: this will continue to be so I unless comparatively sound-proof partition is erected between the former’s office and the Court Room.
Rejang.
Financial. -The nett Revenue for 1921 amount¬ing to $17,663.25. exceeds the nett Expenditure by $4-557-15. a decrease in Revenue of $3,801.3235 compared with figures for 1920. The principal increases are under Court account $1,041.07. and Import duty $ 1,757 47; the decreases under Export Duty $3,671.33 and Food account $4,168.89.
The nett Expenditure amounting to $13,106.10, a decrease of $3,207.07 compared with the Ex¬penditure for 1920. The principal increases are under Prison account $1,084.51, Public Works $2,10504 and the decrease in Food account of $7,34667. The heavy increase in Expenditure under Public Works account is mainly due to extensive repairs to the bungalow and conversion of the old B. C. L. store (rest house) into a clerk's house.
The Dyaks have planted considerably more padi this year, which promises to do well, and the Malays considerably less than last year.
Matu and Daro				
There is an appreciable increase in the export of Raw Sago from Daro. It is hoped that this is the start of an increased trade from this Station.
The present site of the Government buildings is very unsuitable being very low and is also a great distance from the bazaar and Kampongs.
It is hoped that sanction will be obtained to move the Matu Station further up-river so as to be nearer the Kampongs and to the Bazaar. A new site has been found at the junction of the Kampong Ska-an and Jemoring roads. This land is very much higher than the present site and is in an excellent position. Both the Chinese and the Mel ana us have made application for the Station to be mover! nearer the bazaar.
Death of Mr. C. A. Osborne.
It is with regret that we have to record the death
of Mr. Christopher A. Osborne, lute Consul for
Sarawak at Jeddah, which took place on February
8th. at Wallington, Lancs.
Mr. Osborne died of heart trouble and an aneurism
of the throat contracted m France whilst on war
Her vice there.
1 Mr. Osborne was appointed Consul in March 1897,
rice Mr G H. Be winy, and resigned in August 1917.
Hundreds of Sarawak pilgrims passed through
MR. Osborne's hands and his kindness and courtesy
will be gratefully remembered by them
Letters from the Hinterland
MY DEAR PERCY,
I want you and all the other bids of the village, Videns and all that bunch to support this racing stunt. These little horses give one more fun for less money than the others ever did. Besides Percy old pony we must do something before bullock racing really gets a hold on us. Once the bull starts rolling it's so hard to stop it. B N. H Percy is a red 'ot spot and Jesselton provides all the fun of the fair. ft simply bristles, as the saying is, with humourists and beautiful ladies who are also wonder¬ful dancers. There is an unmistakeable air of hospi¬tably about. I got separated from my clothes Imo one evening and did'nt meet them again till 5 p.m. next day, mean while I joined the B. N. B. service buttons and all. Sir West had a great send off and he imide a speech which simply sparkled with wit. A dance followed the speeches and one poor fellow had a misty accident. It is surmised that he fell or at least that hr slipped a longish way. There is a real hotel there Percy where you can order any¬thing from a devilled kidney, to a "peche melon” and get it too also a railway which does not chuck your liver about and bruise you as we always heard it did. The most wonderful thing is the country is still full of planters, and a very cheery lot too. Do you remember Percy we used to have some once. I could say a lot more in praise of our neighbours but Lime presses. Dont forget about the racing Percy old splint.
Ever Thine,
CUTHBERT.
Retirement of Mr. W. R. T. Clement.
The retirement of Mr. W. R. T. Clement, Sara-
wak Civil Service, is announced in the Sarawak
Government Gazette of the 16th. March.
Mr. Clement joined the Service in April 1906 as
a Cadet and was promoted Assistant Resident in 1910
and Resident 2nd. Class in 1911; under the new
scheme he retired as a District Officer.
Mr. Clement served in Limbang, Lawas, Trusan,
Sadong. Bintulu, Lundu, Upper Sarawak, Kuching,
Miri and Mukah and Oya, the latter district of
which he was District Officer when he went home in
May of last year. Mr. Clement has not experienced
good health for some years and has been invalided
out of the Service
Before coming to Sarawak Mr. Clement was in
the South Wales Borderers and served in the South
African war.
We extend to him our best wishes and hope that 
a residence in England will restore him to good 
health again.
The Kuching Sanitary and Municipal
Advisory Board.
Report of Meeting held on 20th. February 1922.
At the meeting of the Board held on above date
the following members were present
Mr. K. 11. Gillan (Chairman), Messrs. ('. Fen-
wick, E. Parnell, Lam Chin Gee. Tan Sum
Guan, Luu Chin Hian, Salleh Marican and
Haji Hassim.
Absent: —
Captain C. P. Lowe, Messrs. W. E. Le Gros
Clark, F. R. c s. and Kon En Law.
The Chairman having read the notice calling the
meeting and the minutes of the meeting of January
13th. 1922, a lengthy discussion then took place on
Part IV of the Municipal Order 1922 relative to
Rates and Taxes and to the By-laws relative to the
Registration of Dogs thereunder, when certain
amendments were made to the original draft sub-
mitted by the Chairman and the meeting adjourned
until March 2nd., to consider further questions in
connection with the proposals.
At the adjourned meeting held in March 2nd.
1922 the following members were present:—
Mr, K. II. Gillan (Chairman), Messrs. E Parnell,
Lam Chin Gee, Lau Chiu Hum, Salleh Marican
and Haji Hassim.
Absent: —
Captain C. P Lowe, Messrs. C. Fenwick, W,
E. Le Gros Clark, F. R. c. s. and Kon En Law.
The Chairman having read the minutes of the
previous meeting further discussion took place in
regard to Part IV of the Municipal Order 1922 and
By-laws under same.
A proposal by Mr. E. Parnell seconded by the
Chairman that the proceeds from the fees of any im-
pounded dogs Ire utilized for the payment of any
additional dog catcher required was approved by the
meeting.
It was decided that a proposal made by the Chair-
man, that the Kampong Water Rate and Road Tax 
within the Ahmicipal area should be replaced by a
consolidated rate of $4 per annum payable half yearly 
by each Malay householder should be referred by
Haji Hassim to the Datus and various Tua Kam-
pongs for their opinion.
On the proposal of the Chairman, seconded by Mr. .
E. Parnell, it was unanimously approved by the
meeting to recommend that the collection of Cattle 
Permit Fees in Kuching should be discontinued on
the grounds that Order No XX1, 1912, under which
these fees were collected was not applicable locally.
Other business transpiring was as follows : —
Proposed by the Chairman and seconded by "Mr.
Tan Sum Guan, it was unanimously approved to
recommend the appointment of a Committee under
Section 21 Part III of the Kuching Municipal Order
to undertake the work in connection with tne
assessment.
In connection with the sub-division of the new
Malay reserve at Tanjong Patingan, it was agreed
on the recommendation of Haji Hassim t at the size
of the lots should be 90 feet by 18D feet
An application was rend from the Conservator of
Forests for a plot of land in this reserve for a house
for a Malay Forester and Forest Ranger It was
decided that the application should be held over
until the requirements of Malay applicants were
obtainable.
The meeting then adjourned till March 9th. pend-
ing Haji Hassim’s report relative to the suggested
amalgamation of the Kampong Water Rate and
Road Tax.
At the adjourned meeting held on March 9th., the
following members were present:—
Mr. K IL Gillan (Chairman). Messrs. Lan Chin
Hian, Lum Chin Gee, Salleh Marican. Kon En Law,
and Haji Hassim.’
Absent.: -
Captain C. P. Lowe, Messrs. E. Parnell, C.
Fenwick, and W. E. Le Gros Clark, F R c. 8.
The Chairman intimated that the representatives
of the Malay ratepayers were not in favour of the
amalgamation of the Water Rate and Road Tax
and recommended the continuation of the present
arrangement
Discussion followed on certain additional sections
in the Order to provide for the collection of Water
Rate by owners of houses built on ungranted land
within the Municipal area which were duly approved.
No further business was brought before the
meeting which then terminated.
Report of Meeting held on 21ST. March 1922.
At a meeting of the Board held on above date the
following member* were present:—
Mr. K. IL Gillan (Chairman), Messrs, E.
Parnell. C. Fenwick, Lau Chin Hian. Salleh
Marican. Tan Sum Guan, and Kou En Law’.
Absent :—
Captain C. P. Lowe, Messrs. W. E. Le Gros
Clark, F. R. c. s. and Lam Chiu Gee.
Notice calling the meeting and minutes of meet-
ing of Match 9th. having been read by the Chairman,
a By-law for the Registration of Motor Cars,
Bicycles, and Caris was, after discussion, approved
by the Board.
An alternative suggestion to a proposed By-law
for toe registration of artizans employed by Gold,
and Silversmiths was proposed by Mr. E. Parnell
and seconded by Mr. Kon Eli Law, that the lax on
and registration of such artizans should be abolished
and that the Goldsmiths tax should be increased by
$2/50 to $7/50 in order to make good any loss of
revenue incurred, was unanimously approved by the
meeting.
A vote was then taken in connection with the
appointment of an Assessment Committee under
Part III of the Municipal order and the following
members of the Board wore selected to serve on
same subject to the approval of His Highness the
Rajah:—
Mr. K. H. Gillan (Chairman)
Mr. Tan Sum Guan
Mr. Salleh Marican
Haji Hassim bin Haji Arip.
In connection with the Kampong Water Rate at present levied on householders m Malay Kampongs, it was pointed out by the Chairman that the present rate was much too high in relation to the general assessment rate, and that instead of Malays getting preferential treatment in respect of rates exactly the reverse had been the case. He farther reported that he had suggested to His Highness the Rajah that the Water Rate should be abolished and that Malays should be subject to assessment on the ordinary basis. He therefore proposed that Haji Hassim should obtain the views of the various Tua Kampongs in regard to such a change as a preli- minary step to the consideration by the Board. As it was. however, stated by Haji Hassim that the Tua Kampongs would not. recognise that he had any authority to call meetings or make such enquiries, it was decided by the Board to ask His Highness the Rajah that steps be taken to notify the Datus and Tua Kampongs that he had such authority in connection with all Municipal matters affecting Malay interests.
An application wits read from certain householders in Central Road for the erection of standpipes there. This was held over pending the return of the Superin¬tendent of Public Works
MONTHLY REPORTS
SADONG COLLIERY
February
The gross out-put of coal produced from the mines during the month was 1,523.16 tons; *20*tons of this was consumed by our boilers, and the balance of 1,103.16 tons, delivered to the wharf for export.
The shipments for the month were as follows :
The balance of coal in stock at the end of the month was 3,546.04 tons
The West panel workings, in the upper seam mines, arrived at the crop early in the month. There being no in< re advancing longwall faces to work in this mine, a retreating method of extracting the coal underlying an average thickness of fifteen vertical feet of soft shale and earth, between this point and the mine entrance was commenced.
The coal seam in No 9 mine was very disturbed, and the seam at No. 8 mine has redo ed to less than one-half its average normal thickness.
The Adit and the two Drifts made very good progress.
Kwak Sim Jee a Teochew Chinese miner, having been found absent from his quartet a on Saturday the, 12th., was discovered, dead, at the lower end of the Main Slant of No. 9 mine, at 8.30 p. m., the following night. Deceased was liable to epileptic fits, and was reported to have been suffering from one of these periodical seizures when last seen alive at the end of his shift by his friends on the morning of the 12th., at 2.30 a. m. At the inquest, held on Monday, the 13th., a verdict of death from misadventure, was passed.
A good supply of Kapur wood arrived for the use of the wharf.
The rainfall for the month was 13 93 inches. *
J. W. EVANS,
Manager
SIMANGGANG.
February.
I left Simanggang on the morning of the 1st. for Engkilili arriving there at 10 45, there were a large number of Malays about collecting durians. The Chinese reported many deaths from fever, mostly among children. I visited some pepper gardens at Bukong which looked well kept and healthy. Penghulu Renang and Awan were ordered to have 20 men each ready to leave for Kuching about the 17th., these men to be the advance party of the Dyak con¬tingent to Singapore, for the Malaya-Borneo Ex¬hibition. I returned to Simanggang on the after¬noon of the 3rd.
Mr. W. F, Dick returned from- Eastern leave on the 1st. instant
Abang Haji Buasan and Penghulu Jaul returned from the Ulu on me 5th. instant and reported that Penghulus Apai Karua, Karna and Jamit had each been fined 1 pikul for attempting to re-open an old feud.
A Chinese trader had his boat upset down-river by the bore and reported the loss of about $500 worth of goods.
Mr. J. B. Archer returned from the Krian on the 16th. and left again on the 17th. for Kuching where he has been appointed to do duty. The. advance patty of Dyaks for Singapore left by the same launch
The 24th. being II H. the Rance’s birthday, the Government offices were dosed.
The District Officer left on the 26th. for Lingga to meet His Highness the Rajah there and proceeded with his Highness to Sibu.
Good reports of the new padi crop come in from every district, hat vesting has now started every¬where.
There has been a great deal of sickness in the kampongs lately, mainly amongst children, several | deaths have been reported; this appeals to be i bronchial pneumonia.
Abang Haji Abdullah, a Government pensioner and father of Abang Dulrasid a Native Officer at Simanggang, died at PUSA on the 25th.
Court.—Imang was sentenced to one year R. I. for attempting to sell a jar which he. knew to be stolen property, Pali a Dyak 6 months for aiding him. Lim Fook Siew, who absconded 2 years ago, was sentenced to a total of 1 year, on several charges. A Chinese case of incest from Roban was referred to the Supreme Court, A Foochow China¬man, by name of Lim Kai Chee, was sentenced to jail for counterfeiting ten cent Sarawak nickel coins. He had evidently boasted to his friends that he had carried on the same trade in Singapore counter-feiting 50 pieces and found it lucrative, until he. had to leave in a hurry.
P. W. D. During the month the prisoners re¬paired the Kampong roads, and cleared the lower cattle plain ; the road leading to the officers quarters to the Fort compound was entirely remade. The carpenter finished the kitchen of the dresser quarters and started on the verandah of the clerks quarters.
I append herewith Mr. .1. B. Archer’s report on his visit to the Sari has and Kalaka.
“I left Simanggang on the 21st. January accom¬panied by Abang Dulrasid, N O., and reached Belong the same evening.
SARIBAS DISTRICT.
Betong.—There were the usual number of cases before the Courts but none of much importance. A number of Teochew Chinese were fined for assaulting a Hokien, apparently for no reason at all.
Many land and fruit disputes were nettled. I in-
spected the School and examined some of the pupils.
So far progress has been slow but one will be better
able to form an opinion when the School has been
open longer.
The Dyaks and Malays report that the prospects of a
harvest good. Notices were issued to the bazaar
Chinese about keeping their shops cleaner; the
bazaar was very dirty in some parts.
Various small repairs to Government building
were sanctioned. Fort Lili will need some rather
extensive repairs soon. I left Belong on the 26tlh.
and reached PUSA the same day.
Pusa.—There were few cases in Pusa, A
deputation of Chinese appeared before me and
complained that the Opium Farmer did not keep
sufficient stocks, especially for the Debak Chinese.
I enquired into the matter and there appears to be
bad reeling between the Opium Farmer and the rest
of the Chinese. I have written to the Opium Farms
Syndicate about the matter suggesting that a new
agent be appointed if the present. Farmer does not
take reasonable precautions to ensure a sufficient
supply being kept in stock A counter charge made
by the Farmer against Kui Mee for importing opium
was adjourned for consideration. A Malay juragan
was lined for bringing the opium in
I regret to say that Abang Haji Abdullah, the late
Native Officer and father of Abang Dulrasid, is
seriously ill.
Chinese New Year passed off quietly.
I left for Debak on the 29th arriving there the
same evening.
Debak. - There were a number of cases waiting
settlement. Two interesting cases were one of
hunting rights, in which Dyaks charged Malays with
infringment of same, and another in which a Dyak
charged another Dyak with failing to attempt the
rescue of a drowning woman. I bail cause to
reprimand Penghulu Sujang for imposing fines on
Chinese.
Whilst in Debak I purchased a piece of land on
which to build the new Court House. The site is a
piece of rising ground and at present, planted with
rubber. The piece is most suitable for a station
and the puce, $25, moderate.
A burglary in the bazaar was reported and in-
vestigations made.
The padi was looking very well.
I left Debak for Pusa on the 31st. Ali was
imprisoned for 3 months on a Malay Court charge.
KALAKA DISTRICT.
Kabong.—1 reached Kabong on 1st. February.
The Chinese presented a petition alleging that
Malays were trading in the kampong. The matter
was enquired into and only one man, an Indian,
was ordered to cease trading or to open a shop in the
bazaar Ile immediately Agreed to build a shop in
the bazaar whereupon the Chinese again objected.
I warned the Chinese that their conduct was dis-
gracefull and gave permission fora shop to be built.
The matter of rubber garden tax about winch a
deputation of Malays had complained in Simanggang,
was looked into and settled satisfactorily. Haji
Metair was fined $25 for bringing false charges,
and Buncbol $25 for causing T. K. Adak to be
arrested on a frivolous charge.
The Kabong School was inspected and I am
pleased to report that it appeared to be in good order
and the pupils diligent. The Schoolmaster, how-
ever, has given notice to leave.
An order was issue warning all owners of rubber
gardens io clear their land within 3 months
The bridges in the kampong are in it bad state of
repair.
P. C. Janting, AN ex-Lance Corporal of S. R. was taken on as a P. C. in place of 'P. C. Sembilan promoted to the Sarawak Subordinate service as 2nd. clerk at Kabong.
left Kabong for Sarawak on the 4th.
Saratok.— There were a great number of eases waiting settlement.
Agal was fined 2 pikuls for re-opening an old case, Mulok one pikul for selling a pig stake, Abang Majit 2 months for Contempt of Court, Abang Seman 6 months for theft, of sago palms, 4 Malays fined §50 each for buying stolen sago palms, Ah So and Ah Hang fined $25 each for living in Dyak Houses,' Bong Ah Ngee 1 year for burglary at Debak. Tay Liong Sai 6 months for embezzling some of the Chinese School funds and Salleh six weeks for Contempt of Court.
A number of fines were imposed in minor cases and many Civil disputes settled.
The Saratok School was inspected and- All, the’ School-master, is to be congratulated on his work;
so far this is the best School I have seem in the 2nd.
Division 
Whilst in Saratok I made a contract for a Chinese
carpenter to build the Court House at Debak foe
$800, the Government finding all materials.
The padi prospects were considered good and
some had harvested already.
The roads and grounds at Saratok were in excel-
lent order and reflect credit on Abang Metalip, N.O ,
and Jerah, the Court Writer.
I left Saratok on the 9th. and reached Kabong
the same afternoon.
Roban. – I arrived here on the 11th. and found
a good many cases waiting settlement.
With regard to the Chinese petition alleging that-
Malays had caused frequent disturbances in the
bazaar I made a careful enquiry into the matter and
am of opinion that the Chinese allegations were un-
founded. in fact most of the Chops on the petition
had been put on without their owner's knowledge.
Various fines and penalties were imposed but under
the circumstances I am reporting on this under
separate cover.
Jelu and his wife Jemburi were imprisoned for 1
year and 6 months respectively for house breaking.
The former has 3 previous convictions for theft. Jew
Chiang 4 months for swindle.
Towkay Ah Chang and Joo Kim (f.) were tried
before the Court on a charge of incest; after taking
all the evidence the Court ordered that, as the cir-
cumstances were peculiar, the prisoners together
with 6 others were to appear before the full Court
in Simanggang within 7 days for judgment.
The padi was looking well.
I left for Kabong on cite 14th. and sailed for
Lingga on the 15th. reaching there the same
evening Four prisoners' were left in the various
stations and six transferred to Simanggang Jail.
$4,241.50 cash was brought from Kabong.
On arrival at Lingga I received letters from the
District Officer ordering me to return to Simanggang
at once as His Highness the Rajah has appointed me
to do duty in Kuching.”
The following me the Trade Returns for the Divi-
sion :—
F. A. W. PAGE-TURNER,
District Officer,
LOWER REJANG.
January.
R E J A N G.
Court.— There have not been many cases before the Courts during the mouth. The only cases of importance were those of Lim Ah Kian and Ho Kii PUK who were both sentenced to 18 months impri¬sonment for theft of brass and absconding under advances and Sin Kii Hii and Sin Kii Boon sentenced to two years and one year respectively for receiving stolen property. These sentences were passed by the Resident 3rd. Division. Cases of theft are being reported by the Island Trading Co., Ltd. of Selalang. valves, cocks, and other brass parts of engines being continually missing. There was found, on searching for the two Selalang men in Kotak No. 84, a com¬plete outfit for the manufacture of counterfeit, coins together with a quantity of brass parts and ingots of zinc. The above mentioned Chinese are in custody awaiting trial
P. W. D.—The prison gang has been employed on general upkeep of the Station.
General —1 returned from Sibu and Selalang on the 4th.
The Resident and Mr. 11. D. Aplin visited the Station on the 11th and returned to Sibu the next day.
1 left by s. 1. Mei maul for Matu and Daro on the 1'Jth. returning here again on the 26th.
The Resident mid Mrs. Owen visited the Station on the 26th. returning to Sibu next day.
The Trade Returns for the month are as follows :—
MATU.
Court.—There were as usual a large number of land cases before the Court also a number of cases in the Court of Requests.
Lee Ban Seng and Bun Boo Koo were both fined for living in the kampong.
P. W. D.—The. prison gang has been employed on general upkeep of the Station.
General.—I arrived here on the 11th, and left for Daro on the 23rd.
Ng Fong Seng, senior clerk has been sent to Kuching for medical treatment
Chop Seng Watt’s shop was broken into on the night of the 28th. Cash and opium to the value of $18 being missing. So far no trace of the culprit has been found.
The Trade Returns for the month are as follows :—
DARO.
Court.—There were a large number of land cases before the Court but very few cases in the Court of Requests. The longstanding case of Temai (f) vs. Mudah has at last been settled. This case is an inheritances dispute which was opened in 1916 and has continually been adjourned for different legatees.
P. W. D.—The prison gang has been employed on general upkeep of the Station.
General.—I arrived from Matu on the 23rd. and returned to Rejang on the 26th.
Application was made by the Chinese for a full set of weights and measures to be kept at Daro. At present any person registering his weights and mea¬sures has either to proceed to Matu or Rejang, which causes both waste of time mid money.
The Trade Returns for the month areas under: -
R. D. ST. J. HORTON,
Officer-in-Charge
SIBU 
February.
Court - Inggang was wounded in the chest by a deertrap set by Rujau who was lined a pikul and ordered to pay a pikul compensation to Inggang. Kee Hock was sent to gaol for 6 months for being the cause of a Chinese woman Seh Moi committing suicide. Five Dyaks were lined for working in the Igan without a pass. The other cases before the Courts were Civil claims or call for no particular mention.
Public Works.—The Tamil gang gravelled the new Wharf road and were otherwise employed in the upkeep of roads generally. The new Tamil lines were completed by the contractor. Prisoners pre¬pared the site for the new Dresser’s quarters and cleaned up all the ditches on the Island. Work was begun on the new approaches to the launch floating stage which should lie completed next month. A small floating stage with approach was completed at the Residency landing. A new belian bridge was erected in Kampong Pulo in place of an old one that had collapsed. The new bridge over the Bakong stream on the Race Course WAS com¬pleted by the Tamil gang A huge quantity of be¬lian fencing and planks was brought down from Kapit and stacked for future use.
General.—The s. s. Alice Lorraine brought 106.09 tons of coal for Government from Sadong on the 2nd. She left for Kuching again on the 5th and I took a passage by her.
She brought up an old boiler and chain which was dropped into position in the river as a mooring for the steamer stage which should now be able to withstand the strain of the freshets.
Mr. Miller Hallett arrived by the Alice Lorraine to relieve Mr. Stooke as Assistant Conservator of Forests here.
The s s. Sarawak made two trips from Kuching on the 6th. and 18th. and the s. s. Sri Sadong one on the 26th. The s. s. Flevo arrived from Singapore on the 7tb. and 22nd. and the s. s Ban Siong Bee on the 12th. and 28th.
I returned from Kuching in the s. s. Alice Lor¬raine. on the 12th. to Rejang, coming on to Sibu by the s. I. Chamois.
A Chinese woman named Seh Moi hanged her¬self from a beam in her house on the 12th. A man named Kee Hock had been annoying her by his attentions and she feared her husband's anger. Kee Hock bad already been lined for annoying her but persisted in his attentions.
The dead body of an unknown Maccau Chinese was found on the 24th floating near K. Assan. Death had been caused by drowning and he ap¬parently fell into deep water while bathing as his body was nude and bore no marks of violence.
The surveyors were away at Gunong Ayer during the month and made considerable progress. The work will take some months yet to complete.
I went to Oya and Mukah on the 16th. accom¬panied by Datu Azahari, to hold Court of Appeal. Three cases at Mukah were settled and there wero none at Oya. I returned to Sibu via the Cut on the 23rd. While at Mukah news was brought of the murder of a Chinese trader named Chua Jit Seng in his bandong in Igan river. Mr. Bruce at once proceeded to Dalat and made enquiries, the body being buried at Dalat.
There were twenty spear and parang wounds on the lardy. The Chinese had evidently been speared while asleep in his boat, and the wound not proving fatal, lie had fought for his life. While being at¬tacked with a spear from the bows he attempted to escape by the stern but was cut down as he emerged from the cabin by another man armed with a parang. The reason for the murder has not transpired. A party of Machan Dyaks, who had been making en-
quiries for the man the nigh he was murdered, have
been arrested. As far as can be ascertained his
property was untouched and no attempt had been
made to take his head.
I left for Rejang on the 28th, to meet His High-
ness the Rajah who arrived at Gunong Ayer in
H H. s. Y. Zahora at 11.30 a. m. accompanied by Mr.
Page-Turner and Captain Lown leaching Sibu at
5.25 p m. the same day.
The rainfall for the month amounted to 4'46
inches only and no rain fell on 17 out of the 23
days. During the greater part of the month the
heat was intense and the weather only broke with a
heavy storm on the 25th.
Chinese and Natives have all been busy harvest-
ing their padi which has ripened quickly under ex-
ceptionally favourable conditions. Everywhere the
crops are reported excellent. The fruit season,
which has been a fairly good one, is practically over.
The Foochows have applied for an area of land
below Lobaan on the left bank for the purpose, of
planting padi only. Most of the land above Lobaan
is unsuitable for irrigation owing to the periodical
flooding which has destroyed a deal of the padi in
the past. Below Lobaan the land is not subject to
floods and can he irrigated. The area suggested is
not occupied with the exception of one.or two pat-
ches farmed by Malays and a survey of it will BE
carried out as soon as possible.
DONALD A. OWEN, 
Resident 3rd. Division 
Oya.

	January.
Court.—Police Court cases were not numer-
ous this month, and the prison gang is now very'
small two Chinamen were surprised at night,
at Kampong Medong gambling m their trading
bandong with natives; they will be dealt with
in due course Drahman Bondol and Tapa were
acquitted of a charge of theft, and the latter ordered
to pay compensation for the loss of a boat in his
charge Amba and the other Dyaks were forwarded
to Sibu to identify a man named Ajak, whom they
accuse of having swindled them out of a rusa jar,
valued at $230
P. W. D.—The contractor having reported fit
again good progress has been made with the new
Forest Checking Station at Dalat, which is now
nearing completion.
The usual upkeep of roads, bridges, and ornamen-
tal grounds has been maintained.
Sundry-repairs to the telephone lines have also
been effected.
Trade. Returns:—
No shipping touched the Port, hence the small
figures above, which present traffic with Sibu,
via the Cut.
Exports include:—
Local market rates have remained steady. Raw
sago being between 95 cents and $1 per passu, and
gutta jelutong between $5 and $5 50 per picul.
General.--967 gantangs imported rice were sold
ex-Government stock. Local price is now $6.80
per picul Up-river Dyaks expect good crops this
year, and are more willing to part with their
reserves of padi from hist harvest
J. Sulong and B Spurirh clerks at Dalat, Awang
Ah, jelutong inspector, and Mandor Dullah reported
fit for duty, after short periods of sickness.
The Government Offices were closed on the 2nd.
and 28th. instant, in observance of New Year's day
and Chinese New Year respectively.
Mr A. E. Lawrence. District Officer, together
with the Acting Assistant Conservator of Forests,
Mr. G. B Stooke, and Mrs. Stooke, proceeded to
Mukah from Sibu on the 7th, the latter returning a
few days later.
1 returned to the Station on the 18th.
This month the Dalat gambling farm was closed,
the reduced tenders for the ensuing period being
unacceptable. New tenders, however, the same
amount as previously, have now been offered and
accepted for the remainder of this year.
His -Highness the Rajah has been pleased to
sanction an increase in the salary of the two Native
Officers.
A case of theft of telephone wire occurred on the
Igan side of the Dalat-Sibu line, twelve fathoms
having been taken; enquiries were made, but with-
out results so far. It is some years since a similar
incident occurred here.
February.
Court.—There was a considerable increase in the
number of cases brought up for settlement this
month. Sentences passed included: Kimit (f.) fined
$25 for altering a sago land boundary, Tow Chiew
and Ah Loo fined $10 each for brawling in the
bazaar, Ho Sai and In Cheng fined for gambling with
natives in their bandongs in Kampong Medong,
Minnie imprisoned for swindling, Balan, Kamal,
Agok and Uyo (f) for theft, Tungan for forgery and
Jin for breach of agreement.
P. W. D.—The new Forest Checking Station at
Dalat was completed and is in. every way satisfactory.
The contractor has now commenced to demolish the
old Police Barracks there, preparatory to re-erection.
A small portion of the main Dalat load has been
raised and rebuilt as far ns the Court House To
complete the work thoroughly a gang of coolies is
essential, and 1 hope to be able to borrow’Tamil
labour from Sibu in the near future, for the purpose.
The small prison gang has been engaged with the
usual upkeep of roads, ditches and Ornamental
Grounds.
Six schooners, two motor schooners and one junk entered. One schooner and one motor schooner cleared the port.
General.—On the 8th. Penghulu Takin, and rela¬tives concerned, reported that a youth named Jalong had died as the result of his younger sister having accidentally cut off his baud while they were both attempting to catch a fish in a stream
Several exhibits for the M. B. Exhibition have been delivered, the number promised, however, is far from completed, in spite of repeated urgings.
Mr. Allman arrived from La was by the Adeh on the 23rd., en route for Kuching.
The A. D. O. Lawas and Trusan bought over the exhibits from his District, for the Malaya-Borneo Exhibition, on the 27th. It was unfortunate that two fine specimens of the proboscis monkey, mangkatau. a mother and a child, escaped owing to the gross carelessness of the gardener. Not to be daunted Mr. Adams has been successful in securing more of these interesting animals. I understand the difficulty is not so much to catch them as to keep them alive in captivity.
Having received information that one of the sub¬marines visiting Labuan would Ire off the Brunei bar on the morning of the 28th. a party of us gaily set out to meet her, but on arrival at the spot we were very disappointed to see no trace of the vessel which we afterwards learnt had hardly come within five miles of Tanjong Sapoh.
It was necessary to detain a Dyak named Juak who is insane. At one time he became so violent, so 1 am informed, that it took eight men to hold I him down.
The weather has been very dry, only 5.52 inches of rain were registered.
The p. s. Adeh called in twice, the s. 1. Peter Duff made three trips, the in. I. Adele four, and m. I. Nancy one.
The following are the trade returns:—
LAWAS and TRUSAN.
February.
Court.—Fewer cases than usual were brought before the Court, as the people were busy on their farms. Hung Yian Keng and Lee Sung were fined for interfering with Murut women. Ah Tai, an old offender, was sentenced to 2 years imprisonment for theft on two charges and Ah Chong to’6 months for assisting him.
General.—I went to Merapok on the 14th.. and settled various matters. On the 15th. at midday after arranging with Tagals to pick out ten men to go to Singapore with a dancing platform and to । meet me on my return, I walked to Sipitang and spent the night with the District Officer there. The next day I went with him to Jesselton to attend the pony races, returning to Merapok on the 22nd
I made final arrangements with the Tagals and left for Lawas next day.
Mr. Allman who arrived on the 13th. via Labuan, kindly lent me the m. I. Nancy, and on the 26th. I took all my exhibit to Limbang via Sundar. I returned to Lawas on March 3rd., accompanied by Mr. Daubeny who came on a visit.
The p. 8. Adeh made two trips calling at the mouth to load timber for Miri.
Kamis Pasir of Trusan reported that he had failed to get Tai Langub, and according to information he had received, this rebel has absconded to Dutch territory. He also reported that a Dyak who had contrary to Government orders, been living amongst Muruts in Ulu Trusan had mysteriously disappeared.
A list of all rubber gardens in Lawas district was completed.
P. W. D—The capernter has repaired all bridges as far as Lumut, but his work is very slow. Ahmat of Trusan contracted to keep the Trusan half of the road and telephone track clear for $20 a mouth All Chinese and Kedayan owners of gardens bordering on the Trusan road were ordered to clean their gardens along the roadside.
The prisoners, who averaged 16 men, were em¬ployed on the ornamental grounds, raising the Kampong road and clearing the track up the hill behind the Kedayan kampong.
The Trade Returns were:—

