The Sarawak Gazette. WEDNESDAY. MARCH I, 1922. Visit of H. M. Submarines
H. M. Submarines Lt, 2, and 3 arrived in Ku¬ching in the afternoon of the 24th. under command of the Lieut.-Commander A. B. Greig, R. N.,D. s.c, of L3. This being the first visit of such craft to Sarawak waters, there was a large concourse of people collected on the banks of the river on their arm al.
They berthed alongside the Ban Hok Wharf and. through the courtesy of the officers, a number of people, including the Datus and other natives, were enabled to go over the ships during their stay.
These submarines are all of the same class,
though differing slightly in minor particularities,
anil are each of 1,000 tons displacement, and 230
feet in length, carrying one 4-inch gun and four
18-inch torpedo tubes.
Their speed on the surface is 15 knots, and about
9 to 10 knots when submerged.
Lieut. T. L Scott Bell R. N. commanded L2, and
Lieut A. M. Carrie, R.N., Li. Each submarine car-
ried a complement of 3 officers and 35 other ranks.
Amongst the other officers were Lieuts. Forbes,
Ruck Keene, Last, Gilbert, Cobb, Robertson, Cox,
Adcock and Dickson.
His Highness the Rajah gave a most enjoyable
dance at Astana in honour of their visit on the 25th.
An "At Home" was held at the New Club on
the 27th. followed by an exhibition of Dyak
I Dancing and other entertainments arranged by
Captain Cunynghame the same evening. The
Members of the Sarawak Club gave a dance on
the 2Sth., which was observed as a general holiday,
by desire of His Highness the Rajah, in honour of
the marriage of Her Royal Highness Princess
Mary.
The men also managed to get in three Football
matches on the Saturday, Monday and Tuesday
with the Police, S. P. G. and Segoleng all of
which they won. and were also entertained on two
afternoons by Mr. Parnell at "The Croft,” The
Hokien School was converted into shore quarters
for them, and free use of the Social Club kindly
given them by the members.
His Highness the Rajah paid a visit to L3 on
the 26th being met by a guard of honour drawn
up on the wharf.
The submarine L2, which has had some engine
trouble, left yesterday, the Li and L3 following
her this afternoon. The submarines are bound
for Jesselton and Manila, the other part of the
Flotilla having already called in at Labuan.
All we can add is to express the hope of all in
Kuching that this visit may be repeated very soon,
and again, and again.
Birth.
LAWRENCE —On December 7th.. 1921, at a nursing home in Richmond. Surrey, to Mr. end Mrs. A. K. LAWRENCE, a daughter.
NOTES
(February.)
THE Topicist has heard a great, deal lately about unification and federalisation and com¬bination of the Straits and States, but he gives the palm to the latest effort of unification by implication contained in the epistle of the gentleman who wrote to a reigning monarch of these lands hoping that there would be a large attendance of his people at the Prince’s visit “because they would be glad to see their future Sovereign” says the Free Press. This crackbrained inability to see further than the counting-house desk will yet involve the Government in a political mess of the first magnitude despite H E’s clear warning that such loose thinking has no sympathy from  Government.—(Straits Echo).
THE Delphic Club—one of London’s psychi¬cal centres—on December 22 had their annual competition of telling ghost stories.
The. members, sitting in a dim light, at¬tempted to make each other’s flesh creep by stories of ghosts gruesome, ghosts fearful, and quite ordinary ghosts who just appeared and did nothing. All stories were told as true. 
One of the members recounted how he in¬vestigated a haunted house with one of the present Cabinet Ministers, who insisted on waylaying a ghost, in company with a lady and a dog.
The recounter and the Minister—so the story ran—crouched .in a room flooded with moonlight, and saw the door slowly opening.
“I asked the Cabinet Minister,” said the storyteller, “if he would get up and see what it was” He replied “No, no,” at first, but then crawled to the door and flung it open.
“Outside the door was the dog”
The member of the club did not give the Cabinet Minister’s name, and did not win the prize.
This WAS won by A traveller who told of an unfortunate Chinese who was eaten by a crocodile in Sarawak. The crocodile was caught, and the man's skull discovered inside it. Part of the jaw containing a gold tooth was subsequently given to a lady as a souvenir.
Eighteen months later the traveller found the jawbone being used as a charm at Monte Cario. The ghost of the Chinese had followed it, and everyone who used the charm had very bad luck indeed. One man who possessed it died.
The unluckly charm, related the traveller, wa* eventually buried at sea.
The lady’s prize was won by a story of a servant’s ghost which returned to earth to work! — (3. T.)
EXTRACT from the letter of an outstation clerk on his accounts being returned for cor¬rection.
“Accuse me, Sir. I added by mistake.”
THE following hand was held in a game of Bridge at the New Club on the 8th.
The declarations were as follows: —
Pass, Six Spades, Pass, Pass, Pass. Dum¬my laid down 9 and 4 of Spades, leaving one between the opponents. The declarer made the six spades and lost the diamond trick.
THE preservation of books in the East is a subject in which most people have a personal interest. Great care is necessary, otherwise the climatic conditions are likely to play havoc among the book shelves. We notice that the Chief Justice of Ceylon has been in com¬munication with a member of a firm of publishers at Home on the way in which books suffer from the ravages of insects The latter has sent him two volumes with special bindings, which he supposes capable of with¬standing them, and Sir Anton Bertram now desires that someone will recommend a corner in a library—public or private—guaranteed to be infested with fish-insects, borer-insects .and cockroaches. At the same time, it is suggested— and there is no doubt about it —-that it is not so much insects that books suffer from as the “mottled mouldiness” that assails them even in glass-doored book cases, and against which some sort of varnish seems the only preservative. Mildew and mould are particular enemies of books in this part of the East. As for insects, it is said that the paste used in binding is an attraction.
“Mould was due to climatic conditions, which could not be prevented unless some special kind of cloth cover is used. It would also be a good thing to use some medicated paste in binding. Books kept in open cases suffered less from the ravages of insects; but it was different where the books are kept in glass book-cases. These books have to be put out in the sun periodically, say about once in six months, for, otherwise, they became sticky.”
The officer in charge of the Government Record Office, Colombo, said that the binding department in his office used a special kind of paste mixed with blue-stone which pre¬served books to a great extent, and he believed that the paste could be further improved by the addition of an arsenic mixture. Another acknowledged preservative was citronella oil, a small quantity of which should be sprinkled on the book at frequent intervals.—( P. G. )
IN connection with the controversy that
has been raging in our columns lately, we un-
derstand that the following selection of new
books has been sent in to the Committee of a
local Library by one of the members, as a sug-
gestion for inclusion in the next list of those
to be ordered from Home.
IN our last issue we reproduced from a Hongkong
contemporary a statement to the effect that a former
Hongkong man, named Mr. C. E. Macfarlane, had
been murdered in North Borneo where he was en-
gaged as manager on a rubber estate. The Straits
Times now states that they have heard from Messrs.
Guthrie and Co. that, AS agents for the B. N B
Government they have received a cable from the
Government Secretary, Jesselton, stating that the
report is entirely without foundation. Mr. Mac fur-
lane who is the manager of Lamag Estate, is alive
and well.
THE Berlin correspondent of the Times says the
German wireless to which Lord Northcliffe has
drawn attention is conducted by a Trans-Ocean
News Service which continues the Wihelmstrasse
war time function of supplying news. The chief
director of this service is Schwedler, who was a war
time propagandist and is still in close touch with
the Foreign Office. The Trans-Ocean News Ser-
vice monopolises the Nauen-Hanover wireless and
sends out 1,000 German and 500 English words
daily. The company has a Spanish contract but
innumerable newspapers in other countries pick up
and publish the news gratis.
"I’m informed" adds the correspondent, “that it
is noted here with satisfaction that British Sunday
newspapers sometimes use Hems of news of the ser-
vice. It is in fact widely used. A South American
Company has important contracts but the Argentine
and Eastern newspapers do not pay a penny.
HAS your watch been behaving strangely of late?
This question is raised by the experience of a
Daily Chronicle representative, who discovered that
not only his own watch, but something like 90 per
cent of those belonging to individuals whom he in-
terrogated on the matter have been working errati-
cally.
This is, apparently, no mere coincidence, for
officials at Kew Observatory and experts at Messrs.
Negretti and Zambra’se stablishment in Holborn have
noticed the same thing.
It is, also, a curious fact that watches of all kinds
and qualities are behaving in a similar manner.
They stop for an hour or so and then start again of
their own accord.
No explanation of the mysterious influence res-
ponsible is forthcoming, unless one admits the
American theory that watches are affected by mag-
netic disturbances.
Dr. Chree (Superintendent of Kew Observatory)
explained to a Daily Chronicle representative that
in the event of a magnetic disturbance sufficiently
powerful to affect watches, these would be disordered
not only locally, but throughout the world. No re-
ports from abroad have come to hand.
"There has been no important electrical disturb-
ance recently,” he said, “and during the great mag-
netic storm of last May there are no official records
|of watches having been affected."
Another official of the same observatory admitted,
however, that "the same thing has happened to my
watch."
In practically the same words, the manager of
Messrs. Negretti and Zambra. Holborn, intimated
that his watch had been working unreliably.
He ventured no explanation, but pointed out that
if a watch were affected in the way suggested, it
would be permanently magnetised, and would con-
tinue to work erratically.
Whether this may actually prove to be the case
remains to lie seen, while evidence as to the period
and scope of the supposed disturbance should help
to elucidate the mystery.
Two other matter-of-fact suggestions have, been
put forward, though they hardly seem to account for
such a remarkable coincidence. One is that the
watches need cleaning, and the other is that watches
are affected by the health of the wearer.
LETTERS patent have been granted to H.
K Hansen of Johore, fur an invention of an
attachment for a plough to enable it to be
used in plantations and root-filled areas with-
out being hindered by roots.
A meeting of shareholders of the Shell
Transport and Trading Company sanctioned
an increase of capital to £43,000,000. Half
of the £10.000,000 new second preference
shares will be issued immediately.
A marriage has been arranged, and will
shortly take place, between Geoffrey Edmund
Gator, Malayan Civil Service, son of the late
Robert Cater, of Grosvenor Place, Bath, and
Eliza! eth Margaret Wynne, youngest daugh-
ter of Canon the Hon Hugh Wynne Mostyn,
of Somerset Place, Bath, and late rector of
Budworth, Huntingdon.
COMMENTING on the decision of the Penang
Cricket Club to introduce a cash deposit
system, the “Rangoon Times” says it will be
interesting to watch bow this experiment
justifies its introduction. Certainly, the new
system has much to commend it. Nobody
can deny that for a very great number of
years the East has been cursed by the baneful
influences of the Chit System, both in busi-
ness and private life. From time to time
earnest attempts have been made to eradicate
the sores it creates; yet it proceeds on its
harmful path unchecked, unabated and rapidly
growing more difficult to exterminate. It
has now become such a big factor in our daily
lives that only the most drastic and combined
efforts of all concerned can deal it a death
blow. In again calling attention to its many
admitted evils, we frankly confess that we
have little hope of ever seeing it completely
abolished.
Coconuts have long been known as the
Consols of Malaya and three cents were taken
to be their price (incidentally die British pre-
mier security gave three per cent on its par
value, and hence we presume the analogy in
price and NAME. The popular idea was that rice had to be grown, and such things as coffee, rubber or even tin might come and go, but the coconut went on for ever. Ceylon has also from time immemorial taken a deep in¬terest in the nut The steps taken recently in tile Dutch East Indies to grow and manu¬facture coco)nit products on a scientific basis, the general activity in coconut growing in French Oceania, French Indo-China, and Portuguese East Africa, the strong support given by the Government of Brazil in the extension of the Brazil coconut area, the success of experiments made at Sungei Nepah in the Federated Malay States with growing I the dwarf coconut, and other world move-| ments, have been noted by intelligent coconut grow, is Taking all things into consideration, coconut growing should be one of the soundest of investments in the world of tropical agriculture or planting. There is much good coconut land available in Ceylon and Malaya. If Brs.British capital cannot wait for four to ten years, according to the variety planted out for the return, it might take advantage of opportunities which often occur to buy producing coconut estates. At present there is, however, comparatively little British capital embarked in this form of enterprise.
(C. E. & T.)
PEOPLE who met Mr. Somerset Maugham out here will  BE somewhat amused to read the following from the Daily Graphic:—
“Perhaps the most Appreciative inhabitant of Wonderful London yesterday was Somerset Maug¬ham. The play-wright, who has just returned from a year’s travel in the wilds of the Malay States, when he has been living in a bamboo hut. Friends who called at his West End home found him seated in his study, clad in a comfortable velvet coat and silk socks, enjoying the soft cushions in a cosy chair by the warm fire.
“I'm trying to find myself again," he said On his desk were piles of letters from friends, for he had had no news of anyone, or anything, for months. |
Mr. Maugham has been collecting material and colour for stories and plays; yesterday he handed his 1atest play, which deals with life in China, to his agent.
Mr. Maugham had many thrilling experiences, one of which WAS his narrow escape from drowning when in a native boat with some prisoners. Luckily they liked him and saved him; otherwise he would not be in London to tell the tale.”
The Italics are ours.
THE Venerable Archdeacon Small arrived by the Kuching from Singapore on the 10th., and is taking the Bishop’s place in Kuching while the latter is away on leave.
We notice from the letter in B. N. B.
He and that Archdeacon is very sorry to leave that country, but we trust soon to have confirmation of our hope that he is as glad to return to Sarawak as we all are to have him again with us.
THE Right Reverend the Bishop and Mrs. Danson left by the Kuching on the 13rd. and will travel home by the Bibby Liner Oxfordshire from Rangoon in tin beginning of March. The Bishop is on holiday, but we understand will speak at the Albert Hall, and has been invited to preach in St. Paul's Cathedral.
Mr. P. C. Cobbold was another passenger by tin's trip of the Kuching, having been transferred to the Singapore Branch of Messrs, the Borneo Company, Ltd.
THE Chinn Express and Telegraph of 5th. January contained a supplement on British North Borneo and Sarawak. Unfortunately both the local copies arrived minus this, and wo were unable to obtain one in Singapore also.
WE are given to understand that His High¬ness the Rajah has cancelled his passage home in April and may now remain in Sara¬wak until September. Ail will be glad to learn that His Highness is able to remain out longer than was at first intended.
DRY rubber harvested at Sungei Tengah during the month of December amounted to 72,000 lbs. and 69,000 for January
A very well-known Kuching resident will be missed by the death on the 18th. January of Lim Moh Moh, the Building Contractor. Lim Moh Moh WAS but 38 years of age, but had long suffered severely from consumption. Amongst the buildings erected lately by him have been the Government Printing Office, the R. C. Mission Rest House, and Mr. Rickett's House, “Palm Hill".
THE death of another well-known Sarawak Chinese also took place lately in China. We refer to Chin Kee, the Manager of the firm of Sin Seng Hak & Co. Chin Kee also suffered from consumption, and was very ill when he left this country
BY the kindness of His Highness the Rajah, local residents have been enabled during the past month to borrow books from the Astana Library, which have been placed in His High¬ness’ Office, where they may be obtained for a week at a time by application to His Highness’ Secretary, Inche Mohamad Ali. We under-stand His Highness has also been sending selections of books for circulation in the Out¬stations.
Mr. D. A Owen, Resident 3rd. Division, paid a visit to Kuching during the month in order to discuss arrangements for increasing tm- efficiency of the Steamship service at Sibu. It is rumoured that there is some in¬tention of moving the centre of the Rejang trade to Gunong Ayer at the mouth of the Sari. where 36 feet of water is obtainable at low tide.
MR. and Mrs. Kortright arrived in the p. s. Adeh from Miri on the 13th. Mr. Kortright is to be stationed in Upper Sarawak. Mr. C. D. Adams having taken his place at Miri.
Mr. J. B. Archer arrived from Simanggang on the 18th. and is taking Mr. Hardie’s place as Magistrate Court of Requests.
His Highness the Rajab left for Sibu via, Lingga on the 27th. in H. H s. Zahora, ac¬companied by Captain C. P. Lowe. Mr. Page-Turner we understand is travelling with His Highness from Lingga.
Departure of Her Highness the Ranee, 
Tier Highness the Ranee left for Singapore by the
s. a. Kuching at 7 a. m. on the 2nd., when a number
of people including the Datus were present to wish
Her Highness bon voyage.
A most enjoyable At Home had been given by 
Their Highnesses the previous afternoon, when all 
the European residents of Kuching attended. The 
Sarawak Rangers Rand gave a selection of music 
during the afternoon, dancing taking place in the
Astana.
Captain Barry Gifford, A D. c„ accompanied Her
Highness, who will travel home from Singapore by
P. 0. s. s Kashmir.
We repeal the wish of everyone in Sarawak in
hoping that we may very soon be able to welcome
Her Highness the Ranee back to Sarawak complete-
ly restored to health.
Captain Gifford hopes to complete bis arrange-
ments for taking further cinema pictures of Sarawak
on a larger scale, and may be expected out again
possibly as soon as May next.
A History of Sarawak.
Her Highness the Ranee has written a small book
entitled ‘"Sarawak," dealing with the lives of the
three Rajahs and the History of the Country under
their Rule.
This is at present in the hands of the printers, 
and will be published in Singapore for the Malaya- 
Borneo Exhibition. It includes several etchings of
local interest by Her Highness, and reproductions
of old prints shewing Kuching as it was in tbe early 
days of Rajah Sir James Brooke, with photographs
of it now and of the native inhabitants of the Country.
Thus the Straits Times: —
A correspondent writes: —A collector of ancient coins, living at Singapore, possesses a one-cent coin of Brunei (Borneo) with the date of 1304. The coin has been well preserved. On one side the inscription reads Sultanate of Brunei, 1304; and it is considered of high value not only by reason of its antiquity but also because of its reputed therapeu¬tic power. Some Chinese believe that old metals are able to cure tumours and other disease, although those curative effects may lie the result of their self-suggestion. This old coin will, I believe, be shown on the occasion of the Malaya-Borneo exhibition. Does anyone know whether there is some other Brunei coin older than 1304 in the museum or elsewhere?
This should be quite possible as it is note only the year 1340 in Brunei.
Extracts from the Annual Reports.
The Land & Survey Dept.
There, were only 118 applications for hind in the 1st. Division during the year, made up as follows: —
Only 70 planting permits were issued, covering an
area of about 1,109 acres. Nearly all the applica-
tions for coconut plantations were for land in the
Samarahan river.
Most of the land suitable for coconut plantations
on this side has been taken up and the soil in the
Samarahan river is Said to be unusually good for this
purpose. There is a large tract of unoccupied land
between the Samarahan and Sadong rivers, and it is
probably here that intending planters will go in the
near future.
If road reserves are laid down and the land suitable-
for coconut planting divided into lots, the cost of
surveying lands will be much less than it is at pre-
sent; and it might be an advantage to keep the
small holders in one locality, which could be sys-
tematically developed, instead of having plantations
so widely scattered that the making of proper roads
and drainage systems becomes an impossibility.
The main traverse of the township has been com-
pleted with the exception of the streets in the bazaar
and permanent marks have been put in.
Also from 2nd. mile Pending Road to Pending
Station—a distance of 8 miles, from Batu Lintang
Road through Stampin to the 7th. mile—a distance
of 8 miles, from Sungei Mating closed at the 3rd.
mile on the Rock Road—a distance of 2 miles, and
the main traverse survey along the coast line from
Mora Tebas to Semarah near the Sadong month—a
distance of about 20 miles. The line runs through
difficult country.
Details of Surveys made during the year are as
follows:—
RETURN OF SURVEYS WITH REFERENCE
TO REQUISITIONS.
Trigonometrical stations were erected, at Sem-
padi, Tanjong Batu, Jagoi, Sadong, Pulo Burong
and Sedong.
This work of necessity progresses slowly as, owing
to the nature of the country, it is only possible to
have stations in places that are not easily accessible,
also observations are often greatly interfered with by
bad weather.
River Surveys.—From the mouth of the Sama-
rahan river to Sajingkat—a distance of 35 miles.
I am indebted to Mr. J. P. Mead, the Conservator
of Forests, for the following river surveys:—
These surveys are done with a Bar and Stroud
range finder, and by this means a great saving and 
time and expense is effected, and the degree of
accuracy obtained is sufficiently close for the pur- 
poses for which the surveys are required. 1 hope to
do much more of this work in the coming fine season,
as the Forest Department have now been supplied
with a range-finder and another has also been pur-
chased for this office. Permanent marks are put
in at suitable places, and in the course of time these
will be connected to the main surveys. In the mean-
time they serve as a framework in places where it
has not been possible to run 1st. class surveys.
Wherever possible these closed on fixed points, but,
where none are available, control points will be fixed
astronomically. The probable error of lines measured
by a range-finder with a base of 1 metre is 1 yard in
500, 3.8 yards in 1000. 15 yards in 2000 increasing
to 137 yards in 6000.
It will be seen that, by limiting the lengths of the
main survey lines, such surveys may be made to
close well. In practice, when the lines do not ex-
ceed 700 or 800 yards in length, the closing error is
generally about 1 in 400.
The heights of the trigonometrical stations have been fixed as also have those of the main traverse stations and other important points in the Township.
Levels have also been run along the Matang Road Stapok Telephone lines, Railway line and on Matang Mountain
The heights of many hills visible from the Main Triangulation marks have also been fixed approxi¬mately
These levels are all referred to Kuching Datum, the actual height of which, with reference to Mean Sea Level, has not yet been fixed.
The levels in the Township will form the frame¬work for the detail survey of the Township which has just been commenced on a scale of 2 chains to an inch with 5' contours. It is hoped that this survey may be completed during 1922.
Ninety separate plans were completed during the year, and 55 of the 8 chains sheets are now in use. These 8 chains sheets cover an area of 200 chains square, and are subdivisions of the main map of the .1st. Division. All connected revenue surveys are plotted on these sheets.
I paid two visits to Jagoi making surveys in con-nection with the boundary settlement there, and my report on this matter has already been submitted. Two new trig stations were erected there, one at Jagoi and one at Gumbang. Others are in course of
erection now. Of these Jagoi is the only point that
has yet been fixed.
A considerable amount of work has been under-
taken for the Public Works Department, including
preliminary surveys at Matang in • connection with
the water supply, for the proposed road to Lundu,
details of the river front, etc. Two surveyors are
still doing work for this Department.
As the majority of the apprentices in this Depart-
ment had been trained only to do revenue surveys, it
has been a distinct advantage to them to work under
the Superintendent of Public Works and gain ex-
perience of topographical surveying, contouring, etc.
There is no surveying school here, and the ap-
prentices have to lie taught their work from the be-
ginning. This necessarily has entailed additional
expense and delayed work considerably in the past,
more especially as proper supervision has too fre-
quently been wanting. On the whole the progress
made by those who joined as apprentices has been
satisfactory and in one or two instances exceptionally
good, and the training of new apprentices no longer
presents the same difficulties that existed when this
Department was first started.
A map of the country on a scale of 1/500,000 has
now been completed. This is compiled from the best
surveys available, and is considerably more accurate
than any of the existing maps, although it can only
be properly described as a sketch map, as no ac-
curate surveys have yet been made outside the 1st.
Division.
The standard maps of the 1st. Division, which
were made to scales of 2 miles to an inch and 40
chains to an inch have been scrapped and replaced
by maps on scales of 1/200,000	and 1/50,000. These are
a more convenient size and can be kept in drawers,
where is the older maps had to be rolled up and con-
sequently had to be frequently renewed-
The standard maps of the N. 1. Government are
made on the same scales.
Most of the work done during the year has been
unremunerative, and even in cases where payment
has been made for surveys it has generally been in-
adequate. This will continue to be the case if the
scale of survey fees remains as at present, and sur-
veys have to be made of small lots distributed over
a wide area.
Trade conditions naturally account for this result.
Increased salaries and allowances, etc., account for the large increase under Court account. The same also applies to Land Office, Military, and Officers Salaries.
Under P. W. D. a large increase appears.
The Singapore trade was carried on by steamer 
Flevo which ran with fair regularity. She is now
unable to cope with the amount of cargo and
there is much congestion at times.
The down-river shippers suffer most from in-
adequate tonnage. A full cargo is usually obtain-
ed at Sibu with the inevitable consequence that
the down river cargo is shut out.
A new steamer, also belonging to the Soon Bee
Company, is promised early to the new year.
The total Export and Import tonnage was
14.155 tons.
The number of Postal Packets handled in Sibu
Post Office during 1921 was 55.341 as against
52.061 in 1920.
Roads. A short extension of the Bukit Lima
Road was completed It was to have been carried
further into the high ground, but the work was
stopped on account of expense
The whole of the Kampong Pulo road was rais-
ed and gravelled.
A new road was driven straight through for a
mile and a half, from the Mohamedan Grave-yard
to the 3rd. mile on the Igan road near Sungei
Antu, following the telephone line. This opened
up and incidentally drained a number of rubber
gardens, and the owners built their houses on
either side of the new road.
A large quantity of gravel was raised by Chinese
on relief work, and was stacked at convenient
spots for repairing the roads.
Chinese were employed on relief work on the
roads during the early part of the year, but all this
labour ceased when the padi crop ripened, they
being then no longer under the necessity of pur-
chasing imported rice.
A new road to Aup was commenced late in the
year, but was slopped owing to floods and in-
clement weather.
NEW BUILDINGS.
The following were completed during the;
year
Pork, Fish, and Vegetable Market in the
Bazaar,
New Gaol for female prisoners in the
Gaol Compound,
New kitchen fur unmarried Rangers,
Boatshed,
Small extension to Club premises,
Telephone Central in the Bazaar,
The B. C. L. Bungalow was purchased by Govt. 
for $2,000. and considerable alterations made in it.
The extensive repairs to all bungalows com-
menced last year were completed and paid for.
As no repairs had been carried out for many years,
the expense, which should have been spread over
a long period, fell rather heavily on this year's
account.
The gaol compound was completely enclosed
by a high belian fence and barbed wire a very
necessary piece of work.
Street Lighting- All the Lux lamps were lit
nightly throughout the year—to the great benefit
of the community.
Wharf.—The wharf, which was a new one and
not vet completed, collapsed owing to the rapid
erosion of the bank, and the structure was entirely
removed, practically all the timber being salved.
As it was useless building a wharf in such a posi-
tion, a new floating stage was built and connected
to the bank by two wide hinged approaches.
This was carried out at a very small cost, and has
been working satisfactorily.
Only 48 grants were issued during the year; the
fees received amounting to $1,296.15 including
payment for a number issued in 1920..
Quit Rent collected amounted to $5,623.30.
Great difficulty was experienced in collecting
the quit rent, probably owing to the low price of
rubber during the year, and a deal was outstand-
ing at the close of the year.
Many applications for grants were also made in
1920, and the surveys were completed and grants
made out during the year: but the applicants left
the grants in the hands of the Land Office, being
unable to pay the fees. Should trade conditions
improve, these grants will of course be taken up.
545 pepper gardens, containing 239,782 vines,
were registered during the year.
 Owing to the high price of rice, a larger area
 than usual was under padi and a good crop was
obtained. It is to be hoped that the price of rice
will hold sufficiently to induce agriculturalists to
 continue padi planting; but, directly the price of
 rubber rises and that of imported rice falls, padi
 planting will of course cease.
 This would be regrettable as the Foochows are
  excellent padi planters, and invariably obtain
good results.
Malays as a rule grow more weeds than padi;
and, owing to the fact that they all own fruit
gardens and the ripening of the fruit crop takes
place just before that of the padi, the latter is
  usually abandoned in favour of the former. But
in any case they are too lazy to weed their padi,
and their total lack of energy accounts for the
poor crops they usually obtain.
162 persons were committed to prison during
the year.
No prisoners escaped during the year, and none
of those who escaped last year were recaptured.
One prisoner, a lunatic on remand, committed
suicide by drowning himself in the river.
Datu Abang Ali, who had been ailing for some
time past, died at Sibu on August 19th. An old
and trusted Government officer with considerable
experience of the district and the natives, parti-
cularly of the Dyaks, his loss has been much felt
by all.
The health of the district would appear to have
been fairly good, and there was no disease in
epidemic form.
Towards the end of the year the newly arrived
Dresser commenced N. A. B. injections, the efficacy
of which were immediately recognised by the
natives and numerous applications have since
been received, but the supply of the drug gave out.
In so scattered a community it is difficult to get
patients collected on any particular date for in-
jection.
No Medical Officer visited the District during
the year.
The rainfall amounted to 122’82 inches, com-
pared with 109’18 during 1920. In that year the
fall for December was not recorded, owing to the
rain guage having floated away; and, as it was
not replaced till February 1921. the rainfall for
January 1921 is not included in the figures, and
the fall during that month was considerable.
Floods caused considerable damage to padi crops
which were ripening.
A combined steam padi mill and saw mill was
in course of erection at Binatang, and also a very
large sago factory at the same place. Neither
had been completed by the end of the year.
There were no serious Dyak troubles. Three
Dyaks named Igoh, Buah, and Raba were killed
by Busang Punans, who escaped across the border.
The Dutch authorities are on the look out for
these men who will probably be arrested.
Fifteen Rejang Dyaks. gutta hunting in Dutch
Territory. were killed by Kenyahs there. The
Dutch authorities took the matter up. recovered
and buried the heads, duly punished the offenders,
and obtained $2,100 from them for payment to the
relatives of the murdered men.
Parties of Dyaks out for trouble were arrested
by the D. O. of Baram in the head-waters of that
river: and a number of others from the Rejang,
Tatau. and Balengian. who attempted to go off
on a raid, were arrested in the Rejang, the ring-
leader being detained at Sibu, and not allowed to
return to the Tatau. This frustrated effort of the
Dvaks cost them over $2,000 in fines.
Two men, both Dyaks, were executed for murder.
Manang Rayong for the murder of Ah Chai in
Sibu Bazaar in January, and Nyanggau for the
murder of a Sarikei Dyak on June 29th.
The new telephone exchange was installed in a 
room adjoining the Police Station, and a number
of new instruments put in the Bazaar and Govern-
ment Bungalows The telephone line to Dalat,
Oya, and Mukah worked intermittently during
the year No more expenditure is being incurred
on this long stretch of line owing to the pro-
bability of the installation of wireless telephones
next year.
Bintulu
Tin- Revenue is $‘28,307.03 compared with $25,346.78 to 1920.
Thus an increase of $*2,960 25.
The expenditure, exclusive of Food account, is $‘25,583.80 compared with $24,015 58, and has there-fore increased $1,568.22.
The cost or part cost of a wireless plant was de¬bited in advance to this Station during 1920. but nothing further has happened.
There has been mi average amount of Court work
during the year, but no serious eases have occurred.
People were fined for felling engkabang trees, also
for improperly working jelutong.
Trade has not been very good, nor has- it been
very bad. There is a decrease in the export of
rattans, also in raw sago, and of course there has
been no engkabang crop this year; however other ex-
ports show an increase, especially that of belian
timber.
Mr. and Mrs. Mackie visited the district-in April.
Mr. Mackie came on behalf of Lord Inchcape to
examine the coal here He was shown the outcrops
in S. Sebatang and S. Sebuan.
Major Galloway came here in May and again in
July, also to examine coal. He was shown outcrops
in S. Sebuan, S. Plapi, S. Kabang, S. Sebatang,
S. Sebiau and S. Silas. Since then several other coal
outcrops have been discovered.
The rainfall for the year was 122‘25 inches.
March was the wettest month with 1707 inches,
and April the driest with 4'77 inches.
Sarawak Library.
The following books have been added to
the Library: —
Malaya-Borneo Exhibition.
FOOTBALL TOURNAMENT.
Satisfactory progress in the preparation of the
sporting events, which form one of the features of
the forthcoming Malaya-Borneo Exhibition, is being
made, and everything points to success crowning the
effort3 of the organisms. The proposed Malay Foot-
ball League is receiving encouraging support, Johore,
Kedah, Singapore, Malacca, Penang, Brunei, Treng-
ganu and Kelantan having already entered teams,
whilst Sarawak, British North Borneo, Negri Sembi-
lan and Pahang have the matter under consideration,
and it is hoped that satisfactory arrangements will
be made for them to be represented in the Competi-
tion.
The Europe Hotel, whose interest in sport has
found practical manifestation on several occasions
in the past, liar, kindly promised one set of medals
for the finalists.
It is hoped that on his first visit to the Exhibition
on March 8|su it will be possible for H.R.H. the
Prince of Wales to kick off in the first match of the
Tournament.
CHINESE DEPARTMENT.
The part to lie taken by the Chinese business
Community in the forthcoming Exhibition is very
encouraging. Already about fifty shops and ten
kiosks have been applied for through the Chinese
Chamber of Commerce in Singapore who have
formed a sub-committee consisting of Mr. Lim
 Nee Soon as Chairman, the Hon. Sir S. Q. Wong
 and Mr. See Teong Wah as representatives, and
Messrs. Lim Chwee Chian, Ang Teow Huan. Teo
Eng Hock, Lim Seow Kiew. Lee Kong Chian,
Chow Kuenam and fifteen others, with Mr. Ong
Thye Ghee as Honorary Secretary.
The Chinese Chamber of Commerce spares
no pains to advertise the matter abroad. Tens of
thousands of pamphlets explaining the objects of
the exhibition have been printed and distributed
in all the big Cities of China and Malaya, and to
assist in the Fund of the organisation a handsome
donation of $1,000 has been promised.
I land embroideries, Chinese silk, matches, and
. Oriental curios form the prominent features of the
imported section, whilst the local merchants take
unusually keen delight in putting forth for display
their own manufactured bicuits, rubber goods,
cement, oil, etc.
Arrangements for awards are in the hands of the
Prize Committee. Mr. Ong Thye Ghee in his
capacity as the Hon. Secretary of the Chinese
Department will be glad to advise and assist Chi-
nese exhibitors, who intend entering for any of
competitors.
AMATEUR PHOTOGRAPHIC SECTION.
There is already distinct evidence of interest
in the Amateur Photographic Section of the Ma-
laya-Borneo Exhibition. At a recent meeting of
the Malayan Camera Club, held in Kuala Lum-
pur, a small collection of pictures submitted by
various members of the Club to the Exhibition
Selection Committee, was on view. The standard
of work was most promising, certain of the pic-
tures exhibited having already found a place in
the London Saloon of Photography. Some forty
pictures have already been accepted, but the Se-
lection Committee has more than double this
number in view, and further entries are expected.
It is anticipated that at least one hundred and
twenty suitable pictures will be forthcoming from
European Exhibitors alone, and this number is
sufficient to ensure the success of th? Section.
The size of the Exhibit as well as much of its
quality, will depend, however, to a very large ex-
tent on the support given to this Section by the
Japanese Amateurs. So far no definite particulars
of the part they propose to take are available but
it is understood that they are taking considerable
interest, and judging by the number of exhibits
and the excellent standard of work in some of their
recent Photographic Exhibitions, it is anticipated
that they are likely to put up a keen and healthy
competition in the various classes.
It would be of great assistance if intending
exhibitors would submit their pictures at an early
date, as this will greatly assist those in charge of
the Section and enable them to make early ar-
rangements for the. construction of a suitable
gallery it is anticipated that the resources at
their disposal will permit of their acceptance of
at least five hundred pictures.
All particulars of this Section may be obtained
from Mr. F. de la Mare Norris, Kuala Lumpur, or
from Mr. H. T. White, care of Messrs. Robinson
and Co., Singapore.
“M.B.E."
In connection with the Malaya-Borneo Exhibi-
tion. what is the best “slogan" or watchword or
catch phrase that can be made up out of three
words with the initials “. M.B.E.”? Send in your
best selection (one only) on a postcard addressed
to “M.B.E., Publicity Chairman, Singapore." The
one which is ultimately chosen by an independent
arbitrator will be worth $25 to the sender, or if
there be more than one sending the chosen phrase,
the $25 will be divided between the first five
received.
Assuming that there are ten suitable words
having the three initials, the first ten adjectives,
the second ten nouns and the third ten verbs, how
many phrase combinations are possible? Put
your working out on a postcard and also address
to “M.B.E. Publicity Chairman, Singapore," and
the proper answer the first received, will be worth
$ 10. This second competition is of particular in-
terest to the unemployed.
Holders of I ’lots, Kiosks, Shops etc. who have al-
ready sent in their applications for electric current
have had them approved and it is imperative
that any further applications for additional cur
rent, signs, etc. should be sent in immediately as
only a certain surplus is available. After this
surplus is taken up Exhibitors will be limited to
the minimum lighting allowed on the forms “F."
THE MALAY FOOTBALL.
Mr. E. S. Manasseh has generously promised to
present eleven gold medals to the winning team
in the International Football League. The me-
dals arc being especially made by Messrs. De Silva
and are of solid gold, surmounted by a crown,
with the Prince of Wales feather engraved on the
face of the medal and a short Jawi inscription
POULTRY.
The Government of the Federated Malay States
has offered to present two cups for Classes ’359 and
3bo, division C. section I, poultry in the schedule
and prize list of the Agri-Horticultural Section.
NOVEL USES OF RUBBER.
 The Agri-Horticultural Committee have deci-
ded to offer three prizes for exhibits illustrating
novel uses of rubber. The manufacture of rubber
goods is included in this section. The entry fee is
$2 per exhibit and the last day of receiving entries
is March 21st. Intending exhibitors can obtain
full information entry forms, &c. from the hon.
sec., Department of Agriculture, Kuala Lumpur.
AMATEUR PHOTOGRAPHY.
Those interested in the amateur photographic
section will read with interest of the £3000 All
British Competition, open to amateur photogra-
phers in the British Empire, for photographs taken
with British cameras on British plates and printed on British papers. There are big cash prizes, seven classes covering all subjects, and boys and girls under seventeen have a class all to them¬selves. Entry forms and all particulars can be obtained from Houghton-Butcher (Eastern). Ca¬mera House, Robinson-rd. Singapore.
ROAD NAMING COMPETITION.
The Exhibition Ground has two main roads, namely A. running parallel to Robinson-rd and stretching from the eastern boundary to the Sta¬dium; B crossing that at right angles from the grand entrance. Names have been chosen for these roads and known but to three in the world. Ten dollars for guessing aright name of the second road. In case of two or more correct guesses for either road, first in to count Two names only per competitor.
SEATING ARRANGEMENTS. 
The following memorandum has been sent us
for publication
The Pavilion in which Raffles Statue stands is
being converted, in accordance with Mr Santry’s
design, into the Reception Pavilion, in which the
Honourable Mr. John Mitchell, Senior Unofficial
Member of Legislative Council and Member of the
Reception Committee, will read the Address of
Welcome from all British Subjects of the Straits
Settlements to His Roval Highness the Prince of
Wales.
This Pavilion will face South, and opposite it
will be greeted a stand to hold a thousand people.
Tickets for admission to this stand will cost $jo
each. With the ticket of admission for the cere-
mony, which will take, place on the morning of
Friday the 31st. March, will be issued, without any
further charge, a ticket of admission to the same seat
lor the evening of Saturday, 1st. April, when the
Torchlight Procession will pass. From this stand
a magnificent view of the Friday's presentations
will be obtained, and His Royal Highness in re-
plying to the Address will be facing directly to-
wards it. The stand will also be the finest place
from which to view the Torchlight Procession,
which will pass within a few feet of the east cor-
ner. As the accomodation is so limited, those an-
xious to obtain seats should book early to avoid
disappointment.
A second public stand will accomodation for*
450 people will be erected in the Municipal Com-
pound facing St. Andrew s Road. Tickets of ad-
mission to this stand will cost 85 each The Ro-
yal Procession will pass this stand twice, once
when proceeding to the War Memorial and again
after the Unveiling Ceremony at the Memorial
has been concluded.
A third public stand will be erected on the
pavement outside the Cathedral along Stamford
Road. Seating accommodation for $2,000 people
will be available and tickets will cost $2 each.
All th se stands will be roofed and some pro-
tection from the sun or rain will thus be afforded.
Site plans and block plans will be exhibited in
Messrs. Moutrie and Company's windows and
booking will commence there soon for the Muni-
cipal Compound Stand ($5) and the St. Andrew's
Corner Stand ($2) Messrs. Moutrie and Company
are arranging to have agents in Penang and
Malacca for the convenience of the residents in
those two Settlements.
Applications for tickets for the Stand by the
Reception Pavilion should be sent as soon as
possible to the Honorary General Secretary, Ge-
neral Committee, Colonial Secretary’s Office,
Singapore, and the envelope should be marked
“Stands.’’ As the number of seats which it will
be necessary to reserve is not yet known, cash remittances should not accompany the application for tickets for this Stand in the first instance, but as a demand far greater than the number of seats which will be available is anticipated, it will be advisable to send in applications at once.
On the occasion of the visit to Singapore of H. R. 11. The Prince of Wales, the Straits Chinese Community are erecting seats between Johnson's Pier and Anderson Bridge for the accommodation of those who desire to see His Royal Highness to better advantage. Admission to these seats will be by tickets only, which may be obtained from Mr. 1-irn Kee Cheok, of Raffles Chambers. Raffles Place and Mr. Cheong Konn Seng of 30 Chulia Street at $3 each for the whole season. As only a limited number of tickets are available, those who desire to reserve seats, should buy their tickets not later than 27th. inst.
Regatta 2nd. January 1922.
Balance Sheet.
Milk From Rice.
Rice can be liquified into the form of milk, we are told by W. M. Queen, writing, in the Rice Journal (Beaumont, Texas). This discovery marks a new chapter, he asserts, in the history of diete¬tics, and opens up an enlarged field of consump¬tion for the grain. Throughout the ages, Mr. Queen goes on to say, the transformation of natural elements into a milk hits been carried on through the water roots of the rice plant, "upon the same principle," he assures us, “as that by which the milk is drawn from Mother Nature through the veins of the cow into the udder." He proceeds:
“In the rice plant the sun’s heat performs the work directly and in a most perfect manner, requiring more time than the cow to complete the process of making its milk. The result is the rice kernel, which is nothing more than a con¬centrated, crystallized milk- which in turn, may be, by a natural process, returned into the following liquid form. S Christenseen, one of California's leading rice growers, who was in the dairy and butter business in Denmark years ago. started in his early youth to study and experiment with rice. He observed that the cereal is both a grain in the ordinary sense of the word, and a water plant. Unless submerged it may grow into a thing of beauty, but, of course, is valueless. It is known that rice at first grows like any ordinary grain, but later puts forth its milk veins, which have been called water roots, above the surface of the ground These draw a milk from the elements in the water. This is no longer a matter of specu¬lation.
Providentially, it would seems, the two men who could together coax the milk from the rice, by reason of their long and patient experiments, have met A milk containing 7 percent fat has been produced. It is too per cent rice. The writer has tasted this milk, fifty five hours after its pro¬duction. when it had become a butter-milk and can vouch for the fact that it is refreshing, invigo¬rating and stimulating. Mr. J. H. Sasseen com¬menced his duties with the Iowa State Dairy and Food Commission. He went to Texas, where he brought the experiments with rice as a base for ice-cream he had started in Iowa to a more perfect stage of their development. His pro¬ducts were already being made experimentally in the form of an emulsion and also in a frozen state as a substitute for ice-cream and sherbet.
At this point Mr. Sasseen brought his discovery to California, drawn there by the famous rice belt and the proximity of a wide variety of fruits for use in his new food products. There he met Mr. Christensen, the rice grower, whose researches covering a long period of years were so supplemen¬ted by Mr. Sasseen's invention that between them they have opened a new field for the development of rice with possibilities hitherto undreamed. In the near future a factory will be started in San Francisco or Oakland, which, serving as a base for operations on the Pacific Coast, will be the nucleus of a world wide industry of colossal magnitude. What this move will mean to the rice interest can be imagined when it is taken into consideration that the new rice milk can be used with greater economy, and with remarkable benefit to health, in any case where cow's milk has been employed. It must not be overlooked that it is richer than ordinary milk, being in fact a cream superior to that which comes from the cow.
Rice will be made the base of a host of delec-
table and nutritious foods. It will appear in a
jellied form for use at soda fountains, in sundries
of all flavors ft will be adopted in candy-
factories as a filling for French creams, etc. In
the frozen state it will be served in the same
manner as ice-cream and sherbet, but as will be
seen, it can be eaten more freely and by persons
who have hitherto had to abstain from frozen
dainties Only lately, after incessant educational
advertising and publicity, have people come to
know the importance of the vital element, vitamines 
which is lacking in many of our daily foods. 
Ordinary meat and fish do not contain it at all.
Milk is not as rich in it as was once thought. Too 
many everyday foods have been robbed of their 
vitamines in the process of manufacture. Care
has been taken to avoid this fault in the prepara-
tion of rice as a milk, which will make it an
important ingredient of the products of the bakery
candy factory, soda fountain and a host of other
industries, as well as increasing its consumption 
in the home markets, a beginning of a new chapter .
in the history- of dietetics.”
Sarawak
List of Bazaar Subscription
LOGIE Danson when he was here was re¬nowned for a cheery disposition, never more evident than when playing the drum in the Pipers’ band, the aplomb with which he did, the back bit always reducing the children to hysterical cheers. The cares of a Bishopric seem to have dulled little of his sense of humour for the report of the Sarawak Library, which is signed by him, ends with the delicate phrase that the Committee, whilst not being in favour of spending money on the most up- to-date sensational novels, still do not wish the institution to become “an early Victorian well of gloom.” There are permutations of this phrase also, for he might equally as well have said “a well of early Victorian gloom.”
Thus the Free Press.
Sarawak Fifty Years Ago.
[Extracts from the Gazettes of 1872.]
The Geology of the country is exceedingly
difficult to elucidate owing to its great compli-
cation, to the difficulty of obtaining sections and
the excessive variety of organic remains. In no
case have I been able to ascertain by direct ob-
servation the order of super-position of any of the
formations. The most extensive formation in the
country- is ferruginous sandstone conglomerate,
this composes most of the mountains near the
coast, and also the whole of the central mountain
region. Between these and often in contact with
them occur limestone -and porphyritic and trap-
pean rocks and a hard slaty rock which is some
times highly crystalline. The sandstone rocks
are generally inclined at an angle of from 7° to
20° with the horizon, while the slaty rocks are nearly-
always vertical. No distinct stratification is ob-
servable in the limestone, which forms abrupt and
fantastically isolated mountains often presenting
mural precipices of much grandeur. It is in the
sandstone and the clayey beds which alternate
with it that the coal occurs, and there seems little
reason to doubt that it is of the tertiary formation,
as the most abundant fossils are impressions of
exogenous foliage, exactly similar in character to
that of the trees which now cover the surface? I
have also seen what appears to be leguminous
fruits, and shells fou.id in the Labuan coal fields
were all-of an extremely recent type.
Now as the sandstone of the interior, almost
exactly corresponds with that of the coal form-
ation, we may conclude that it is also tertiary,
the principal difference being that some beds of it
contain a greater quantity of quartz and lime-
stone pebbles. The presence of volcanic rocks
with contorted limestone sufficiently explains the
vertically upheaved stratified rocks which appear
to underlay the sandstone. The limestone is
highly crystalline and is probably an ancient
formation, as it contains slender stemmed encri-
nites, and the slaty rocks which occur in all the
river bees between the coal mountains and those
of the interior are probably of equal or greater
antiquity.	,
A considerable tract of country between the
limestone hills is covered with an alluvium of
gravel and clays, the surface of which is very un-
dulating, and in this the gold washing is chiefly'
carried on. It seems to rest upon the limestone
which often pierces through it in strange water-
worn peaks, which resemble ruined buildings or
ancient monuments. It is in cavities of the lime-
stone also that the antimony- ore is found, and
near the junction of the trap rock with the lime
stone, a fine hot spring has been discovered: we
may. therefore in general terms describe the
Sarawak district as consisting of ancient lime
stone and of modem sandstone with coal, in the
interval between these deposits violent volcanic
action has taken place which has resulted in the
trappean mountains, and this action has been re-
newed since the most recent rocks have been
formed.
Proceedings before the Royal Geographical
Society-1857.—A. R. Wallace.
The Significance and Customs of Chinese New Year.
Of all the elaborate festivals of the East the Chinese
New Year is probably the most elaborate and the
one which has the largest number of votaries. In
the strict sense of the word Chinese New Year is not
one festival but a succession of festivals which are
not observed to-day with the same rigorous attention
to detail as was perhaps the custom fifty years ago.
In spite of the depression in trade the enthusiasm
with which the New Year is heralded has been fairly
well maintained.
There are many who are not aware of some of the
most outstanding features of the Chinese New Year.
To see these one must peep into the home of an old-
fashioned orthodox Chinese. In such a home New
Year’s eve is the day for the settling of accounts and
this task is more or less arduous according to the
means and business dealings of the head of the house.
After the accounts have been settled the house is
thoroughly washed and cleaned and often decorated.
After this two sugar canes with leaves and roots and
wrapped in Chinese red paper are brought into the
and kept on either side of the door, an emblem of 
the authority vested in the headman of the house 
over the other members of the family. At 2 p. m.
the same afternoon the household gods and ancestors
are worshipped and the members of the family fore-
gather to pay their respects to their ancestor. In 
the evening there is a regular feast and a large round 
table loaded with the most varied Chinese delicacies
is laid for dinner. This dinner is called the “Ooi
Lor" or round the hearth. The god of the family
hearth is despatched to heaven on the 24th. day of
the 12th. moon of each year. This god, it is generally
believed, will report on the good and bad acts of the
family. After making this report the god of the
hearth is expected to resume his place in the family
hearth on the morning of the New Year day. At
the stroke of midnight on New Yen’s Eve the door
are opened, lamps and candles are lighted and all
preparations are made for worshipping the various
household gods. The father of the house takes the
three largest joss sticks, lights them and prays for
. health, long life, wealth, happiness and tranquility
in the family. The children follow the father’s ex-
ample, with smaller joss slicks, and even the servants
in the house do the same After their worshipping
is over they wish each other a happy New Year or
“Keong Hee Huat Chye.” This concludes the
ceremonies of New Year’s Eve.
On Year's morning the whole family put on
the best garments for the purpose of visiting, or in
anticipation of visitors, lied papers, 4 inches by 9
inches, with one’s name printed on them are ex-
changed during visits, and gifts, of silver coins
wrapped in red paper, are given to children when
they visit. The day is devoted to much conviviality.
On the day after the New Year’s day the Chinese
have what is called the “First Luncheon’’ in the
...... Pigs, goats and fowls are slaughtered and
form various dishes. After the luncheon is over
year.
shophands and servants in private houses cease
work until the Gtb. day.
The third day is called the day for the “sending
away of the poor." This custom is an interesting
one and is probably peculiar to the Chinese. All
the rubbish which had accumulated in the house
from the first day of the New Year is swept and put
into a vessel. This vessel is taken to a river or any
running stream. Joss sticks and candles are lighted
and after prayers etc. the rubbish is thrown into the
running stream.
Thus the poor are ceremoniously sent away. The orthodox Chinese never call nor visit on this day.
The seventh day is called the creation day. Raw or uncooked fish is partaken of on this day. Ikan parang and Ikan haruan are dressed sliced then soaked in vinegar mixed with chillies and are eaten with salad, cucumber, celery, radish and other vege¬tables Many people enjoy this feast at the street stalls. The ninth day is regarded as God’s birthday. This does not mean the household gods, but God the Creator according to Confucius. This is a day of wor¬ship more or less and commences at midnight the previous day. An improvised “Altar” illuminated with candles and joss sticks and loaded with sweet¬meats, roast pig, boiled capon, tea, brandy, flowers and fruits is placed in the street by the house and firing of cracker, is continued for some time. No image or idol is used. This day is said to have been choosen as God's birthday—although the Chinese realise that the Infinite can have no beginning and no end because it is the 9th. day of the 1st. moon. They regard the 9 and the 1 as the two most im-portant numerals. They instance that 9 times two are 18 and 1 and 8 equals 9; 9 times three are 27, and these two figures added together again give 9, and so on until nine times nine is reached.
The most picturesque and the culminating festi¬val of the series is the 15th. day of the 1st. moon. This is the lust festival winch is familiarly known as “Chap Goh Meh " and work commences in ear¬nest on the following day. On this night, i e. the 15th. night, Chinese ladies, young and old all parade the streets in vehicles and almost invariably bright moonlight favours them. —(M. M.)
The Editor acknowledges the sum of $12 35 from the Treasurer of Miri for the above Fund, being the balance remaining over from the collections made there during the War This sum has now been remitted to the offices of the Fund in London, by money order for £1-8-3.
THE energetic organiser of the games at the great Exhibition of 1922 has notified the world that Malay teams from all over the Malayan, area will chase the football before the Prince. Borneo also is to send its team, and Sarawak, whilst the Sakeis and Semang are in strict training with coconuts. But the Topicist offers a word of friendly warning. If Dyaks are to take a hand there will have to be new rules for they play twenty men a side and are “allowed to kick or pick up the bail, or do anything they like to get the ball through the posts.” There is an ominous significance about the last phrase which the Topicist does not like, for it would be a pain¬ful moment for the Referee if, when he gave a penalty agains' the Dyaks, one of the team should snip off his head with a pedang.
Again the Free Press.
The Effects of Quinine.
At the British Medical Association (Straits branch)
Conference, Dr. Malcolm Watson read his paper on
“Quinine and the Quinine Controversy.” He pointed
out that after knowing the drug for 400 years it was
remarkable that there was no unanimity in fixing
the optimum dose or method of administration
though all were agreed that no other drug can com-
pare with quinine. There is the widest divergence
of opinion of -it as a prophylactic—that is of its
power to prevent malaria in a malarious country.
Dr. Watson reviewed the. various contributions of
scientists, beginning with the experiments of Pro-
fessor Robert Koch in 1900 at Stephenscourt; and
the extensive use of the ding in the same direction
in Italy. On the other side there were the careful
experiments of the Americans in the Panama Canal
Zone; and the experiences in Macedonia as detailed in
Capt. Treadgold's paper. The author of the paper
suggested that there might he ocher factors in the ex-
periments influencing the results There were four
factors, the quinine, the mm, the mosquito and the
malaria parasite, and these he would discuss m turn.
He gave as his opinion of the value of quinine pro-
phylaxis* in an intensely malarious place it should
certainly be taken not with the idea that it will
prevent infection but that it will reduce its severity.
Secondly in a less malarial place—that is one where
one may expect to live for many months without
being likely to contract the disease, it is less impor-
tant for healthy people to take it. In such places,
however it is important to give quinine continuously
for three months to those who do contract the disease.
This will certainly reduce the danger to others. Of
the dose at least ten grains daily should be taken
preferably in solution and preferably with meals not
before and not after; he laid stress on this.
In the discussion which followed Dr. Kay Mount
commented upon the possibility of dangerous effects
from taking quinine which had been kept for a con-
siderable period.—Dr. Glennie suggested that certain
preparations of quinine might have been adulterated
and commented on the criminality of such adultera-
tion where the purity of quinine preparations was
of such vital importance.— (P. G.)
The Rajah Charles Brooke
Memorial Fund.
Promotion in Civil Services.
A system of promotion founded on sound prin-
ciples and methods is one of the prime essentials
on which the efficiency of our public services
depends, writes a correspondent in the Daily
Telegraph. Have we had such a system in the
British Civil Service? We believe that nearly*all
who are acquainted with the inside of our
machinery of government would unhesitatingly
answer this question in the negative.
The greatest weakness, perhaps in the present
system of promotion—and this applies throughout
the whole Civil Service is that too much regard
is paid to mere seniority and too little to excep-
tional merit and ability. The senior man. some-
times even when quite unfitted for the post, ob-
tains his promotion almost automatically. It is
very difficult indeed, if not impossible, for the
really able man to get to the top in the Civil Ser-
vice one day before his turn comes in the regular
course of seniority; that is, assuming he has had
the patience to tread the weary road and is not
picked up by some university or some great com-
mercial house outside.
There are several reasons for this worship of
seniority, which, without doubt, is the greatest
obstacle to a more virile, progressive, and efficient
service. First the head of a department has no
dividends to earn, no shareholders to placate, and
therefore, he has not the same incentive as the
head of a commercial concern to discover and
advance those in his employment who possess
superior capacity and brains. Secondly, promo-
tion by seniority is simplicity itself, and gives the
least trouble, while the head of a department
knows that promotion by selective merit would
involve him in endless trouble, and perhaps sus-
picion of favouritism, for it is hardly in human
nature that those passed over should regard the
man who has "jumped" them as possessing superior
or special qualifications.
There is, too, another reason why seniority is the
rule. The head of a department is, after all, human
and when a man is in turn for promotion, some-
times after long years of faithful service, it is not
very pleasant to turn that man down in favour of
a junior, however much more competent.
A committe of the national council for the
 administrative and legal departments of the Civil
Service has since 1920 been considering the whole
question of promotion, and has just produced a
very interesting report, though the vicious and
paralysing effects of the undue consideration
accorded to seniority are not sufficiently empha-
sised in its recommendations. It is a mere plati-
tude to say that "the consideration ruling all
promotions should be the advancement of the
efficiency of the public service, and that this can
only be secured by determining promotions on the
ground of fitness." It is not complained so much
that the man promoted by seniority is unfitted for
his position, as that the Civil Service gives no
opportunity for the really able man to rise to the
top. no matter what class or grade he belongs to;
he must march step by step with mediocrity.
Different methods of regulating promotion exist
in the departments, and the report first draws
attention to the desirability of standardising these methods as far as possible. The responsibility of the head of a department must remain unimpaired, whatever machinery for promotion may be adopted within the department. For different posts, it is pointed out, the relative importance of qualities varies, and the fitness of an officer is indicated not by a mere enumeration of the qualities he has displayed in the past, but by the extent to which he possesses that combination of qualities which is requisite for the work to be performed in the immediate or more distant future
In promotions to posts in which the work is of a more routine character seniority should be allowed more weight than in the case of promotions where greater responsibilities and initiative are involved. The institution of a system of annual reports is recommended to apply to all officers whose salaries do not exceed £700 a year, subject to the reserva¬tion that in the case of officers with salaries above £500 a year it should be open to departments to I waive the use of such reports at their discretion.
A model form of annual report has been adopted to record each officer’s qualifications as “above , average," “average," or “below average “ of grade in respect of: (1) Knowledge- (a) of branch, (b) of department: (2) personality and I force of character; (3) judgment; (4) power of taking responsibility ; (5) initiative ; (6) accuracy ;  (7) address and tact: (8) power of supervising staff; (9) zeal; (10) officer’s conduct
In the larger departments promotion boards are to be set up, appointed by the head of the depart¬ment, but promotion to posts with salaries rising to £900 a year will be outside their scope These boards will consider representations from the staff sides of the appropriate Whitley Councils; and in departments where no promotion board is instituted the staff are to be given equivalent oppor¬tunity for making representations or furnishing information in their possession. It is also recom¬mended that it should be open to any officer or officers to make representations to the head of a department in regard to any promotion that has Seen made affecting him or them. Vacancies occurring in posts which would be dealt with by promotion boards are to be notified within a department to those directly affected.
It is important to note that where an officer obtains an adverse mark in the confidential annual report, he must be given in duplicate a written intimation that he has been so assessed under the particular heading or headings, with reasons, where stated. This last provision is eminently desirable in view of the abuses to which these confidential reports are liable, and the too great frequency with which they have been used to gratify' personal prejudices or enmities. Even now with this check they will still remain liable to abuse. It so easy to say that an officer is lacking in zeal, for instance: you cannot weigh or measure zeal. The incompetent man who appears anxious and straining under his work may get a good mark for zeal, while the competent man who finishes his work quietly and expeditiously and is seen resting on his oars may receive an adverse record. Besides, an officer may not be marked “Below average of grade,” and yet may suffer grievous injustice. It is sufficient to mark him “Average of grade” when he is possessed of excep-tional ability and eminently fitted for early and special promotion.
Impressions of Old Sarawak.
(Continued )
Being Extracts from “Ten Years in Sarawak” 1853—1863 by His late Highness Rajah Sir Charles Brooke, o. c. M. G , etc.
December, 1855—I found myself gaining ground among the natives as we became better acquainted, and every' little improvement afforded me an in¬expressible pleasure. I had been employed build¬ing a farm-house on a hill about two miles off, which would serve as a sort of sanitarium, al¬though it was only 400 feet in height. The view from it was beautiful, the sides precipitous, and as yet a mere speck in the old jungle.
My little cot on Braiun was soon completed, and it afforded me many a wild and happy day. as I roamed about those nigged steeps with my dogs, without which 1 never dared to sleep at night, the place being on the high road to the enemy's country. Small parties might at any time have crept about in the vicinity. Two little boys were my only friends, as I could not persuade my re¬gular followers to accompany' me, their unromantic spirits refusing to endure such a desolate spot. We all slept on mats in one room, while the dogs kept watch outside. Shortly afterwards the Dyaks fanned around, and in one season clear¬ed the hill of every tree. When burning, the flames approached within a few yards of my do¬micile. and the farmers trembled while thinking of how many jars I should demand, if the house were burnt down The Undup Dyaks, whom I trusted far more than any others, were always about me here, as their houses were close at hand. One party* in the course of conversation told me that while they were working gutta percha last month, far in the jungles, they met another party of Dyaks As each was facing the other, with spears in hand and swords half drawn, one hailed, “Who are You?” The reply was, “Undups”. The others then said, “What Undups?" and on receiving the reply- ‘‘Undup Tuan," they said, “We are also Undups of the white man;" after which they joined their forces and proceeded to¬gether on friendly terms. They had been enemies previous to this unexpected meeting, and it is a wonder that heads were not the fruit of their campaign, instead of beeswax and gutta percha.
A Dyak has no conception of the use of a cir-culating medium. He may be seen wandering in the Bazaar with a ball of Beeswax in his hand for day's together, because he can’t find any body’ will¬ing take it for the exact article he requires. This article may be not more than a tenth the value of the beeswax, but he would not sell it for money, and then buy what he wants. From the first, he had the particular article in his mind’s eye, and worked for the identical ball of beeswax with which and nothing else to purchase it.
The natives, both Malay’ and Dyak, have a method of seeking internal satisfaction (I cannot explain it by other words in my limited vocabulary) by communing in private with the spirits of the woods; the Dyaks call it Nampok. and the Malays. Betapar. They stay away many day’s, feeding on little or nothing, and if they see any living person during the time, they come home,’ and afterwards start afresh. Doubtless it does them good, soothing their simple minds.
A troublesome Malay, named Abang Talahar, I found, had sent a spear among the Sakarang Dyaks, as a sign for them to arm and follow him on an expedition. This news reached me just in time to put a stop to what might have given much trouble; as it was, some boats had started, and others were arming. Immediate directions
were sent round to stop them under the heaviest
penalty, and I started myself after those who had
gone on, and overtook them at the mouth of the
river is seventy miles off) The head man slunk
quietly into the background. I called for the
"calling out" spear, and my crew searched the
boat before they got it I ordered them back, and
gave the: t to understand, that the first who left
without inv permission, would be speared with
this identical weapon This was quite within
their comprehension, and they returned home. A
short while afterwards I summoned the Malay to
appear before the Rajah, to answer for his delin-
quencies; and the steady way in which he denied 
having sent the spear, or even knowing anything 
at all about it, quite astounded me. This man 
was the coolest liar I had hitherto met. Turning 
white into black was a trifle compared with it. I
felt my case was lost, as I had no witnesses in
Sarawak, although there were numbers in Sa-
karang; his name subsequently appears, in con-
nection with even more barefaced deeds.
January, 1856 —A peace was concluded between
our Dyaks and those of a tribe named Bugau, who
inhabit a branch stream of the Kapuas river The
Bugaus came in of their own accord, and were
anxious to trade on this side, which is nearest
them. This, is one more hole stopped for head
hunting excursions; and forms another handful of
friends. They talk much the same language as
the Sea Dyaks, and show a similarity in manners
and customs
Early this year, a force started from Sarawak to
erect a fort at Sarikei, twenty-five miles from the
mouth of the Rejang. The Sherip Masshor had
left this place, in consequence of having been fined
for calling out the Dyaks for war-like purposes at
Mukah, contrary to the regulations of Govern-
ment. On arriving at the village, we found
half of it in ashes, having been burnt down by
the Dyaks. It was a pretty spot, on undulat-
ing ground, surrounded by fruit-trees. The build-
ing of the fort was a matter of only a few days.
In all directions around Sarikei and Kanowit
there were enemies. Some few came to trade, but
refused to pay revenue or obey the orders of the
officials. They loved independence, and the two
branches of Dyak employment were simply heads
and salt; and as these two requirements could not
be found in the same quarter they, in former times;
usually made peace with one petty Malay chief
for the purpose of obtaining salt, while the heads
were brought from some other petty Malay chief's
village lying in another direction. By these
means the Malays obtained a trade with Dyaks as
well as a following.
They are the most subtle enemies, and there is
no cure but burning them out of house and home -
dreadful as this may appear. The women too
must suffer, for they are the principal inciters and
instigators of these bloody exploits. An attack
upon a Dyak force, the destruction of the whole
of it, with the lives of all the men. is no permanent
advancement towards of cessation of head taking.
But the burning down of a village, loss of goods,
old relics,—such as heads, arms, and jars—and
putting the inhabitants, male and female, to ex
cessive inconvenience all this fills them with
fear, and makes them think of the consequences of
taking the heads of strangers. These inland
abodes have been and are everlasting fastnesses in
their imagination Besides, they always express
very freely their notions of white men—" They are
powerful, having arms, and ships at sea; but it is
only we Dyaks who can walk and fight by land.
and clamber steep mountains.’' The Lingga.
Dyaks expressed a strong desire to be allowed to
go and make attacks on any Dyaks in this vicinity;
but I prohibited their moving, as I was well aware
an indiscriminate onslaught would only be made,
in which the most innocent would suffer. Again
patience was the order of the day.
THE following is taken from the Dutch East Indian Archipelago, a fortnightly commercial review pub¬lished in Java:—
On the 10th. of November last at midnight some ten prows, containing sixty armed Badjos, visited the establishment of the Bataafsche Petroleum Company at Sembakung, an island on the North East Coast of Borneo and some twenty miles to the north of Tarakan. The leader pretended that he was looking
for his brother and asked for rice as well as permission to go farther up the river. The man in charge of the oil-bore, however, disbelieved his story and told him to clear out which he did on the following day. The attitude of the man was such that it was deemed advisable to keep the staff there on watch 1 the whole night. And as it looked as though the Badjos might return in greater numbers, word of ; the occurrence was telegraphed to the civil authori¬ties, who communicated with the vice-Admiral at  Priok. On the 16th. the Lynx, a destroyer, which had just arrived at Priok, was sent with all haste to Tarakan, arriving there on the 22nd., after calling at Macassar to replenish her coal-bunkers.
To facilitate the search for this native fleet an aeroplane with a machine-gun had been taken on board; and on the 23rd and 24th. the destroyer searched the river and its branches until British territory was reached. On the 24th. the aeroplane sighted a Badjo fleet close to Si-Amil but within British waters so that no action could be taken. The “observer" had an interview with the leader of the Badjos outside British territory, who pretended, however, never to have been to Tarakan.
As this fleet had come originally from the Philippines and was now in British territory, the Consuls of these respective nations were informed, with the result that tiie fleet was kept under constant observation.
On the 28th. of the month (November) the Lynx
located a fleet of fifteen prows close to Tarakan and
escorted them up to the town. Here the leader was
taken before controller of Beroa, when he admitted
that the fleet m question had been to Sembakung.
As, however there appeared no valid reason for keep-
ing him prisoner he was allowed to go. The fleet
was then lowed by H. M. S. Lynx outside Dutch
waters, and forbidden to return. Meanwhile, for the
next few days their movements were strictly watch-
ed. Once outside our territory, however, they set
a course for British North Borneo.
From tire Resident of Tawao word was received
that everything was in good order at Si-Amil. So
there was no urgent need for a warship.
H. M.S. Koetei, which was cruising at the time
in the Sangir and Talaud Archipelage, and which
was ordered to Tarakan to assist the Commander of
the Lynx in carrying out his orders, remained at her
station. The Lynx with the aeroplane, however,
returned on the. 4tli. of December to Priok, and was
followed by the Koetei on the 14th.
From later advices it appeared that these men
were not so lunch sea-pirates as sea-rovers, who, if
they could not get what they asked for, would simply
lake it. The fact remains though that for the reasons
given which necessitated immediate action being
taken, they are a nuisance to the Neth. Indian
territory,
One special feature worth mentioning is that the
aeroplane remained during the whole of the journey
uncovered and exposed to the heavy rains and fierce
heat, and returned home in good condition, the only
damage sustained on the way being a few defects
that could be remedied without much trouble.
Letters from the Hinterland.
MY DEAR PERCY,
Well old pudding, you appear to have been going
the pace at Videns’ birthday party. Fancy his being
nineteen How time does fly, does not it Percy old
pahit  Bit rotten of Gappy to take advantage of the
poor boy’s condition on his birthday too. Am grieved
to see these youths making a habit of this drinking
business. With others of course it isn’t really a
habit but a gift.
I hope Percy, old parsnip, you an really spreading
yourself about the exhibition. I am awfully worried
My haricot beans got frost bitten just when they
were ready for reaping and my scarlet runners won’t
run. Perhaps the Prince would sanction a post-
ponement, rather than the show should be a failure.
I simply cant get a phasselus munge. Someone
tried to bluff me he bad caught one the other day,
but on inspecting it's date it turned out to be. a
mucura utalis. Celery (pronounced Ce—lery) and
asparagus (as—pa—ragus) abounds in tins; onions
cum tripe even more so, in or out of tins.
I can't help wondering Percy old parsley, why
the Straits Branch of the Royal Asiatic Society
didn’t fix the day for their dinner just after the
exhibition. “Vegetables of Malaya" would have
made a most appropriate item on the menu, and
such a good subject for after dinner speeches.
If only the Committee would guarantee a signed
photograph of the Prince eating the biggest durian
as a prize to the Exhibitor, Singapore would be I
flooded with this delicacy. The also rans could lie
used to add power to the speeches at the S. P. R. A.
S. dinner.
Give my chins to Videns and the lads, and warn 
them not to overdo it It's a strenuous life, up at
8 a.m., drink the bath water, and back to bed again.
Who says we don't earn our pensions'.’
Ever Thine, j
CUTHBERT.
The Sundial.
A SAD STORY.
Once upon a time, years and years ago, a nice kind old gentleman presented a sundial to a certain little village, the memory of which dwelt pleasantly in his mind.
The sundial was duly placed in the village green, since when no one in the village has noticed it, until just the other day.
It so happened that the Squire was sitting in the Tavern one. chilly winter evening, when the talk of the villagers turned to the unreliability of modern clocks and watches. "But” said the Squire, "we have our sundial, and I remember in my young days we always set our turnips by the sundial at least once a week—generally on Sundays—on the way home from listening to Parson Hodge’s discourse." It so happened that the Squire’s Third Footman was present, and, being a promising lad withal, he jumped up with alacrity, saying, “Squire, shall I set the Manor Clock by it now?" The Squire, pleased by the lad's eagerness, softly replied, "Well, if you do, you bad better take a lamp with you." And, clutching a lantern, the eager young Third Footman went out into the cold dark night
CORRESPONDENCE.
[ The Editor is not responsible for the opinions of
 Correspondent.]
Hints to Editors,
KAPIT
6th, February, 1922.
The Editor,
Sarawak Gazette,
Kuching.
I would draw your attention to Sarawak Gazette
of August 26th. 1870—final paragraph of the leader,
as follows:—
“As the Gazette is published with the distinct object
of representing the country as a whole, and of record-
ing only such information as may be of general
service, all correspondence of a personal nature will
find no place in its pages. Argument, and the
statement of individual criticisms mid grievances form
no part of the plan on which it is proposed to
conduct the Gazette."
it seems limes have changed. But some of us
would like to know for what reason.
Better be dull and useful
Your faithfully,
WELLWISHER.
Obviously the man for the job -the following is
also an extract from the same leader:
“ Our coloumns will therefore be open to all Eu-
ropeans who have information to give with respect
to the social and political condition, the trade and
general progress of the districts where they are sta-
tioned, or with respect to any matter of general
interest in their neighbourhood. Articles on the
policy and foreign relations of the country may from
time to time be expected, and any remarks which
residents may have to offer on methods of cultiva-
tion, utilization of native labour and similar subjects
will lie received and inserted." Ed.,
Agriculture in Sarawak.
15th. February, 1022.
| The Editor,
I Sarawak Gazette,
Kuching.
SIR,
As the writer of the leading article in the
Gazette of February 1st. appears to have written it
without reference to my letter and further makes
statements concerning the country which are far
from being facts I trust that you will allow me to
further encroach on your valuable space in the in-
terests of Sarawak.
I In no way did I slate that the planting of lea,
"Tobacco, etc., could not be cultivated successfully in
Sarawak -on the contrary I shewed that tea has
been and still is cultivated on Matang Mountain
and that the quality is said to Ire good.
The reason for no further cultivation is the fact
that, as you correctly state, foreign capitalists were
not encouraged to come in, and only by a foreign
Company with a large concession could tea be plant-ed on a sufficiently large scale to make ii a paying
concern.
Tobacco grows well even when planted by Dyaks,
Kayans. Kenyahs and Mu ruts as anyone with any
I knowledge of the interior of Sarawak will know. I
stated that the Lundu failure was due to “mis—
management" not to any failure of the plant to
grow re again the same remark applies—tobac-
co can only he cultivated properly by Companies
with Capital and these have not been encouraged
in the past
The writer of your leading article, Mr. Editor, ob-
viously knows but little of the country. I happen
to know it quite well and can assure him that coco-
nuts do grow in localities other than the sea coasts.
A few trips up some of our rivers would be an object
lesson for him. 
Natives never have planted on any scale but he
would see large numbers of trees in full bearing over
50 miles from the coast. If hundreds will grow why
not thousands? I might mention that some ten
yean ago a local Company sent its representative
round to find land for planting coconuts. I happen-
ed to meet him and he stated he required 5,000 acres
but was unable to find so much land in one place
owing to the scattered native population holding up
the land
The remark to the effect that the Rajah’s policy
was always to uphold the rights of the natives is
Correct but it was realised by him that the natives
alone would never bring prosperity to Sarawak,
hence the importation of Chinese in large numbers.
The natives need he deprived of no rights to make
room for foreigners as a country of 50,000 square
miles carrying a native population which, with the
exception of the Sea Dyaks. is slowly but surely
decreasing and only numbering possibly 400 or 500
thousand should be able to support quite a large
number of foreigners without taking any rights from
the natives. If the natives persist on buying their
talent it will surely be taken from them and given to
others who will make use of it. This happens all
the world over and Sarawak will be no exception,
The statement concerning encouragement offered
to Chinese is incorrect and it would be as well for
the writer of the article to be more careful of his
facts.
The only “tax” on land in the 3rd. Division is
the Quit Rent paid to Government for granted lands 
which is collected IN the 1st. Division as well, and
of course whenever grants are issued. What other 
land taxes exist in the 3rd. Division I should be in-
terested to know. No charge is made for Planting
Permits nor is the charge of 25 cents per 100 rubber
trees and pepper vines when in bearing collected in
that Division as in the 1st
The statement that use would naturally be made
of the unoccupied land near the coast before open-
ing up the interior is extraordinary. Soil, elevation,
rainfall and temperature are all of some slight im-
portance to planters and your correspondent is
apparent under the impression that these conditions
on the coast and in the interior are identical. Let
him try growing tobacco or tea at Oya or Mukah!!
He needs to travel in Sarawak before he again
Criticizes remarks made concerning this country and
its products by one who has.
I am, dear Sir,
Yours faithfully,
ORANG MUDA.
This correspondence may cease. Both Orang
Muda and the writer of the article to which lie now
objects obviously have only the interests of Sarawak
at heart, though from different points of view. In
justice to the writer of the other article, who is
quite willing to let that stand without any alteration
or addition, it is only fair to mention that (1) This
was written with reference to Orang Muda's letter,
(2) that few have travelled as much in or know as
much about Sarawak, and (3) that it was written with
particular care as to facts. “Cut the cackle.”—Ed.
LONG Boat Races.
18th. February. 1022.
The Editor,
Sarawak Gazette,
Kuching.
DEAR SIR, 
In the article entitled “Christmas and New Year
at Sibu," in your last issue, I notice that “the races for
the long boats, big temois paddled by 60 to 80 men
were over a five mile course.” Can this really be so?
The course of the long boat race in the Kuching
Regatta, from Batu Bliong to the Pengkalan Batu,
is only a little over two miles, and the Simanggang
course is about the same.	
Also I see that “the Dyaks at Sibu were hopelessly
beaten by the Milanos and Kanowits.” The Re-
jang Dyaks are not boat builders like the Balaus of
the Batang Lupar. and I would venture to state that
such a test proves nothing.
The Simanggang Regatta Committee has put up
a Challenge" Cup value $100, vide Gazette of 16th.
April. 1920. but this challenge has not been taken
up by any Milano boat-owner.
Yours faithfully.
KAMI BALAU.
Answers to Correspondents.
The Editor is not responsible for anything.
CUPID—No, it is untrue that the scheme includes
debtors there being seconded to the Court
of Requests.
D. M G —1’he correct answer now is a Small Le-
mon.
ARCHIBALD—Pass-ports are required.
ORANG BRANI -Yes, we agree, but then there are
agriculturists and agriculturalists.
POSHICUS—We hear that (I) the mowing of the
grass has been carried out throughout the
year as in Kuching also, (2) thus affording
much relief to the Meadow Staff. (3) This
consists of one man and his dog.
TOM BLACK -We understand he couldn't draw the
weight—just 281b. short.
BOY SCOUT NO, the shortest story is “why did the
Bull snap?”
PETER, J. COBB, A. BELL, D. S. SPERO, BEN. etc.—
Good-byee, old beans.
MONTHLY	REPORTS. SADONG.
January.
General.—New Year’s day falling on a Sunday, the
following Monday was observed as a public holaday.
I returned from Christmas leave in Kuching on
the 5th. in the s. s. Alice Lorraine, accompanied by
Mr. D. Evans. The Native Officer Haji Mohidin,
having been granted special leave on family affairs,
did not return to duty until the 17th.
Having obtained permission, I engaged one Chee
Kim Thiam as second Clerk on probation; This
brings the staff up to full complement.
The Native Officer Haji Mohidin left to visit the 
coast villages on the 19th., accompanied by Native 
Officer Abang Bujang. On his return he reported 
_ that most of the traders there were still using false
and unregistered gantang measures.
The various Tua Kampong reported themselves
during the month, and stated that their padi was
doing very well.
On the 20th. the Manager of the Colliery reported
that a Chinese miner named Cheng Soo had been 
killed by a fall of rock in the New Mines and that
two others bad been badly injured. One of these men,
who was suffering from a compound fracture of the
leg, had to be sent by express boat.to Kuching for
treatment.
Chinese New Year’s day on the 28th. was observed
as a public holiday.
Courts.—In the Courts, Jee Sam. a Mine Coolie, 
was convicted of burglary in the Colliery Bazaar and 
sentenced to six months imprisonment; Chai Ah
Leong, who had been giving trouble in the local 
Gaol, was sentenced to a further term of imprison- 
inent in Kuching Gaol; Senen bin Matusin was im- 
prisoned for cheating. Several of the traders at 
Semrah and Jai Laut were fined for using false and 
unregistered gantang measures. A number of persons 
were fine for trading without licences.
The usual number of breach of agreement and 
debt cases were dealt with.
Forestry.—The Forest Guards inspected jelutong
tapping at Ensingai and Ulu Gedong and reported
a number of cases of ringing jelutong trees. They
also reported the working of a large number of
belian ataps and posts which were below the stan-
dard size.
P. W. D.—The construction of the Hospital
Dresser's Quarters was completed, and work was
commenced on the conversion, as originally arranged,
of the padi godown into Police Barracks, a section
still being retained however for future storage of
padi.
The prison gang, averaging 21 men, was employed,
on the up-keep of the ornamental grounds, and fill-
ing in the swamp underneath the Clerk’s House and
Police Barracks with shale, kindly supplied by the
Manager of the Colliery.
Shipping.—Four steamers and one schooner
cleared with cargoes of coal during the month.
The Trade Returns are as follows:—
January.
The gross out-put of coal produced from the mines during the month, was 1,759-07 tons; 890 tons of this were consumed by our boilers, and the balance of 1,369-07 tons delivered to the wharf for export.
The shipments for the month were as follows;—
The Municipal Department.	Kuching	114.00 tons.
The Sarawak Steamship Co. 	362.00
The Sibu Station	Silm	126.19 IH
Total Shipments
603.19 ton*.
Tin balance of coal in stock at the end of the
month was 3,033.17 tons.
Conditions prevailing underground in the various
mines were similar to those reported to Your High-
ness during the previous month.
The surface labour force was employed on the
railway, weeding, and cleaning up the Chinese Lines.
The new Cattle-shed was completed during the
month.
Mr. David Evans returned from Kuching on the
5th and moved into the new Bungalow on the 9th.
One Chinese miner by name Chong Shoi Siew
was instantaneously killed while at his work in the
Upper Drift of the new mines on Friday the 20th.
inst., and his working partner, Chong Chow, was
injured and carried to Hospital, suffering from
minor bruises and shock. On the same day two hours
later Lee Tek, also a Chinese miner, sustained a
compound fracture of the leg above the ankle by a
subsidence of earth and shale at the West crop of
the Upper Seam mine.
The Chinese new year Holidays commenced on
Friday the 27th., and ended on the evening of the
31st., when work was resumed on the night shift.
The Engines and boilers were cleaned and over-
hauled during the vacation, and the railway line
relaid with rails of a heavier section on a stone bed
below the Bazaar.
The rainfall for the month was 16'64 inches.
J.W. EVANS
Manager.
SIMANGGANG
December, 1921.
On the 2nd., Mr. J. B. Archer, A. D. O., returned
from Belong bringing for the Simanggang Treasury
the sum of $1,564.
Accompanied by Abang Dulrasid I left for Lingga
on the 9th. in the s. I. One. Next morning, having
settled up various matters, I left tor Sebuyow and
from there visited Triso. The Lupar Timber Con-
cessions, Ltd., are not at present receiving any tim-
ber but are getting rid of their present stock. The
padi at Triso and Sebuyow looks well; also coconut
palms do excellently and bear fruit in four and a
half years Much Debt Court work was settled whilst
at Sebuyow, and all outstanding fines paid in full.
I returned to Simanggang on the 14th.
The s. s. Alice Lorraine arrived at Lingga on the
23rd. with a small mail. Next day an express boat
arrived with a mail, also a letter from His Highness
the Rajah stating that Mr. M. E. Sherwood would
be at Lingga on the 26th. Mr. R. E. Le Sueur left
on the 26th. for Lingga in s. 1. One, and returned
next day with Messrs. M. E. Sherwood and E.
Parnell who were here on a visit. On the 29th.
Messrs. Sherwood and Parnell returned to Kuching.
1 accompanied them in order to attend the Kuching
Regatta, and was still away at the end of the month.
Public Works. —The prison gang have been em-
ployed in clearing the long round, which connects
the Sabu and Brayun roads. The work was heavy,
as the road has not been cleared for some time. The
carpenter was unable to finish the kitchen of the
Dresser's quarters on account of the shortage of
planks.
Saribas —The Court Writer reports the death of
P. C. Buassan after a short illnes. The natives are
busy weeding their farms and the padi promises to
do well.
Kalaka. - The Court Writer reports that an extra 
Policeman is needed at Rohan. There is only one
at present and he is often away serving warrants,
etc. P. C. Sembilan was appointed extra clerk at
Kabong dating from December 1st.
There has been a good deal of sickness amongst
the Malay children at Kabong. The illness takes
the form of diarrhoea and vomiting, followed by
fever.
The following are the trade returns for the Divi-
sion.—
F. A. W PAGE-TURNER.
District Officer.
January.
New Year's day falling on Sunday, tin- 2nd. was
observed as a public holiday.
1 was in Kuching up to the 10th., returning in
the a. l. Lucile accompanied by Capt. Barry Gifford
and Mr. H. E. Cutfield. Next day Mr. H. E. Cut-
field left for Simanggang in s. I. One, having been
appointed to do duty in this Division. Capt. Barry
Gifford and myself visited Penghulu Jimi's house,
upending two days during which Capt. Barry Gifford
took sundry films of Dyak life. We returned to
Lingga on the 13th. Mr. R. E. De Sueur was
waiting here to proceed to Kuching, having been
appointed to do duty in the Police.
Captain Barry Gifford and Mr. R. E. Le Sueur
proceeded to Kuching in s. 1. Lucile on the 14th.
I arrived at Simanggang on the 13th., and the
Assistant District Officer Mr. J. B. Archer reported
all well during my absence.
Malays from all round the coast arrived in crowds
during the month, proceeding to the Skrang and
the main river as far as Lubok Antu to collect the
durian and other fruits
On the 2lst. Mr. J. B. Archer. A. D. O., accom-
panied by Abang Dulrasid left for the Saribas and,
having held Court, etc. there, proceeded to Kalaka.
They were still away at end of the month.
Abang Haji Buasan and Penghulu Jaul left for
Lubok Antu on the 23rd. as I had received news
that Penghulu Apiti Kana and Penghulu Kana with
other Dyaks had threatened to attack Penghulu
Jamit, for the death of one Abeng, an Engkari Dyak,
some years ago. Both Abang Haji Buasan and
Penghulu Jaul had not returned by end of the month.
Fifty Ulu Ai Dyaks under Ranggau and Lidom
were signed on as coolies for Messrs. the Sarawak
Oilfields. Ltd., and left here on the 25th. for Miri
via Kuching.
The 28th. being Chinese New Year, all offices
were closed.
Court—The Court work during the month has
not been heavy. There have been several cases of
petty theft but no convictions. Ossen and Adam,
Binatang Malays of Batang Rejang, were sentenced
to terms of imprisonment for using a forged do-
cument in order to pawn a gun, and for escaping
from custody. Brauh of Spak brought a charge of
murder against one Berduli of Spak : the case was
adjourned for enquiries lto be made on the spot.
Dyaks in the Strap and Klauh, also Saduku
Dyaks, have started harvesting, and they report
being very satisfied with the crop.
Two Dyaks, while paddling down river just below
Lubok Amu, capsized on account of the heavy fresh,
and Nyabor, an old man, was drowned. His body
was recovered three days later.
There is nothing of importance to report from the
Saribas and Kalaka.
The following are the trade returns for the
Division: -
Court. But few cases have been Before the
Courts, and none of any importance whatever.
Public Works: -The Tamils cut the remainder
of the Wharf road through behind the Bazaar
to the Cross road, joining that road at Abang Adeng’s
house Three dilapidated Chinese houses chat stood
in the track were demolished, and Abang Adeng’s
granted land, part of which was taken in by the road,
was properly fen cad off. Bridges were constructed
at each end of the completed length of the Wharf
road, which is now gravelled and in use.
The bridge over S. Bakong on the Race Course
collapsed and was reconstructed entirely, and
completed by the end of the month.
A large quantity of belian fencing and planks,
which had been worked by Dyaks, was brought down
from Kapit by lighter and stacked here.
The floating stage opposite Mr. Jacques' bungalow
WAS rebuilt and is again in use.
The contract for the new Quarters for the Dresser
was signed and the site cleared. The building will
be completed in 8 months. It cannot be built sooner
owing to the’ impossibility of obtaining seasoned
timber.
The prisoners and part of the Tamil gang weeded
paths and ditches where necessary.
The Surveyors commenced making a rough survey
of the ground round Gunong Ayer, and cut rentis
in several directions. This work is still proceeding.
General. January 2nd. was observed as a Public
Holiday, the Regatta and Sports being held on that
day. 	.
Mr. A- E. Lawrence returned to Mukah- cm the
4th., the Assistant Conservator Mr. Stooke accom-
panying him to inspect the working of the Forest
Department at Mukah and Oya.
The s. s. Alice Lorraine arrived from Sadong on
the 6th. with 111.19 tons of coal for Government
here.
Mr. MacBryan returned from upriver on the 7th.
with Abang Aboi. He brought down a quantity
of things for the Exhibition.
The s. s. Sarawak loaded a cargo at Kapit and
left for Kuching on the 17th.
The S. s. Flevo and Ban Siting Hee ju rived from
Singapore OH the 17th. twelve days late. Consider-
able anxiety concerning the safety of these vessels
was evident in the Bazaar, and supplies of rice etc.
gave out owing to their non arrival. They ex-
perienced head winds and seas, and, being of low
power, were unable to make headway.
The Ban Siong Bee was a new vessel which left
Singapore in tow of the Flevo for registration in Sa-
rawak, but she arrived here under her own steam. She
proceeded to Kuching to be registered, returning
here for cargo on the 25th., and sailing for Singapore 1
on the 29th.
The Flevo left for Singapore with the usual full I
cargo on the 21st., but a very large quantity re-
mained unshipped. The lack of shipping is causing
traders and Government here considerable loss, as
cargo is rapidly deteriorating having been waiting
for many weeks for shipment.
Complaints are loud and frequent, and the matter
is now being taken up by the Government, as the
trade of the District is suffering in consequence of the
uncertain and unsatisfactory communication with
Singapore.
The Kev. J. M. Hoover returned from Singapore
on the 21st.
A salute of 7 guns was fired on the morning of
the 28th., the occasion of Chinese New Year.
P. C.’ Cha, who has been ill with phthisis for some
time past, died on the 29th.
The rainfall for the month amounted to 15’51 
inches. No rain fell on 12 days
The padi is everywhere looking excellent, and 
harvesting has commenced in some places.
The trade returns for the month are.—
DONALD A. OWEN, 
Resident 3rd. Division.
BINTULU .
January.
Early on the morning of the 2nd. a Chinese
named Teo Ju Hak hanged himself in the Govern-
ment boat-shed. It appears that he climbed on top
of the cabin of the barong, tied a strip of kulit to a
beam and around his own neck, and jumped off.
This man is said to have recently become insane
after looking at some graves, and had to be sent
down from Pandan a few days before on account of
his behaviour there.
On the 9th. at an early hour Mr. Down's agent
Chiang Ah Hiang reported that his shop had been
burgled, and that his safe containing over $400 was
missing. A little while latter, the safe with the
bottom half cut out, and empty of course, was found
in a garden some distance away. There was no
clue at all, but I had a search made in the premises
of one Ah Yok, a Hylam of no certain employment,
who lived in a small hut behind the bazaar, and
there buried in the ground under the house was
found about $50 in small coins. We could find
nothing more, until, when pulling down the dapor,
we found hidden under the earth and ashes two tins 
which contained the balance of the money in notes
and silver and about $100 worth of gold ornaments. 
Thus by great luck the whole amount was recovered
with the gold ornaments, and within less than
two hours from the time the loss was reported.
Ah Yok was sentenced to imprisonment and sent
to Kuching in custody of P. C. Jumat, who. through
gross carelessness in removing prisoner's handcuffs,
allowed him to escape by jumping over board at
Goebilt and swimming ashore.
About the middle of the month the Kampong
people put in new channel marks at the mouth f
the river.
Between the 18lh. mid 22ml. I was away in ul it
Sungei Sebiau and Kalalong. There is a small
settlement of Penans in the S. Sebiau, and their
padi crop, which was nearly ready for harvesting,
was first class.
The Chinese wish to build a substantial School
House, and asked that a site be given them for this
purpose. There is an empty and very suitable plot
of land close to the Chinese Temple, and they have
been told to build the School there.
Owing either to lack of foresight or lack of credit
with their Kuching owners, the Chinese ran short
of rice towards the end of the month, and only had
enough for their own consumption, and refused
to sell to Fortmen, Police and others. I have been
obliged to ask for some from Kuching, and to send
to the Dyaks for some to tide over until the next
bazaar shipment arrives. There seems to have been
a shortage in this bazaar all through the lau las;
and if the Gladys had not been able to come in
here twice, matters would have been serious. The
Chinese here claim that the fault lies at the other
end; that one man asks his towkay to send him 50
bags of rice, and he only sends 20. Local rice and
padi is not yet available as harvesting is only just
beginning.
I have had some bother with these Chinese over
the selling price of rice, and their refusal to sell to
certain people for ready money, preferring to keep
it and exchange for jelutong or to supply people to
work jelutong or rattans for them. They deliberate-
ly make a shortage of rice—a means of profiteering.
The Chinese did this in most if not in all the out-
stations during the hard times.
The prisoners have made very necessary repairs
to the Rangers quarters, also to the floor of the
Kidurong Bungalow, which was quite rotten and
even unsafe. Many kasaus had also to be changed,
being eaten through by white ants. One prisoner
is making a small boat at Kidurong; the rest are
now employed on the roads, raising and ditching,
and this will be a long job.
I went to Kidurong with some prisoners on the
28th mid put up the lump which was sent here
from Brooketon some months ago, and has now been
repaired. This lamp was sent on account of com-
plaints of the feebleness of the Kidurong light. It
is a taller lamp than the old one, but the size ot the
burner is the same. It was unnecessary to strength-
en the light-house, as the difference in weight
between the two lamps is slight.
The month has been very wet, and 12.36 inches
of rain were recorded.
The 28th., Chinese New Year, was observed as
a holiday, the flagstaff dressed, and the usual salute
of 7 guns was fired from the Fort.
Trade, Returns.
HENRY H. KORTRIGHT,
District Officer.
MIRI.
January.
The 2nd. was observed ns n public holiday and the offices closed.
The Sikh police recruits from India and Singapore , gave a considerable amount of trouble on the grounds that they were dissatisfied with the new scale of pay; so by orders of His Highness, the dissentients numbering 15 were discharged and sent back to Singapore, a squad of 25 Rangers from Kuching arriving to relieve them the next day. This arrangement has proved most satisfactory, and the presence of the Rangers is much appreciated by all
A very sad shipping disaster occurred on the even- I ing of the 6tb. when the schooner Kim Seng Guan, which had fomerly been driven into the Baram river and since refitted and loaded with a cargo of Rotans, Damar and Jelutong, while attempting to leave the river struck the bar and broke to pieces within an hour. Of a crew of eight and one passenger it is feared that there are only two survivors. These were picked up in a very exhausted condition near Sibuti mouth, floating on rafts of rotan. They have since received treatment and been sent to Kuching.
From the 18th. to the 21st. I was away at Niah and Sibnti in the m. l. Helen, accompanied by Lieut. Taylor who was visiting here from the Submarine Flotilla at Hong Kong. The villages were very empty, everyone being away on their padi farms. Good crops are expected, but pig are doing a great deal of damage. Haji Bohari, Native Officer, intimated his intention to resign at the end of next month, as he has not been well since he first took up office at Niah.
The 28th, Chinese New Year's Day, was observed
as a public holiday, and practically no work WAS done,
by Chinese on the Oilfields until the 31st.
A quarrel started in the Main Bazaar in con-
sequence of a slight dispute with the gambling farm.
P. C. Japarudin received a blow on the head with a
stick while trying to separate the parties. After
this it looked as though there might be serious
trouble, and all the Rangers and Police were turned
out. However, after one Chong Yan who was the
original cause of the disturbance was taken into
custody, the mob broke np and continued to amuse
themselves in the ordinary way.
Six vessels to and from Singapore called, by which
mails we’re received and despatched.
Tankers cleared with a total of 18,709.81 tons of
oil.
The rainfall amounted to 12’83 inches, and the
Trade Returns show as follows.
BARAM.
There were few cases brought before the Courts: Pangeran Drahman sentenced to imprisonment for swindling and selling charms to the Kayans. Lian Fook fined $100 for illicit Gambling. Yap Yik fined $50 for illicit trading. Selimu 6 months R. I. for ' theft. This man bears a very bad character.
Cheng Watt and Atong one years R. I. for theft •of Jelutong.
I was kept very busy during the month with case* in the Probate and Bankruptcy Courts.
On the 30th. I received full details of the death of Baia Burong at the hands of Paran Metu in tint Kalabit country. The quarrel started over a dog seizing a piece of meat out of a child's hand. I have reported this matter in full to His Highness under separate cover.
I visited Bakong on 14th. instant to hear cases, etc. Mr. Green, Manager S. O. Ltd., reported the finding of oil of very good quality at Buri.
Mr. Palfreman and Tuanku Drahman, Native Officer, went to visit the Tinjar District on 29th. instant., and were still away at end of month.
Penghulu Oyau Malang and several other upriver chiefs visited the station.
The Contractor finished the Bazaar road at Bakong.
The prisoners have been engaged in the usual up¬keep of roads and grounds. They also moved the Malay Court building to a new and more con¬venient site in the Kampong. Its previous situation was a long way from the Malay Kampong. A start was made with levelling the end of the Fort Hill.
Prisoner Peng Chiang escaped from the Gang on 5th. instant and is still at large.
New Year's Day was kept as a whole holiday and the old custom of having a tiffin-party in the Court Room was revived. About 80 persons of all nation¬alities sat down to a substantial meal, after which the usual loyal toasts ware drunk.
Mr. St. V. R. Down made an agreement to buy jelutong from the local Chinese and Natives for the Rubber Patents, Ltd., and left on the 4th. for Miri and Niah.
Mr. C. D. Adams, D. O., returned from local
leave on the 24th. and resumed bis duties.
1 left for Miri on the 31st. on business in connection
with the Sarawak Oilfields, Ltd.
The weather has been wet and hot, the rainfall
registering 10.78 inches.
Harvesting is in full swing upriver and the report*
are good, although the pig are causing a lot of dam-
age.
The loss of the schooner Kim Soon Guan on
Baram bar was a blow to the trading community
here. It was entirely the fault of the juragan, as ha
had been told not to attempt to cross the bar unless
he could get towed over; hut he persisted, saying
that he know Mukah and Oya bars so was not
afraid. The result was he ran aground in 5 feet of"
water and the boat broke up. Three sailors are the
only survivors, and a few bags of Damar have been
I washed ashore.
I The Trade Returns for the mouth are:—
BROOKETON COLLIERY.
January.
The gross out-put of coal amounted to 1742’5 tons; 755 tons of this were consumed at our boilers, and the balance 987’5 tons sent to wharf.
Coal shipped to Labuan by s. 1. L' Aubaine and lighters amounted to 1,051 tons, and 84 tons were supplied to the p. s. Adeh and local launches.
The balance of coal in stock at the end of the month was 717 tons.
Sales of coal at Labuan totalled 857 tons, of which 834 tons were taken by Messrs. The Straits Steam-
ship Co’s steamers, and the balance 23 tons by local
launches.	
The balance of coal in stock at Labuan at the end
of the month was 538 tons; making a total stock of
1,255 tons, for Brooketon and Labuan.
Two of the shallow worked Mines took tire early
in the month, and both had to be temporarily sealed
off. It is hoped to lie able to re-open one of these
Mines towards the end of the new month.
Owing the Chinese New Year, very little work
was done at the Mines from the 26th. to the end of
the month. Advantage was taken of this stoppage
to make necessary repairs and overhaul machinery
in the mechanical department.
The s. l. L' Aubaine's fires were drawn from the
18th. to the 20th. inclusive, when her boiler was
cleaned and engines overhauled.
The rainfall at Brooketon Mine was 5’64 inches-
J. O. MADDOCKS,
Manager.
LAWAS AND TRUSAN.
December, 1921.
Court.—The arrack farmer was summoned for
nonpayment of two months rent.
Matsait was fined for tapping jelutong trees in a
manner contrary to the Government plan.
General.— 1 left Lawas on the 4th., accompanied
by M units and Dyaks, on a visit to the Tulit valley
and ulu Meputeh. The main object of the expedition
being an attempt to capture a young Rhinoceros for
the Exhibition. I remained about a week on the
Mountains in ulu Meputeh, but saw very few tracks
of these animals. I returned to Lawas on the 15th., 
leaving some Dyaks to carry on, on their own.
P. W. D.—Pgn. Damit signed a contract to build the
new bridges to Trusan fur $245 and to guarantee
Ins work for 10 years. Most of the timber had been
collected by the end of the month. The bridges as
far as the 3rd. mile are now Gt for horse traffic.
Pgn. Hj. Matusin kindly lent a buffalo to draw the
posts and planks. Two prisoners assisted the car-
penter, and the rest, with the help of some Dyaks,
cleared all the jungle behind the Fort. This will
give more grazing land for the cattle.
I left with Mr. Cook in the m. I. Nancy on the
24th. for Limbang to spend Xams and New Year
at the invitation of the Divisional Resident.
The trade returns were:—
January.
Court.—Pgn. Mumin, the mail bearer, was found
guilty of misappropriating monies entrusted to him,
and was sentenced to 1 year’s imprisonment; Jipu
to 3 months for adulterating jelutong; Ng Teng to
2 months for helping an escaped prisoner to avoid
capture; Aman and Duraman to 2 months for con-
tempt of Court, the latter two were also fined for
trespass; Wahit was imprisoned on a Debt Court
warrant, and Ah See for petty theft: Leow Sin Tin
was fined for breach of Customs Regulations, and
Buaya Singa and Laun (f.) for adultery.
General. I returned from Limbang on the 3rd.,
accompanied by Mr. C. D. Adams and Mr. C. J. Cook,
the former being on a visit to this station.
I visited Merapok on the 10th. but no cases wore
brought for hearing. I discussed the New Forest
Rules with Mt. Cook, as I understand that these
rules are now in force as far as it is possible to en-
force them in this district, which, owing to absence
of the proper staff and necessary books, is practically
nil. I went to Labuan on the 12th to pick up the
mail and purchase some much needed crockery, etc.
Mr. C. D. Adams returned to Miri from Labuan
direct. I returned to Lawas on the 16th. Lalip
was engaged as mail bearer in place of Pgn Mumin
discharged Kuab (f), who escaped from the
Trusan jail in November, was recaptured; her sen-
tence increased by two months, and sent to Lim-
bang Lo work this off.
1 I walked over to Trusan on the 20th. Part of the
journey, as far as Ulu Punang, being accomplished
on horseback, the bridges having been repaired to
there. The contractor stopped worked on the 5th.
owing to sickness and other excuses. All the tim-
ber has now been collected.
No cases of importance were heard at Trusan I
went to Sundar on the 21st. and inspected some
land on the way which had been the subject of liti-
gation.
The Resident 5th. Division arrived at Sundar on
the 22nd., and several matters were discussed. The
most important being the proposed fencing off of
a tanjong of the Sundar buffalo alaman, for the
benefit of those who wish to plant sago and build
houses. The Resident went very carefully into the
matter and examined the land in question, and
decided to try the experiment by allowing the fence
to be erected. If at the end of the year it appears
to be a success as far as the health of the buffaloes
is concerned, the land may be given over to cultiva-
tion and dwellings, all risks to be taken by those
people making the fence. Great interest was taken
in the proceedings, though the majority of those
present will not be affected by the result.
Court work was, as usual, fairly heavy at Sundar.
I accompanied the Resident to Trusan on the 24th.
The three Murut chiefs who went security that Tai
Langub of Pah Lupin would remove to below the
Fort, as ordered by Government several months ago,
have ignored the order, and were given one month
to produce him, or forfeit $100 each. The Resident
returned to Limbang next day. I returned to Lawas
on the 26th. after leaving instructions to call up all
rubber planters with a view to collecting assessment.
The Offices were closed on the 28th. being Chinese
New Year.
Sian Tadam arranged to contract to keep the
Trusan road and the telephone track cleared as far
as Latum for $20 per month. A similar arrange-
ment will be made for the Trusan half of the mad
and track. This will not be much more expensive
than turning out Muruts, and will be far less trouble.
Prisoners,—who numbered 16 at the end of the
month, were engaged in improving the padang,.
cleaning ditches, and on odd jobs on the Trusan road.
The trade returns were:—
P. M. ADAMS,
Assistant District Officer
