Vol. LXXIV.
No. 1084.
Sarawak Gazette
PRICE
KUCHING, Friday, July 2nd, 1948.
20 CENTS
Contents.
The Sarawak Gazette.
FRIDAY, JULY 2nd, 1948.
The Brains Trust.
A short time ago the cry of ‘Mail up’ meant the hope of news and messages—with, perhaps, a furtive hope that one's nearest and dearest would say it with parcels. The fortunate few collected a letter but the many, in adversity, realised the worth of a letter.
That particular period of adversity is over but the value of a letter, a good, meaty letter, remains and particularly so to the Sarawak Gazette. Write to a friend and a friend reads the letter; write to the press and a small world will read it.
A few months ago the Sarawak Gazette announced with becoming modesty ‘We have much pleasure in presenting a correspondence column rich in merit and full of promise for the future’ but to-day there is a different tale to tell. As we go io press, there is a modest bag of three letters; and of the three, one from an irate rate-payer on the perennial traffic topic and second by way of an advertisement for the Honourable the Financial Secretary’s currency museum. Both are excellent in their way; the moan on the traffic-cum-jay-walker nuisance may provoke a learned discourse on the nuisance of expectorating in public places, or the currency letter may urge some naif but ardent collector to invite readers to send him specimens of recent
issues, all denominations from ten cents to one hundred dollars being acceptable.
Where there are clubs and coffee houses (and Sarawak has plenty of both) there will be gossip to be aired and grievances to be chewed over. It cannot be claimed that reading the Sarawak Gazette makes a full man, but conference in the coflfee house is no doubt making many a ready man; there is small indication that writing is making many an exact man. Not that the call to be exact is too imperative : even school-boy, laboriously copying out a quotation, has enough sense to mis- quote and lend the impression of a mind too well versed to need a reference.
There is a stern warning on the cover of the Sarawak Gazette that letters should reach the office at least three days before the publication of each issue (heavily underlined). It is reminiscent of the tradesman’s injunction to 'shop early and avoid disappointment,' but with this difference; failure to heed the tradesman’s wanting may perhaps mean missing the prime cut, but as far as letters are concerned, the late entree of one month may well be the hors d'oeuvre of the next. There is no cause to curse one’s fate that immortality in print has been missed by a matter of twenty-four hours. The files of the Sarawak Gazette are commodious (and empty) and its columns are wide and catholic. What is far more to the point, however, is that in Sarawak exists a fund of knowledge and inform- ation concerning local custom and the like and as each generation dies out and as an adat lama is ironed out under the levelling influence of civilisa- tion, westernisation, colonisation or call it what you will, a corner stone of history is lost. A writer, by which is meant one who writes, may understand- ably hesitate to carve or even to chip a path through the preseves of proven title-holders and he may well keep a wary eye on the shadow which the critic throws: but the minor critic, devastating his prey, is no more impressive than a minor prophet denouncing his generation. A criticism that is wantonly destructive censures the critic, a criticism that is construction extolls the critic and the writer too.
It may fall to one man's lot to hold the torch while the runner is resting; another may conceive vast worlds and produce small things.
The mountains groaned in pangs of birth Great expectations filled the earth And lo, a mouse was born.
But, on the other hand, what mouse would be pleased to sire an elephant?
No man may rob himself, but if he choose to rifle the store-house of his mind he earns not the imprecation but the benediction of posterity.
The Emergency Regulations Ordinance, 1948.
The Emergency Regulations Ordinance, 1948, which was enacted at the May meeting of Council Negri and has received the assent of His Excellency the Governor, appears in the Sarawak Government Gazette of 16th June.
It was perhaps not generally realised that the great bulk of the special war-time legislation made under the wide powers conferred by Order No. E—6 (Emergency Powers (Defence)) 1939, still remained law in Sarawak. This legislation, how- ever, has since the liberation been used only to control the “essential commodity” situation, for which separate provision has now been made in the Controlled Goods Ordinance, 1948. The remainder of the war-time legislation has been treated as a dead letter and infringements of the rules and re- gulations ignored.
It was clearly desirable that such an anomaly should be rectified, but this could not be done unless, in conformity with the practice in the United King- dom and other Colonial territories, some legislation giving power to deal with a peace-time emergency was placed on the statute-book.
The complete absence of internal trouble in the Colony, and the unlikelihood of any emergency arising in the foreseeable future, renders it unnecess- ary to take more extensive powers than have been taken under permanent legislation elsewhere. The new Ordinance is based on the Singapore Emergency Regulations Ordinance (Cap 98), but, unlike that Ordinance, the Sarawak law will remain in operation only for a period of two years, unless extended by a resolution of the Council Negri. Its principal object is to repeal the war emergency legislation, but at the same time to ensure that the Govern- ment has sufficient powers left to deal with any unexpected contingency. Without these powers it would be failing in its duty to the public.
Old Currency Withdrawal.
Certain Malayan currency notes now in circulat- ion will cease to be legal tender from September 1 this year.
The Board of Commissioners of Currency, Malaya, are taking this action in order that the old notes, most of which are in poor and dirty condition, may be replaced by new notes and to enable the present figures of circulation of currency to be checked.
Proclamations carrying out this decision will be issued shortly.
The currency notes affected by the proclamations will be :
1.
All currency notes issued by, and bearing the words ‘Government of the Straits Settlements’ and
2.
All currency notes bearing dates prior to July 1, 1941.
Notes now in circulation which will NOT be affected by the proclamations are the following :
1.
Notes of the following denominations bearing the date July 1, 1941, and issued by the Board of Commissioners of Currency, Malaya : 1 cent, 5 cents, 10 cents, 20 cents, 50 cents, $1, $5 (Green), $10 (Red).
2.
Notes of the following denominations bearing the date January, 1, 1942, and issued by the Board of Commissioners of Currency;
$50 (Blue), $100 (Red and Green), $1,000 (Purple.)
3.
Notes of $10,000 denomination issued by the Board of Commissioners of Currency (various dates).
After August 31 this year, holders of notes to be withdrawn will only be able to exchange them for legal currency, at the offices of the Board of Commissioners of Currency in Empress Place, Singapore, and at the Divisional Treasuries, Simanggang, Sibu, Miri and the Treasury, Kuching.
It is therefore advisable that members of the public throughout Sarawak should try to exchange their holdings of these notes as soon as possible, either by paying them into their Bank or Savings Bank, or by bringing them direct to one of the Treasury Offices, and thus avoid the inconvenience of possessing notes which will cease to be legal tender after August 31.
The Banks are asked to assist the Board of Commissioners of Currency by not issuing the notes which are now to be withdrawn from circulation.
A special appeal is now made to the public, and particularly to the merchants, shop-keepers and others through whose hands notes pass, to withhold the old notes and to arrange for them to be replaced by new notes.
Notes and Comments.
His Majesty the King has been graciously pleased to approve the bestowal of the following Birthday Honours :
Officer of the Most Excellent Order of the British Empire
Dr. Elizabeth Josephine Le Sueur.
Colonial Police Medal ... Constable Gindi anak Banggan.
The Sarawak Gazette offers sincere congratulat- ions to the two recipients.
A ceremonial parade was held on the morning of June 10th in honour of the celebration of the Birthday of His Majesty the King. Contingents of the Sarawak Constabulary, the Sea Scouts, the Boy Scouts and the Girl Guides took part in the march past at which His Excellency the Governor took the salute.
His Excellency the Governor has been pleased to bestow upon Mohamad Zin bin Matsrudin the title of Datu with the emoluments that pertain to the title.
The Honourable Mr. C. W. Dawson, while playing a friendly game of golf on Sunday 30th May, holed the fourth hole in one. It is understood that this feat has not been accomplished since 1934 and we congratulate Mr. Dawson on his effort. While the Sarawak Club Golf sub-committee regret that this player has not put in a card for his handicap, it is recorded that the usual penalty for such golf was duly paid.
From Pusa comes a report of a freak hen. The District Officer, Saribas, (Mr. Waine) relates that a correspondent had seen a ben with four legs, of which two were in good working order.
There was some speculation concerning the hen’s laying capabilities.
The Kuching Rotary International organised an outing on the 6th June to Satang for some forty local children. The preliminary arrangements must have entailed a considerable amount of hard work but curiously enough the greatest difficulty which the organisers encountered in this laudable project was the emphatic opposition on the part of Chinese parents to allowing their young children to take part. After patient propaganda by one of the organisers some ten Chinese boys (out of an allot- ment of twenty) joined the party; in one case the juvenile holiday-maker was handed over with a request for a receipt.
The Rotary guests included some of the boys from the Boys’ Home and, possibly to the con- sternation of those who were conducting the party, one small girl who unexpectedly accom- panied her brother. Happily, she was allowed to join the expedition and she enjoyed herself in an aloof and sedate manner.
Safety precautions included an escort of Boy Scouts who did admirable service as life-guards and leaders.
The following, which was made in a statement to police, provides a happy illustration of how a language may enrich itself by adopting and adapt- ing
“Tiada berapa lama kemudian sa-orang mala- mata pakai preman dan sa-orang mata-mata ber- uniform datang dan tanya siapa bergadoh.”
The Sarawak Government Senior Officers’ Association was formed on the 12th June, 1948, and an interim Committee was appointed to deal with formalities prior to registration.
Attention is drawn to a minor alteration in the form of the Kuching Market Price List in this issue. The list for June includes Cold Storage prices as at the 29th June (the figures have been supplied by courtesy of Messrs. Tan Sum Guan & Son) and, for the purposes of comparison, the ruling Singapore prices taken from the Straits Times of the 19th June. We understand that a revised price list for Kuching may come into force shortly.
A correspondent writes to the British Malaya magazine of the death of Datu Roberts.
Edmund Roberts, who, after being manager of the Island Trading Company at Brunei, was Executive Engineer for Brunei and Labuan for many years, had Hie unique distinction of being appointed Datu by the then Sultan of Brunei. He was known to many of the older Sarawak officers for his hospitality and for the help he was always so willing to give.
The first two of the sixteen travelling dis- pensaries projected under the Colonial Development Scheme are already in operation. They are fifty foot perahus powered with 22 H.P. outboard engines and each has a crew of three, a dresser, a driver and an attendant. The boats are stocked with an adequate range of drugs and equipment.
Travelling Dispensary No. 1 is in operation on the Batang Igan making a round trip from Sibu to Kampong Igan each week calling at fixed
stopping places on fixed days of the week to treat the sick. Since this service commenced on 15th March, 1948, the weekly schedule has been maintained and good work has been done.
Travelling Dispensary No. 2 set off from Kuching on its first trip on 7th June, 1948. This perahu goes down the Sarawak River to Muara Tebas and from thence to Sambir at the mouth of Samarahan River. Calling at a considerable number of kampongs on the Samarahan, the perahu goes as far up river as Kampong Panchor which is at the 27th Mile on the Serian Road.
On the return journey use is made of the Loba Batu Blat which joins the Samarahan and Sarawak Rivers, thus obviating the long journey to the river mouths.
The number of persons receiving treatment each week on this circuit so far averages more than three hundred and considerable appreciation of the service has been shown.
The Secretaries of the Sarawak Turf Club have informed us that the entrance fee for membership of the club is $5 and the annual subscription is $5 for Kuching members and $2 for outstation members. The subscriptions for the remainder of 1948 are $2.50 and $1 respectively.
In order to assist the students of Standard VITT and the Senior Cambridge Classes, the Principal of St. Thomas’s School has arranged for a series of external lectures to be held on the first Tuesday of each month at 8.00 p.m. in the Sarawak Union Club.
The present series will deal with 'the function of Government within the community in which we live’ and it is hoped that members of the public will be sufficiently interested to attend.
The provisional programme is :—
July 6th ... The Function of Government.
August 3rd ... The Meaning of Democracy.
September 7th ... Deep Sea Fishing.
October 5th ... Administration.
November 2nd ... Municipal Affairs.
December 7th ... Forestry.
Outstations.
I see in the “Straits Times’’ that Sir Andrew Caldecott has written about Malayan outstation life forty years ago.
Now, this rather takes the wind out of my sails as I had already prepared notes for a similar sort of story of Sarawak, say, thirty-six years ago. I do not of course expect readers to compare my writing with that of such a famous man as Sir Andrew. Whatever he writes has the backing of his remarkable and successful career, but we can, I think, be regarded almost as contemporaries and our descriptions therefore of outstation life in those happy years may corroborate each other.
It is a great day in a young administrative officer’s life when he gets his first outstation on his own—in fact, when he crows on his own dung- hill. It was even more so in those days as there were no telegraphs, no telephones and, so far as we were concerned, no Secretariat. In my case I
was pitch-forked into Oya and told “Oh! you’ll learn all about it when you get there.”
I arrived in Oya by sailing boat. This will. I expect, sound strange to present-day cadets who complain of slow motor launches.
We left Mukah in the middle of the night, just when the south wind began to blow. As we rowed out to the mouth of the river the bar was growling and murmuring and the juragan carefully covered my few belongings with a kajang, which I took to be an ominous sign.
However, the bar was not too had and once at sea we made sail and the crew, with one exception, wrapped themselves up in their kain and un- ashamedly went to sleep.
The south wind, which generally comes down about the middle of the night, is not a strong one, but the wind does come obedient to their appeal.
I lay on my little mat and listened to the old cry of sailors the world over—whistling for a wind.
“Tua, tua kladi.
Makin lama, makin jadi!”
Why this call and what it means, I do not know, but the wind does come obedient to their appeal.
Towards morning, just before that first, false dawn appeared, I saw a ship's lights right down on the horizon. I drew the attention of the juragan to this and he replied laconically “Venus.” As dawn appeared the wind veered round to the south west and our hopes of further progress vanished. I, myself, slipped over the side arid swam ashore, preferring to walk along the beach for the last three miles rather than spend half a day tacking and backing all over the China Sea. And so I arrived at my first station unheralded and unsung, and very wet and very hungry.
As I walked up the beach round I met a very early riser, who said politely “Kuman-an-ka-au?” I realised that I was in Melanau country.
I think it was a good thing to begin one's out- station life among the Melanaus. They are a conservative people and like to be left to go their own way.
Oya was (and I think still is) a regular back o’beyond—a sleepy hollow—and I learnt more of the ways of Sarawak there than in any of the other more go ahead places. Although it was 1912, the ways were those of 1850. A very old Melanau asked me once “Is the Queen well?” The Boxer (by which name we called the Chinese shop that sold European goods) retailed a good claret, St. Julien or St. Emillion, because "all English gentle- men drank claret for dinner.”
There was no Secretariat to tread on one’s tail, and the Divisional Resident only came round once a year—and that was in the snipe season—or perhaps again when the punei were flighting. You were on your own dunghill and crowed just when you liked. On idle days, when no one came up to the Government offices, the best idea was to take the prisoners and go pukat fishing. No doubt there would be in these days gubernatorial frowns at such doings, but one learnt many things in those piscatorial excursions. All about Tugau, for instance, and why Melanau girls eat sago.
The Native Officer was old Pangeran Mohamed, who went by the affectionate name of “Farmer George.” He had two of the prettiest daughters I have ever seen, black, yellow or white, and I admit that I used to call on the old man, ostensibly to learn Melanau, but perhaps in the hope of seeing the girls. One of them died at the age of sixteen and I always associated her with that heart-rending poem by Cameons to his little dead Chinese wife. In this case, her father built a roof to cover her virgin grave, being careful to leave an opening in it for Azra’il, Maluku'l Maut, the angel of death, to come for her soul.
It was here that I learnt what a “bantut” was, although opinions differ as to what exactly it is.
Here too, I learned the boating songs, and when- ever I go up and down the Oya river in a stinking motor vessel I recall the haunting refrain of “Lanang, belado, lanang !”
Internal combustion engines, however useful, will never make me forget those voices singing, stroke for stroke as they paddled through the night, "bukan-mabok pinang" "lanang mabok anak orang !"
When I say that there were no telephones I am not speaking the truth as we and Mukah had the only outstation telephone in the country.
Of course it did not always work and disgruntled litigants used to cut the wire. We used the old- fashioned bellow-through-the-wall instruments and apparently they had no anti-lightning apparatus. I was once blown dear off the stool on which one had to stand with the remains of the severed instrument still in my hand. The local policemen had a curiously polite routine when telephoning. They rang first, you answered by ringing too, they then replied to your ring, you courteously replied to his. They rang again to slow that they knew their manners: you rang in reply—and so on. Conversations generally began after the twentieth ring.
Few now will know what a Court of Requests was. It was, in fact, the petty debts court and was, I understand, a relic of Dickens.
The Melanaus are improvident and until it was abolished in 1922 this Court took up most of one s time. It was not a good thing, as the Chinese regarded it as a cheap debt collecting agency. Most of the claims were admitted, but now and again one had to sit in judgment on claims which were not only absolutely denied, but on statements in which the defendents said they had not even seen the Plaintiffs before!
One case I heard was that of rather an attractive Melanau girl who was sued by a Chinese shop- keeper for a long list of articles. Weary and bored (I had been in Court for three hours) I wrote down the list as stated by the Chinese. “Five kati of sugar?” (yes, from the girl) “Two depa of blachu?” “yes.” “Ten roti cabin?” “yes.” “Three depa of kain perlas?” “yes.” “One silk sarong?” “NO" from the girl, most emphatically. A slight squabble and the girl admitted that she had not bought it. The Chinese had given it to her. "Why” asked the tired magistrate. “Oh, think for yourself” replied the pert girl.—(To be continued.)
O.F.
Tropic Seas.
The watch of Day is almost done, and Night is taking o'er.
Beneath the sea a world of gold sinks slowly, glowing; whilst in awe,
My soul great leagues apart from me, I gaze into the West.
The time to dream, to think alone, of home and those loved best.
The caressing spell of tropic dusk, which bewitches the purple sea;
These glorious hues of red and gold—of shades known but to Deity,
Are a worldly heaven through which my soul escapes from strife and strain.
No more in foreign lands 1 roam, I’m homesides once again!
A milliard stars now glitter through the portholes of dark Night.
Gray monsters of the darkening depths below, swim ’neath their shadowy light—
And thus my shadowy thoughts swim through the indeterminate space,
And all things dear of my native land they yearningly embrace.
A sprinkling breeze, with mystic grace, then ruffles the stars down-flung.
Their magic lights no longer lead to where my thoughts have clung:
No more of dreams and phantasy, of life abstract and free—
A trembling shiver, and my wandering soul turns back to reality.
Tai Pin Yeo.
Fifty Years Ago.
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, July 1, 1898.
SADONG NOTES.
A RATHER curious incident was reported by Kadir the pilot here. On the 11th instant towards evening, when going off to the Vyner which was at anchor off the bar, he was obliged to put back again on account of having run into what appeared to be a shoal of enormous fish (Paoor); these fish which were 14 or 15 feet long by about 10 feet broad were jumping 8 or 9 feet out of the water and coming down again with a resounding report; once or twice, one nearly landing on his boat and he was considerably relieved when he got safely back into the river.
BEING somewhat incredulous as to the size and quantity of these fish as seen by the worthy Pilot, enquiry was made of the Captain of the Vyner as to whether he had seen anything of them, he said that for some time that evening a great number had been playing round the ship and the account given by Kadir as to their size and number was in no way an exaggeration.
THE fishermen at the month say it is but seldom the very large Paoor are seen and then only one or two at a time, smaller ones are often caught in their jeramai.
ONLY a few days after the above took place a Sebangan fisherman went with his sons to visit his kelong, he had only just got into the water when he noticed a large Sword-fish close by, he struck at it with his parang, the fish however was too quick for him and rising from the water it brought its sword down, with so great force on the man's neck that he died in his boat, before he could be brought back to his Kampong.
Some of the fish to be found at the mouth seem to be disagreeable customers.
This Sarawak.
(With apologies to the New Statesman and Nation.)
Speaking after the signing of the bill President Truman declared that the United States was anxious to show other free loving nations in Europe that the United States was willing to work side by side...............—Sarawak Tribune.
Congress was considering the conscription bill during the week-end, and two senators started a filly-busting campaign.—Sarawak Tribune.
...........Senator Robert Taft of Ohio who shares two characteristics with Dewey—natural ability sharpened by unremitting toil and an absence of adhesiveness.—Sarawak Tribune.
Russian reform was scheduled to begin yesterday and to last till Monday.—Sarawak Tribune.
On Saturday afternoon, the 26th and 27th June instant.—A report.
To the largest Prison (Warden)
Muka, Sarawak,
The Netherlands Indies.
TO ALL PRISONS AND JAILS.
TO ALL WARDENS.
Please paste one of these on the walls of each and every Cell. Also paste these all through the HALLS and in each and every room. Also paste ONE of these on the walls of each and every DEATH cell. Also the DEATH house. Also in Solitary Confinement; paste these on the walls.
Please get a thousand or more of these PRINTED in your OWN language. Thank you.
(At the time the circular enclosed with the above was received, no prisoners were housed in Mukah Jail nor had there been any for the previous two months.—Ed.)
............was convicted on a charge of cheating Sec. 417 S.P.C.—A report.
...........either of the two lovely European Import Houses here ............—A letter.
Dear Sir,
I beg to inform you that there’s a vacancy in your department.—A letter.
I have been a sailor.................and can stand
seasick.—A letter.
(The Editor is unable to follow the example of our illustrious contemporary and offer a prize for the best entry in this column. Contributions from all parts of "This Sarawak" will, however, be warmly appreciated, and the most favoured will be given pride of place.)
Sarawak Turf Club.
Annual General Meeting.
The first Annual General Meeting, since the liberation, of the Sarawak Turf Club was held in the Sarawak Union Club on Wednesday, 26th May, at 4.30 p.m.
The Chairman, Mr. B. J. C. Spurway, in his speech pointed out that all the Club’s records were lost during the occupation and that while the list of members had been reconstructed as accurately as possible, there might be omissions and he hoped that members whose names were omitted would notify the Secretaries.
The Accounts for the year ended 31st December, 1947, were then reviewed. The Chairman drew attention to the omission from the Balance Sheet of the land owned by the Club, and explained that as the pre-war books and Balance Sheet were all lost during the occupation, it was impossible to enter this asset in the present Balance Sheet. He thought it would not be correct to include them now at a purely estimated figure but suggested that they be included in the next Balance Sheet at a nominal value of $100 and asked members to con- sider this as approved when passing the Accounts. The Chairman then moved that the Accounts be passed. Seconded by Mr. Ong Hap Leong, the Accounts were passed.
A brief report on the past year’s working was then made by the Chairman, in which he informed the meeting of the ruinous state of the Club's pro- perty after the liberation. He stressed the difficult- ies with which the Committee was confronted in their efforts to make a re-start. Negotiations between Government and the Jubilee Recreat- ion Ground Trustees had been successful the Chair- man was glad to inform the meeting; and the Club had secured the lease of land for the proposed Track and Club buildings.
The Chairman then outlined the Club’s proposals for an early re-start of racing. He informed the meeting that to enable the Club to proceed with the rehabilitation programme, a loan would be required, and added that the Club was in negotiat- ion with its Bank for the loan which was to be secured by a lien on the Club’s own land, and that the Bank had agreed. The Chairman asked that the Committee be empowered, if necessary, to raise such a charge.
He then formally put the motion to the meeting. This was seconded by Mr. D. L. Leach, and carried.
The Chairman reported that already some pro- gress had been made in the reconstruction of the Course and attributed this to the energy of the pre- vious honorary Clerk of the Course, Mr. R. S. Sagar,
and that of his recent successor, the Honourable Mr. J. B. Archer.
The importance of the revision of the Club's Rules was then stressed by the Chairman. “These Rules drawn up several years ago, contain many anomalies in the light of to-day and will have to be revised completely," he said. He hoped that this would receive the attention of the incoming Committee.
The Chairman informed the meeting that now that the Club was “active" once more and in view of the imminent expenditure, it was decided by the Committee to re-introduce members’ subscriptions as from 1st July, 1948 (a half year) and thereafter annually as was the custom pre-war. The Chair- man also stressed the need for more members and said that he hoped those present would endeavour to increase the Club’s membership.
Concluding his speech, the Chairman said, "Now gentlemen I thank you for your attendance today and I wish to express the hope that next year, maybe, will see a modest recommencement of the Club’s Meetings, the greatest social function in Sarawak of the past. I also wish to take this opportunity to thank the President and Members of Committee of the Sarawak Union who have very kindly permitted us to hold this meeting here today."
The meeting then closed.
The election of Committee for the current yea ' resulted as follows :—
Management Committee.
Kuching Members :
1.
Mr. Ong Hap Leong
2.
Mr. B. J. C. Spurway
3.
Mr. T. C. Martine
4.
Mr. D. C. White
5.
Mr. Augustine Chong
6.
Mr. W. J. Chater
7.
The Hon’ble the Datu Amar
The Nominees of H.H. the Rajah remain; they are :
1.
The Hon'ble Mr. J. B. Archer
2.
The Hon'ble Mr. J. C. H. Barcroft
Outstation Members :
1.
Mr. William Tan
2.
Mr. J. C. B. Fisher
Election Committee :
1.
Mr. Ong Kwan Hin
2.
Inche Ali bin Dollah
3.
Mr. A. P. Merrells
Present at the meeting were: Mr. B. J. C. Spurway (Chairman), the Hon’ble Mr. J. C. H. Barcroft, the Hon’ble the Datu Amar, Messrs. Augustine Chong, Ong Eng Hin, W. J. Chater, A. P. Merrells, Tan Kui Choon, Ong Hap Leong, Henry Ong Kee Chuan, William Tan, E. W. Howell, D. L. Leach, W. S. B. Buck, Philip Soh Fu, T. C. Martine and Abang Suhai. In attend- ance were : Mr. G. W. Parry (representing the Secretaries) and Mr. N. D. Burnell the honorary Auditor.
The Turf Club.
In view of the considerable interest that has been shown as to when racing will start again in Kuching, we approached Mr. J. B. Archer, who has recently taken on the duties of honorary clerk of the course.
“It has been decided” said Mr. Archer “to remake the race-course, and only relatively small stretches of the old course will be utilised. The reason for this is that the Japanese destroyed the old 'straight' and most of the buildings, and in any case it had been decided before the war to rebuild the course. The new one will be a left-handed course, which is usual; there are very few right- handed courses in England or, in fact, anywhere else.”
“How is the work progressing?” we asked.
“Well, it is really only a matter of money and fine weather. The lay-out has been approved by the Committee and the levels have already been taken by Mr. William Tan. If funds are available, and I think they are, there is no reason why a contract for the work should not be signed soon. It is a matter of urgency as unless the work is started soon the landas will be upon us.”
“Then you think that the new course can be completed before the landas?”
“No, I do not,” he readied, “but most of the preliminary work could be completed and the ground allowed to settle during the landas. In the landas of course,” he said, “the course could be turfed. Then, when the fine weather came the ‘trimming’ could start and I firmly believe that with energy and the good-will of all the course could be ready for racing in September next year.”
“But what about all the buildings?”
“Well, I think we should have to content our- selves with temporary ones for the first meeting. The loan that is being raised will, in my opinion, only cover the actual cost of remaking the course. It would be bad policy to cripple the club financially by erecting permanent buildings now. I am sure that the new course will be an improvement on the old one. The new course is 8.9 furlongs round and 80 feet wide and possibly a training course 8.2 furlongs and 60 feet wide. There will be a better view of the racing and the old awkward bends will disappear. I well remember the horrors of the bend we called ‘Tattenham Corner’ and the really horrible language which the jockeys used. I have been a culprit myself !"
“But what about horses or ponies?”
“Well, that’s the greatest difficulty. Some people are optimistic but on my last trip to Jesselton I found that the prices of even moderate ponies were fantastic.”
“How about getting horses from Malaya?”
“Yes, I have heard about these, but I am not too keen on ‘chuck-outs’ from racing stables. It may be that my experience has been unfortunate but some of these three-legged thoroughbreds are only fit for the cats’ meat seller. However, that is not my department and it will depend on what the Committee decides. I will give one word of warn- ing, however, and that is the present high cost of keeping a horse or pony in Sarawak. In Kuching, too, there are the added difficulties of the new
Stock Regulations. I know owners who quite rightly like to have their stables in their own grounds. This may not be possible in some areas.” “Would saddlery and fodder be a problem?”
Yes, I. think it might be. Saddlery is very expensive in these days and a constant supply of crushed oats, hay, padi and even beans might be difficult. However, if people want to run horses or ponies they will have to pay for their hobby, but I am afraid that some people who clamour for racing to be restarted are thinking mainly of sweeps and totes! Still, all that is no business of mine except as it concerns one member of the Committee and I shall do my level best with the able assist- ance of Mr. William Tan to have some sort of course ready by September, 1949.
Films of the Month.
One of the earlier films exhibited this month at the Sylvia Cinema was “Blue Skies,” the plot of which followed too closely upon others of a similar type to arouse much enthusiasm.
An idea to a film director is like a bone to a dog; it only starts to acquire interest and merit after the marrow has been extracted. Mr. A. G. MacDonell has ascribed the cause of this repetition to the charitable desire of one pioneer producer to allow other producers to share the epoch-making theme but whatever the cause the result is reminiscent of cold left-overs.
Fred Astaire provided plenty of enjoyable moments but what should have been excellent entertainment whirled on its way like a damp catherine wheel; there were moments of sparkle and spurts of movement and altogether too much dampness.
If the audible approval of the audience is any guide, the honours of the film go to an actor (whose name passed unnoticed) who interposed a variety turn as “Mrs. Murgatroyd.”
To the casual layman, film production seems an unbalanced industry; the stare, (the expression is confined mainly to an industry where the remuner- ation is astronomical) earn sums that are out of proportion to their abilities or capabilities. Normal values are reversed; few directors, apart from the celluloidal world would publicise the record high cost of their productions or the record salary of their employees.
But perhaps the film star, like Emperor Jones, can plead the performance of a public service and as a result, claim exemption from judgment by ordinary standards.
The film version of Mr. Somerset Maugham’s book, “The Razor’s Edge,” was good entertain- ment and succeeded in attracting a better than average audience.
The last film of the month starred Deanna Durbin in “Hers to Hold.” It did not seem to arouse the enthusiasm that her earlier films did.
THE SARAWAK CLUB.
LIST OF DRAWINGS ON THE DERBY RACE
Drawn at the Lilian Theatre Hall, Kuching, 4th June, 1948.
Scrutineers
D. C. WHITE
L. K. MORSE
E. W. COUSENS
B. J. C. SPURWAY
A. P. MERRELLS, Asst. Secretary, Sarawak Club.
Kuching, 7th June, 1948.
Turtle Trust Fund, 1947.
Revenue and Expenditure Account for the year ended 31 st December, 1947.
INCOME.
Sale of turtle eggs ... ... $11,034.79
$11,034.79
Balance Sheet as at 31st December, 1947.
Liabilities.
Assets.
There is a contingent asset of $165.00 in respect of repayments of loans made from the Fund's income.
D. C, WHITE, Chairman, Turtle Trust.
19th June, 1948.
Audited, and found correct, subject to com- ments made in a report dated 9th February, 1948, and addressed to the Chairman.
D. E. NEWELL, Acting Principal Auditor. 19th June, 1948.
News from Far and Near.
FIRST DIVISION.
The District Officer, Kuching, (Mr. Outram) reports that a preliminary reconnaissance for a boat dispensary to operate on the Sarawak and Samarahan Rivers was carried out on the 30th May. The regular service was scheduled to begin on the 7th June.
The rise in the price of rubber towards the end of May was reflected in the volume of business locally.
In reporting the visit of His Excellency the Governor to Kampong Skrak on the 14th May, the District Officer, Kuching, writes: “The Orang Kaya Permancha had prepared his speech with some care, to which he added forethought and con- sideration when he announced that he would not inconvenience his guests by speaking his piece but would hand His Excellency a typewritten copy.”
The District Officer, Bau, (Mr. Lloyd Thomas) reports three convictions during May for the illegal manufacture of arrack.
The District Officer, Bau, reports that much work has been done on the roads of the district during May in spite of many difficulties. The
District Officer adds : “Meanwhile a new equipage has made its appearance here during the month, namely a jeep touring a trailer fitted with an under- neath chute (for scattering gravel and tailings) and finally a roller constructed like a horse-roller from the remains of the pre-war motor-roller. One workman is to be observed sitting on the trailer inducing the gravel or tailings to flow out via the chute while two more sit in a box on the roller, with a heap of stones, to impart weight where required.”
The District Officer does not claim that this truly remarkable contraption will revolutionise road- maintenance, but it does at least work.
Four of the mining companies in the Bau district produced a total of 55.3943 ounces of gold during the month of April.
The monthly meeting of the Bau Municipal Board was held in the District Office, Bau, on the 27th. The chief item on the agenda in this meet- ing was concerned with the impounding of un- licensed and diseased dogs in order to reduce the present dog-nuisance in the Municipal Area.
It is reported from Serian that durian and other fruit trees are flowering profusely .
SECOND DIVISION.
The District Officer, Simanggang, (Mr. Bruen) reports a meeting of the Batang Lupar Local Treasury and Simanggang District Native Authority, held on the 4th May. The District Officer comments: "The meeting was very lively and much useful discussion took place on most of the items of a very long agenda. It is gratifying to note that the discussions, arguments and interest increase at each meeting as the members get more and more used to the idea. It can now be said that these meetings are appreciated by most of the members who realise that the value to be obtained from them amply rewards them for the discomforts of their long journeys to these meetings."
A total of one thousand snake skins were shipped during the month from Simanggang, Engkilili and Lubok Antu.
Eight doors of a twelve door house in Lachau, Ulu Lingga, were struck by lightning during the month, and every main post of these eight doors was neatly split in two. The occupants of these doors were untouched.
The District Officer, Saribas, (Mr. Waine), reporting on the meeting of the Saribas Native Authority on the 9th May comments that one case on the agenda is noteworthy, the case of the Dayaks of Tebalau who had broken away from their long-house. This case was re-heard in the District Native Court with the Native Authority as assessors. The case was settled and the Dayaks were ordered to return to the long-house or to build a long-house of their own within calling distance of the main long-house. It was also clearly laid down that the adat concerning the land was that the Tuai Rumah had complete control over all the Tebalau land and if the Dayaks who were living in langkau did not comply with the Court’s order, they would have no claim to any share in the land.
The following is an extract from the report of the District Officer, Kalaka, (Mr. Wilson) : "The second meeting of the District Council showed an improvement on the first, mainly because the impending exhaustion of sago palms and destruct- ion of padi by pests were of immediate interest to members and some differences of opinion were apparent during discussion.''
THIRD DIVISION.
The District Officer, Sibu, (Mr. Fisher) com- ments in his April report that it is noteworthy that, since the 1st of January, 1948, there have been ten cases under the Monopolies Order concerning illicit arrack and that there are still cases pending.
The following is an extract from the report of the District Officer, Sibu, “A certain amount of consternation was caused in Bridge Road and Island Road. Sibu, when the Divisional Agriculture Officer rode along on a water buffalo in furtherance of his campaign for accustoming the local populat- ion to these beasts."
The following is an extract from the report of the District Officer, Lower Rejang, (Mr. Snelus) “In addition to the fem and 'lalang' the Dayaks now have to compete with a new grass weed, which grows in most prolific fashion on the worst soil and has a peculiarly powerful odour. This weed is known
to them as rumput balloon (aeroplane grass), so- called because, as it never made an appearance until the Japanese arrived with their aeroplanes, Dayaks are convinced the Japanese broadcast it from the skies. It remains in their minds as just another example of the way in which the Japanese tried to make life as hard as possible for them : a lasting reminder to them of the evil effects of the Japanese occupation.
All wet padi had been harvested by the end of the month, with an estimated average increase in yield of 25% over the previous season and an increase in total area planted of some 2,000 acres.”
The District Officer, Lower Rejang, comments that, after three very wet months at the beginning of the year, April re-established its reputation as the first month of the official dry season and kicked off with a drought lasting sixteen days.
The District Officer, Lower Rejang, reports that trade in general was dull. The price for rubber seemed to fluctuate considerably and vary from district to district. Matu for instance reported at the end of the month $24 per picul for unsmoked rubber locally while Daro stated that Sibu dealers would offer only $24 for smoked rubber. Undoubt- edly both rubber and jelutong are fetching poorer prices than what they might owing to lazy and care- less preparation of these products. The same of course applies to sago flour.
The District Officer, Lower Rejang, reports that attendances at most existing vernacular schools were again poor. Now that the padi harvesting is over, it is frequently given as the reason for absence that fathers claim their children to help in the fishing.
The District Officer, Kanowit, (Mr. Drake) reports a case of gang robbery at Julau. Twenty Dayaks, the whole of the gang concerned, have been arrested.
The following is extracted from the monthly re- port of the District Officer, Kanowit. “Harvesting at the Agricultural Station was completed early in the month, a total of 760 gantangs being collected. Much activity continued at the station, including planting of thirty-two suckers of Manila and Sisal hemp, various types of vegetables, further planting of rubber seeds, and preparation of sago and citrus plots. A total of twenty-one pikuls and sixteen katis of dried padi were harvested from the Sta- pang plot.
A big meeting of all Tuai Rumah from Penghulu Empam’s and Penghulu Simon’s districts was held in the Roman Catholic Mission on April 4th. All present agreed to try and get their houses to plant at least two acres of swamp padi per door. The Penghulus have worked very hard to get people to agree to this, and it is hoped that the Tuai Rumah will be successful with their houses.”
The District Officer. Mukah. (Mr. Morris) reports that there was very little Court work during April; with the increase in the price of sago many civil cases had been withdrawn.
The following is an extract from the monthly re- port of the District Officer. Mukah, “As a result of the satisfactory price offered for sago, output in- creased during the month and reports have been received that in some cases, rasping and washing
have been carried on long after dark. Many sago factories have been working to capacity and their profits during the month must have been enormous. "
The District Officer, Mukah, reports that the usual meeting of Mukah Tua Kampongs was held on the 13th of the month. The question of Co- operative Societies was brought up by the Tua Kam- pongs who were eager to see one started in the area. The District Officer adds that there is no doubt that the high prices ruling in the Mukah bazaar (higher than at other stations in the District) are largely responsible for the trend.
It has been reported that approximately twenty Melanau Islam residents of the District will be mak- ing the pilgrimage to Mecca this year.
The following is an extract from the monthly report of the District Officer, Mukah : “It is rather an interesting commentary on local prices to com- pare the cost of canned and fresh vegetables. A “tie” of kachang panjang at 20 cents (or approxi- mately 80 cents a kati) is dearer than a tin of imported green peas at $1.10 for a 30 oz tin. Similarly a 16 oz tin of bacon at $1.10 may be compared with local pork at $1.60 a kati (including bones and fats) when available.
At the end of the month there was a pronounced rise in the cost of labour from $2.50 per day to $3.00 per day in the case of Melanaus and from $3.00 per day to $3.50 per day for Chinese sago workers."
The District Officer, Mukah, comments that, as a result of the prolonged dry spell the bazaar area presented a most dismal appearance at the end of the month, with dust swirling through the shop- houses and lying inches deep on the bazaar area roads. This dust coupled with the smell of rotting sago refuse made the bazaar appear to be a most un- pleasant place.
FIFTH DIVISION.
The Honourable the Resident, Fifth Division, (Mr, Anderson) reports that kapok trees in full flower were observed all the way upriver from be- low Danau to Ukong. They are owned chiefly by the Bisayas who sell the kapok to traders. The Resident adds : “This is eminently a trade where the cooperative principal should result in bigger pro- fits to the producers."
The following is an extract from the report of the Cadet Officer, Limbang, (Mr. Harper) : “A large number of upriver natives have been visiting Limbang during the month. The padi purchase scheme has filled their chawats with money, most of which appears to run straight out into the hands of hawkers and shopkeepers. Sufficient is being retained by Ibans, however, to purchase guns, for which there is a brisk demand."
During a visit to Rumah Budat, the Cadet Officer, Limbang, commented : "This is a new house of three doors with another three to be built. The physique of these people is extremely good, notice- ably better than I have seen elsewhere in the dis- trict. But in spite of this there are very few child- ren in the house and no male children at all."
The Assistant District Officer, Lawas, (Mr. Smith) reports that attendance at the Lawas Dis- pensary during the month has been extremely heavy,
over treble the normal numbers. It appears that this is mainly due to the end of the harvesting, patients now having sufficient time to come to Lawas for treatment.
The Assistant District Officer, Lawas, reports that tuba fishing under permit was held twice during the month at Sungei Kebab Besar and Ulu Merapok. Total catches were reported as 70 katis and 575 katis respectively.
CORRESPONDENCE.
CURRENCY ISSUES.
Office of the Financial Secretary, Sarawak, 1st June, 1948.
The Editor,
Sarawak Gazette,
Kuching.
Sir,
The Treasury is endeavouring to compile a history (which the loss of pre-war records now renders most desirable) of the Sarawak currency issues, and of other coinage and notes in circulation in Sarawak from 1839 up to the present day.
2.
It would be greatly appreciated if any reader who holds any documentary evidence of early issues, or any specimens of the 10 cent notes believed to have been issued about 1857 would communicate with this office.
3.
Information respecting the mechanics of the “copper loans" which were a feature of the 1860’s would also be of interest and value, as would details of the silver coinage in use in the early days. References have been traced to a “trade dollar," but a description of the coin is not available.
4.
Complete details of the currency notes issued by the Second Rajah from 1880 onwards are avail- able, but specimens of the early issues will be exchanged with great pleasure by the Currency Department.
I have the honour to be, Sir,
Your obedient servant,
C. E. GASCOIGNE, Acting Financial Secretary.
TUGAU.
Kuching,
5th June, 1948. The Editor,
Sarawak Gazette,
Kuching.
Dear Sir,
To those interested in stories of the great Melanau Chief Tugau and the recent correspondence about the supposed remains of his house in the Riitus I strongly recommend them to read the in- teresting article by Mr. A. E. Lawrence on page 120 of The Sarawak Museum Journal of January,
1911 (Volume I No. 1). At the same time they might turn up the old files of the Sarawak Gazette for May 1907 at page 99.
Mr. Lawrence, late Sarawak Civil Service, knows as much as any European and more than most about the Melanaus, and his writings on those people leave my efforts in the shade.
I do not think the legend about the hidden treasure of gold should be discounted altogether. It is well known that in the olden days (and even in my time) the Pagan Melanaus did bury much valu- able gold, and, what is more, most of it was un- disturbed. I myself have seen real gold bangles, buttons and necklaces which had been recovered from a grave at least a hundred and fifty years old.
The Brunei conquest and the gradual conversion of the Melanau people to the Muslim faith put a stop to much of this form of burial, but it must be remembered that up to this day I suppose fifty per cent of the Melanaus are still Pagan and articles of value (perhaps not gold) are still buried in graves.
I apologise for taking up more of your space, but perhaps new arrivals in Sarawak may be interested.
Yours faithfully,
J. B. Archer.
SAFETY FIRST.
Kuching,
25th June, 1948.
The Editor,
Sarawak Gazette,
Kuching.
Dear Sir,
The high hopes which were held out after the recent Safety First Week have not materialised. In fact traffic conditions in Kuching are worse than ever.
Is it that the offenders, seeing that the warnings were not followed up, are just cocking a snook at us, or is it that they are not yet traffic educated ?
I know that it is the fashion to blame the police, hut in many cases it does seem that they are either physically or wilfully blind. Bicyclists ride openly down the wrong side of the road, they ride on the footpaths, they ride on the kaki lima, they ride three, four and five abreast and they ignore all signs. And all this before the very eyes of the police.
Motor buses race each other, they leave their doors swinging outwards and they stop to pick up passengers at every dangerous corner.
Drivers of motor cars keep their finger on the electric horn with a “get-out-of-my-way” air. So long as their horn is going nothing can go wrong.
Pedestrians, those jay-walkers, are bad, I know, but who can blame them when wheeled traffic is allowed to go mad?
Yours faithfully,
Rate-Payer.
From “Adversity”: Internment Quarterly.
(The following article was published in "Adversity” on 1st July, 1943.)
AN ECONOMIC VIEW ON BALI AND LOMBOK.
The isles of Bali and Lombok belong to the group of the so-called “little Sunda Islands’’ and form together one Residency administered by one Resi- dent, three Assistant Residents, twelve District Officers and three Assistants.
The area of the whole Residency is about 3,500 square miles. Bali has eight native kingdoms, which were restored in 1938. Lombok is Govern- mental territory without native rulers. Formerly the western part of Lombok was conquered by one of the Bali Princes, but the Dutch Government intervened and since 1906 this native ruler has not exercised any influence there, and Lombok came under the direct administration of the Government. The total population of Bali is 1,250,000 and of Lombok 800,000. Java and these Isles are the most crowded Islands of the D.E.I. Archipelago with approximately 500 people to the square mile. (U.S.A. 45 per square mile).
It is only natural, in a land of steep mountains, with abundant rains and intersected in almost all directions by streams and rivers, the ground im- pregnated with volcanic ash, that the soil should attain great richness and fertility.
Despite the enormous population, the Western part of the Island has remained uninhabited owing to the lack of a natural water supply for agriculture. The few remaining tigers, the deer, wild pigs, cro- codiles, great lizards, jungle cocks etc. (an El Dorado for hunters) are the sole dwellers in this hilly North Western part where the ground is cover- ed with thick bush. Another arid region in contrast with the extravagant fertility of the island is the Southern limestone peninsular called Tafelhoek, where a new aerodrome was built in 1937.
The main product on Bali as well as on Lombok is rice, grown in wet rice fields with very ingen- ious water supply systems. These irrigation works, are wholly organised,—now and then with Govern- mental support—by the “Subaks." The Subak, the village rice-growers’ association, incorporates all the small and big land owners for the village espec- ially for co-operation and administration of agricul- ture and irrigation. This “water-board’’ is of very great economic importance.
The Subak orders the beginning of the rice planting, distributes the irrigation water coming from the main source equally amongst all the mem- bers, settles all the water disputes, such as stealing water, and arranges the communal rice festivals. On the other hand all the members of the Subak have to contribute to the maintenance of the irrigat- ion works in the Subak area. This contribution consists of money, material for aquaducts, dams, dykes and pipes (stone, cement and sand etc.) and labour. The cultivation of rice they have raised, by this method of organisation, to levels unreached by other rice growing nations.
Being essentially agriculturists, they are not in- terested in navigation and trade. So the majority of the Balinese work for themselves on the land and if they have not yet become wage earners de-
vote their leisure to spiritual relaxation. Their culture, unlike that of their cultural ancestors, the Javanese, is very high. Even the common people are better agriculturists, craftsmen, artists and organisers than the average Javanese.
The Balinese are by no means a primitive people. The “Sassak” population of Lombok, which, in contrast to the Hindu Balinese, is Mohamedan, cannot be compared with them. As already men- tioned the Western part of Lombok was for a long time ruled over by the Balinese Prince of Karanga- sem. In this part approximately 80,000 Balinese live among the Sassaks, so that Balinese influence has had its effect on the progress of Sassak populat- ion and these people have derived a lot of their economic welfare from the Balinese especially in connection with irrigation and rice-planting, the latter having reached nearly the same level as in Bali. Bali and Lombok are rice granaries with a considerable export to the Moluccas and Celebes as well as to Europe, and the rice is first class quality. There are four rice mills in Lombok and another four in Bali. These are partly in Chinese and partly in Bandarese hands. (Bandarese are oborigines from Bandjermasin). I cannot give the figures of the Rice export. The second important agricultural product on both the Islands is the coconut with a large scale export to Europe (normally). There are three coconut oil factories in the Residency owned by Chinese tradesmen. On Bali the export of coffee is of smaller importance, though the robustar coffee is of excellent quality. Bali has only one Rubber Estate (1,500 acres) owned by the Straits Sunda Syndicate. The tobacco crop is principally used for local consumption, a small quantity being sent to Java yearly. Lombok exports a fairly big amount of onions grown on the sawahs and ladangs after the rice crop’s so called second plant- ing. One of the main sources of income in Bali ns well as in Lombok is the cattle rearing which receives considerable assistance from the Veterinary Service (breeding, selection). On Bali too the pig- rearing is very important, with considerable export to Singapore (cattle as well) and other parts of the D.E.I. Archipelago. The total yearly pig export amounts to about 80,000 and cattle 20,000. The export prices, before the War were respectively Guilders 7.50 and 20.00 per head. Besides these main sources of income the Balinese have a lot of accessory and supplementary sources of income. The Native markets are operated mostly by the women, who sell fruit, pottery, mats, baskets, dried fish, vegetables, all kinds of candy, spices and flowers for the religious ceremonies. The Balinese are excellent craftsmen too and from all paints of view real artists. The gold and silver workers are famous for the real masterpieces and the gold and silver objets d'art find a ready market among the colossal number of American, French and English tourists, who spend a lot of money in the “Paradise of the East.”
The sale of all kinds of sculpture, weavings and paintings to the tourists gives a lot of artistic crafts- men an independent income. Some celebrated dancing groups get their living wholly from their artistic performances. In Bali one may see a wo- man laying bricks for European houses or breaking stones to pave a road (nearly all the five hundred miles of roads in Bali and Lombok are covered with asphalt) or find men in the market sitting at their sewing machines making blouses for women, but it would be unthinkable for a woman to paint a picture or to climb a coconut-tree.
The labour allotted to each sex in sharply defined ; agriculture, house-building, carpentry-work, wood and stone carving, writing, playing musical instruments is the work of men; women own, raise and sell chickens and pigs, but only men care for cows and buffaloes and ducks.
The K.P.M. carries out a lot of propaganda for the attractive “Island of the Lemons," which is the title of a film representing the daily life on Bali.
The Lombok ponies actually imported from Sum- ba and Sumbawa are renowned and the rearing of little horses is brought to a high level by the veterin- ary service. The races in Lombok are features of the season and the horses from the west, middle and east Lombok compete with ferocious en- thusiasm. The ponies are ridden by small katjongs and the book-makers are also present at the Lom- bok “derby.” Bali and Lombok have a consider- able amount of very comfortable Rest-houses, about two or four thousand feet above sea-level.
The description of Balinese art and the artists, the caste-system, death and cremation, witch-craft, temple rites and festivals, marriage and family life, law and justice, all very interesting subjects, is precluded by the lack of paper and space, and I have therefore chosen to give a rough outline of the economic life on the islands.
The islands have an abundance of economic possibilities, which is the reason why, although both islands are crowded the people as a whole are prosperous.
Both the Balinese and the Sassaks belong to the most peculiar and remarkable races of the D.E.I. Archipelago.
Kuching Market Price List.
Monthly Average Market Price from 20th May, 1948, to 20th June, 1948.
