Vol. LXXIV.
No. 1078.
Sarawak Gazette
PRICE
KUCHING, Friday, January 2nd, 1948.
20 CENTS
Contents.
The Sarawak Gazette.
FRIDAY, JANUARY 2nd,1948.
Births.
Ward.—At Kuching General Hospital on December 18th. a daughter, Annette Beresford to Olive Emily wife of Henry Church Ward, Segama Estate, Lahad Datu, B.N.B.
Stratford.—At Kuching General Hospital on December 26th, to Maree wife of R. A. Stratford, Resident Engineer S.E.S. Co., Sibu, a daughter—Lynn Maree.
1947.
The year that has just closed was the first full year of civil government since the occupation and may on the whole be regarded with satisfaction. His Excellency the Governor in his speech to the Council Negri in December dealt in detail with the material process that has been and is being made. The Financial Secretary filled in the crevices and it merely remains for the Sarawak Gazette, in its customary New Year review, to survey broadly a few of those aspects of the life of the Colony which help to illustrate the more weighty facts and figures previously made public by authority.
That fundamental factor in, the pursuit of happiness, the cost of living, showed throughout the year little tendency to rise and in some respects a distinct fall was apparent. The quantity of goods available in the shops steadily increased with the result that the complaints of shortages, which were so widespread a year ago, are now seldom heard. The new customs tariff, designed, it is understood, for the twofold purpose of assisting rehabilitation arid at the same time maintaining the level of this source of revenue, incurred some criticism from members of the public when it was published in December on the grounds that it would lower the standard of living of the poor man, but it is to be hoped that this prophecy will be falsified in the event. The absence of serious industrial trouble throughout the year affords substantial evidence that the real value of wages has not so far tended to fall. The Government padi purchase scheme, which came into operation in February, resulted in a very useful reserve of some 3,000 tons of padi being available for augmentation of the rice ration and for the relief of distressed areas during the lean period before, the new crop is reaped. The Second Division appeared to have had a particularly bud harvest and many Dayaks were looking for relief work.
Much emphasis has of course been laid on the Colony's development schemes. The arrival of officers from Africa to take charge of the Medical and Educational Departments respectively. and the steady growth of the Agricultural Depart- ment, resulted in the infusion of new energy and ideas into these important branches of the public service, and the preparation of far-reaching plans for the years that lie immediately ahead. Cryptic references that occurred from time to time in monthly reports to “flat-bottomed valleys” showed that a novel element had entered the traditional life of the District Officer.
The year can be said to have been chiefly devoted to the laying of firm foundations for the economic and social reforms that are to be adopted. The ever-recurring visits of " experts" to investigate and report on various concerns of the Colony inevitably produced a certain amount of good- humoured irritation amongst those who have already completed more than half their working life in Sarawak, hut there are few who fail to realise that the “expert” is not a mere pensioned-off play- boy. It is almost a platitude to point out that he is a very experienced and intensively trained man who must have reached a high degree of skill in his particular calling before earning the title sometimes so derisively bestowed on him. A development
scheme built up without the advice and assistance of such men would be built on sand. The tact and understanding with which our visitors have carried on their work and established friendly relations with those whose human nature could not help, in the first place, evoking a low growl have played no small part in the success of their inquiries. Another indispensable condition precedent to any real economic progress was provided by the Census of population which was triumphantly completed in November, in spite of the fact that in the early days many fears had been entertained that “anti- cession” propaganda might succeed in sabotaging it in some places. In practice it was found that, when the objects and scope of the Census were carefully and clearly explained, any opposition that had been previously expressed dwindled into in- significance and may in fact be said in the end to have disappeared entirely. Lastly, at the turn of the year, the preliminary work on the soil survey had been substantially completed and the next stage was due to begin.
However eager and efficient the officers charged with the work of social and economic reform may be it is clear that progress must be slow for the present on account of three main deficiencies—lack of data, lack of money, and lack of staff. The solution of the first of these problems is a question of time, the second was dealt with in detail in the Council Negri speeches previously referred to, but there is one aspect of the third on which little emphasis has so far been laid. It has been found difficult to recruit officers for certain departments, but an almost equally important consideration is the fact that a very large proportion of the service is not only inexperienced in the life and ways of Sarawak but inexperienced in the government of dependent peoples. Before the occupation the Senior Service of the Sarawak Government was comparatively small and the war wrecked havoc in its ranks. The result is that young officers to-day are being required to do duties and assume respon- sibilities in about a quarter of the time previously allotted to their predecessors. There are some in charge of very important administrative districts who have not passed their examinations in the Malay language. It is true that the only really useful officer is the one who is learning all the time but there is a difference between reading in the university and toddling in the kindergarten. The newcomers, being for the most part ex-soldiers, are, on the whole, older, wiser, and more experienced in the ways of the world than was the case with newcomers before the war, when officers were recruited straight from the university or even, not so long ago, straight from their public schools. Nevertheless even these advantages cannot compare with the priceless asset of having lived and worked and moved about in the country for a number of years. Although on the surface the efficiency of the service may be as great as ever it was it stands to reason that the lack of “old hands” must to a certain extent obstruct the turning wheels.
The crime position improved enormously during the year and no cases call for special mention. In two areas, Kanowit and Bintulu, difficulty was experienced with Dayak recalcitrants. In Kanowit the trouble seems to have been the familiar one of a natural leader of the people assuming to himself unwarranted airs and exhibiting an aggressive attitude towards government officers principally for the delectation of his friends and admirers. How- ever the situation appeared to have been handled with the skill expected from officers experienced in
this kind of work and, in the second half of the year, the breeze subsided. In Bintulu the dispute was produced by an alleged shortage of farming land and at the end of the year negotiations were in hand for settling the trouble by agreement. Stories of hostile movements of Ukits from Dutch Borneo occasionally threatened the peace of the Ulu Rejang and similar tales caused similar un- easiness in the Ulu Sadong. No affrays resulted, however, and the King’s peace was undisturbed.
In the absence of any crime wave or Ulu strife the most serious menaces to the well-being of the Colony may be said to have been malaria, bombs, and crocodiles. Many parts of the country were affected by the first of these evils but the most serious out-break seems to have occurred in the Miri District towards the end of 1946, diminishing during the early part of 1947. In several places through- out the Colony it was found that deaths were occurring from pneumonia consequent upon bathing while in a condition of fever. With the rehabilit- ation of Miri and the institution of anti-malaria measures it is hoped that malaria in that area will give less cause for concern in the future. However the imponderables in the malaria problem do not allow of complacency. Chest complaints were com- mon and an unusually good fruit season produced an outbreak of stomach ills early in the year.
Unexploded bombs continued to constitute a formidable danger and fatal accidents occurred. In October the Bomb Disposal Squad at last arrived and was still engaged on its bénéficient work at the end of the year. If anybody jumped into the river to avoid the bombs he very soon encountered as deadly an enemy. An astonishing number of crocodile stories were produced from various parts of the Colony. This reptile did a good deal of damage to life and limb during the course of the year and as usual the reports vied with each other in attributing to the beasts with which they respectively dealt an extraordinary size and un- precedented ferocity.
Two meetings of the Council Negri were held, one in May and the other in December. The pro- ceedings of the first were reported in the Sarawak Gazette for June and an account of the second appears in this number. We must look elsewhere, however, for the really significant political develop- ments of 1947. Throughout the year Hie Excel- lency the Governor, often accompanied by His Excellency the Governor-General, travelled widely throughout the Colony, visiting the most remote stations and enjoying the hospitality of the most unsophisticated ' peoples, thereby carrying on, emphasising, and even enlarging, the Brooke tra- dition of personal administration and the mainten- ance of close contact between the government and the governed. While His Excellency has been explaining official policy to, and obtaining the views of, the native chiefs on their own stamping grounds, Divisional and District Advisory Councils, and Advisory Boards on a tribal basis, have been constituted throughout the Colony composed of the representatives of the various races within the area covered by each. The first steps in a ‘‘pyramid” constitution have been begun, the District Councils electing members from their own bodies to the Divisional Councils, which will, it is understood, in due course be entrusted with the task of electing some at least of the unofficial members of the Council Negri. It is reported that the New Year will witness further developments. Native Authorities are being constituted by notification in
the Government Gazette and local treasuries are being established under the control, subject of course to supervision, of those Authorities. The Authorities will possess certain statutory powers but no legislation exists as regards their "treasuries, " which are consequently at the present stage of development merely the creation of administrative arrangements, all taxes being levied and collected by or on behalf of the central government which makes an allocation therefrom, duly appearing in the Estimates and voted in the annual Supply Ordinance, to the Native Authorities. Legislation of some sort to define more clearly the duties and responsibilities of these Authorities and treasuries will of course have to be enacted fairly soon, and perhaps the opportunity will be taken at the same time to provide for the vesting of powers, as opposed to the privilege of tendering advice, in the local Councils at such future date as the central government may consider suitable.
Mention must also be made of the various Chinese Advisory Boards. As was to be expected they show themselves particularly forceful and politically intel- ligent. The principal danger appears to be that the reports of their proceedings, which sometimes appear in the local press, may tend to give the public the impression that they have legislative powers.
It is once again to be regretted that no review of the year would be complete without some men- tion of “the anti-cession” campaign. It has remained sporadically active in Kuching and its agents have succeeded in rousing occasional mani- festations of collaboration, principally amongst the Malays, in a few of the outstations. In Kuching the “campaign” has mainly taken the form of “demonstrations,” held about once a quarter, and hospitality to Mrs. Brooke. The resignations of certain Government servants early in the year were referred to by His Excellency in his address to the Council Negri. Apart from their catastrophic effect on Malay education they seem not to have impeded administration to any profound extent. The only- ugly aspect of the whole affair has been that unscrupulous persons have made the “cause” an excuse for extorting money from the more primitive inhabitants of Sarawak. A few prosecutions and prison sentences have, however, satisfactorily dealt with this excrescence. Otherwise the “anti-cession" propaganda is at present negligible in its import- ance, but some energy and capacity for mischief might be injected into it if leaders and opportunities became available. At the close of 1947 the entirely "non-political” Junior Civil Service Association had ten times as much life in it.
And so the Colony advances, slowly but surely, economically, socially and politically. No pro- gressively-minded man can have any doubt about the intrinsic worth of the reforms before us, but sometimes a still small voice is heard lodging a tiny caveat. Some of the minor advocates of "develop- .ment” seem to talk as if the Colonial Office had suddenly discovered a virgin and untilled field of primitive mankind. It cannot be Loo strongly emphasised that there was a Sarawak before July 1st, 1946, that she possessed a proud, though perhaps anomalous, position amongst the peoples of the world, and that not the least cause for her complacency was the fact that, under the wise and liberal guidance of the Brookes, she had avoided many of the pitfalls into which parts of the Colonial Empire had fallen. The most loyal servant of the old regime realises its shortcomings—the capricious
rule which is unavoidable when the ruler is respon- sible to nobody, the neglect of education, the deplorable deficiencies in the Medical and Health Department, the absence of any real agricultural policy. But that some loyal servant knows that the Brookes had something which an omnipotent bureaucracy might have missed. It is a vulgar ami a dangerous error to assume that the old must be all wrong and that the new must be all right. It is generally agreed that a synthesis should be developed between the wise principles of Brooke Rule on the one hand and modern and enlightened ideas of colonial administration on the other. Official policy is not of course afflicted with the sort of myopia to which we refer, but it is desirable that everyone concerned with the affairs of the Colony, however unimportant they may be, should treat with respect and deference the great Sarawak that has gone before, and learn not only from her mis- takes but also from her virtues.
It is inevitable that in due course a real, live nationalist” and “independence” movement will arise and when it comes it will not be connected with the name of Anthony Brooke. In sponsoring and insisting on educational schemes the British consciously aid and abet this development. The manner and dress in which it comes is largely the responsibility of the administrators of to-day. If we so shape our policy, if we so conduct our public duties, if, even, we so manage our private affairs, that, at the end of it all, those to whom we hand the reins of government look upon us as friends and colleagues rather than as interlopers and masters, as guardians who carefully nurtured and preserved native rights and native interests rather than as officials who thoughtlessly sacrificed them, we may succeed in preserving a special relationship between the mother country and the peoples who erstwhile were dependent on her, and thereby earn, as the Brookes have earned, the gratitude of Sara- wak, the sympathy of the world, and the respect of posterity.
Council Negri.
The Council Negri met from December 8th to December 10th and in three mornings and one afternoon passed fourteen Bills through all their stages. Reference to the regrettable absence of debate is made in our Notes, and Commente. Two of the Bills were concerned with the appropriation of public money, two with tidying up the legal position regarding the revised edition of the laws, one with the protection of the interests of arrack "farmers,” one with the reception of lunatics from Brunei, one with amending the law regulating the Post Office, one with the administration of the extradition laws, one with the relation of the period of occupation to the pensions laws, and one with the incorporation of the Financial Secretary. The remaining four were probably the most important. The Societies Bill proposed to sweep away the old law based on compulsory registration, the chief merit of which was that, by making unlawful all associai ions of two persons, not excepting married couples, which were not registered as societies, and imposing the death penalty for the management thereof, it induct'd hnsbands to retire into the shadow's and thereby became a powerful stimulant to the cause of sex equality. The Trade Unions and Trade Disputes Bill provided for the regis-
tration of trade unions and the regulation of trade disputes hut did not, as some people had appeared to think, legalise trade unions, because, as was pointed out, they were not previously illegal organisations and many were in fact registered under the law regulating societies. The Customs Bill provided new and comparatively involved legislation for the regulation of Customs, not, perhaps it must be added, meaning “adat” by that term, and the Circuit Courts Bill included very con- siderable restrictions on the powers of Residents’ Courts, and provisions for the creation of two Circuit Courts, staffed by qualified judges, which would take over the bulk of the Residents’ Courts work.
The Governor.
In opening the Council His Excellency the Governor said :
“Mr. President, Members of the Council Negri :
It gives me great pleasure to welcome you to this, the second budget meeting of Council.
In addition to the Supply Bill making provision for the service of the Colony for the coming year (1948), there are a number of other important Bills, some of them complex and technical, which await your consideration. Included amongst them are the Trade Unions Bill and the Customs Bill.
In accordance with the provisions of the Colonial Development and Welfare Act it is necessary that before any assistance under this Act can be given to any Colony, there should be adequate Trade Unions legislation for the protection of the rights of labour employed on development and other works. Sarawak had no such legislation in the past but the Colony has now embarked upon a course of planned development, for which it depends in huge part on the assistance of funds granted under the Act. The Trade Unions Bill is a piece of legis- lation essential to the progress and development of the Colony and in tunc with modem conditions.
Our existing Customs laws do not accord with modern practice and hitherto have not been collated in a form convenient both to the public and those charged with their administration. The Customs Bill before you is designed to overcome these handicaps.
Before dealing with the Supply Bill. I would like briefly to review the financial position of the Colony.
At its last budget meeting, Council provided in its estimates for 1947 for a total expenditure, including special and extraordinary, of slightly over $11 million against expected revenue of approxi- mately $6 1/2 million. The resultant deficit of over $4 1/2 million was to be met from the Colony’s unappropriated surplus, which it was anticipated would thereby be reduced (from over $8 1/2 million) to about $4 million by the end of the current year. There is a wide discrepancy between these original estimates arid the revised estimates for 1947 which are before you—a discrepancy which reflects the uncertain and unpredictable economic conditions which prevail all over the world as a result of the war. This year Sarawak has been fortunate. The estimated deficit on the year’s working has been reduced from $4 1/2 million to about $3/4 of a million only, to be exact $757,000, and the Colony’s un- appropriated surplus is expected to stand at the end of the year at over $7 1/2 million.
This satisfactory result of the year’s working has come about, not through failure to expend the monies voted by this Council for the essential and
social services and for the rehabilitation of the Colony during the year but largely through the un- expectedly rapid recovery of trade and commerce and resultant buoyancy of our revenues, which are derived mainly from customs dues.
The revised estimate of expenditure for the current year is $12,150,000 compared with $11,097,000 originally voted, an excess of over $1 million. The amount originally provided to meet the anuually recurrent expenditure on personal emoluments and other charges will be exceeded by a little under $1/2 million, and that provided for Special and Extraordinary Expenditure by a slightly larger amount. Despite the great difficulties imposed by the shortage of equipment and materials that have to be imported and by the lack of technical staff, which seems at present to be almost unobtainable, expenditure on rehabilitation and new works closely approximated to the amount (about $2 million) provided in the original estimates, an achievement on which the Director of Public Works and his small staff are to be con- gratulated. Nevertheless the experience of the past year has shown that there is a definite limit to the amount of work that can be undertaken while the present conditions of acute shortage obtain. This experience will be reflected in the amount of money it is suggested that you should provide for public works in the coming year.
The revised estimate of revenue for 1947 is $11,394,000, an excess of nearly $5 million over the original estimate. 70% or a little over $3 1/2 million of this increase is derived from customs duties, 12% or about $600,000 from the sale to dealers and the general public of "the new provisional Sarawak stamps surcharged with the Royal Cypher which were issued this year, and the balance from a variety of items. Steps were taken during the year to increase the import duties on liquor and tobacco, to raise Forestry fees and royalties, and to increase a number of municipal dues but the main reason for this very substantial increase in revenue is, as I have said, the unexpectedly large volume of our imports and exports. There is one significant feature to which 1 invite Council’s attention. Despite the fact that products such as sago flour, pepper, jelutong, damar and illipe nuts fetched good prices throughout the year and were exported in much larger quantities than anticipated (the export of sago flour is more than double the original estimate), yet out of a revenue of nearly $4 1/2 million derived from export duties. $2,825,000 or 64% is obtained from rubber. The trade and economy of the country depends far too much on one single commodity.
Draft Estimates for 1948.
You will be considering the Supply Bill and the draft estimates of revenue and expenditure for 1948 in some detail at a later stage. I would like to comment on some of the main features. The revenue for the coming year is estimated at nearly $11 1/2 million, which provides a surplus of $2 3/4 million over the annually recurrent expenditure estimated at over $8 1/2 million. A large part of this increase in annually recurrent expenditure is attributable to increases in salary rates and the fact that the cost of living allowance, which is costing the country $1,150,000 this year, is now classified as recurrent instead of being shown as Special Expenditure, as was the case in the 1947 Estimates. These estimates contain three new features of particular interest, namely, the provision of grants- in-aid to a number of Local Treasuries, which it is
proposed to establish, the creation of a Department of Co-operation to deal with Co-operative Societies, and particulars of approved schemes financed by the Colonial Development and Welfare Fund. I shall have more to say about these later. Special and Extraordinary Expenditure is estimated at just under $4 1/4 million of which 67% ($2,842,000) is to be spent on replacements and rehabilitation, 26% ($1,150,000) on new works and the balance of 7% ($282,000) on other items. This gives a total estimated expenditure for 1948 of nearly $13 million and leaves an estimated deficit on the year's working of nearly $1 1/2 million to be met from surplus balances.
In preparing these estimates your Finance Com- mittee has had the task of effecting a compromise between the need to press on with the work of rehabilitation and development in order to restore and improve the economic life and productive capacity of the country and the limitations imposed by the acute and continuing shortage of materials, equipment and technical staff and by the desirability of not drawing on storing balances while the world- wide dollar crisis persists.
There are certain encouraging features in the figures I have given you. The Colony is in a much better financial position than was anticipated a year ago. The deficit for 1947 is $3 3/4 million less than expected. A comprehensive programme of public works up to the limits imposed by the shortages of staff and materials has been undertaken and is being curried on. Both in 1947 and 1948 the costs of (he rehabilitation programme exclusive of new works will, it is expected, be largely met from revenue.
But these facts provide no grounds for com- placency. The social services of the Colony are deficient and not in accord with modern standards. As soon as our immediate difficulties due to the lack of trained staff, teachers, dispensers and others, are overcome, a much greater proportion of the Colony’s revenues will have to be devoted to the maintenance and steady improvement of the health and education sendees. The economy of the country is still too dependent on rubber and its revenues on the vagaries of one unstable market. Any pro- longed slump in the price of rubber can still strike a crippling blow at our revenues. There is urgent need to diversify the economy of the country, to develop its resources and find new sources of revenue. It is possible that further calls on the financial resources of the Colony will result from the activities of two important Commissions that have been at work during the year.
A Commission to assess war damage claims in Sarawak, North Borneo and Brunei has established its headquarters at Jesselton and started work. The public of all three territories has been invited to submit claims in accordance with the directions issued. It is not yet possible to give any reason- ably accurate estimate of the amount of these claims. There are many complex problems involved, not the least of which is where the money is to be found to pay them.
Another Commission under the chairmanship of Sir Harry Trusted was charged with the task of investigating the question of salaries and other conditions of service of all Government officials and employees in the three Borneo territories. The Commission spent some time in Sarawak studying the problem and hearing evidence. It has now completed its task and I have just received its report. I am anxious that all members of the Civil Service should be presented with fair and reason- able salary scales and terms of service consistent
with post-war conditions. The recommendations made in the report will receive immediate consider- ation and I trust that it will be possible to bring into effect early in the coming year those improve- ments which it is found practicable to adopt. Any such improvements will inevitably involve an increase in the annually recurrent expenditure of the Colony.
In these circumstances consideration has had to be given to ways and means of increasing the revenues in order to carry the country through until development plans can produce their effect. A committee appointed by me to examine this question has completed its work and its report is now receiving consideration.
In my address to Council last May I outlined the schemes then under preparation for the develop- ment of the Colony’s resources and the improve- ment of its social services with the aid of the Colonial Development and Welfare Fund. Since then a number of schemes have been approved. Four schemes, providing for a soil survey, improve- ment of the rubber industry, the holding of a census and the establishment of dispensaries, details of which you will find printed in the draft estimates, have already been initiated.
The Soil Survey is being undertaken by the Agricultural Department and will extend over a period of three years. From the results of this survey, as they come in, it will be possible to determine the areas most suitable for wet-padi cultivation and to prepare plans for their develop- ment. There is a world shortage of rice, which is likely to persist for some years, and Sarawak does not produce enough rice to feed its people. An immediate start will be made on the development of suitable areas found by the survey.
Already there is evidence that small holders will welcome the three year scheme for the improvement of the Rubber Industry by the provision of high yielding planting material and by demonstration of improved methods of maintenance, tapping and manufacture. On hearing of the scheme one Iban sent an advance order for plants and accompanied this with cash. Unfortunately it will be some time before the new nurseries can provide planting material in any quantity or trained staff is available to give advice, demonstration and instruction.
As you all know a Census, the first of its kind in Sarawak, has just been carried out. Enumeration of the people, which began in August with nouse numbering, was completed by the end of November. Full reports have not yet been received from all stations but there is every reason to believe that the count was accurate. Provisional population figures should be available for publication about the end of the year but the extraction of the detailed final statistics is a slow process and the final Census Report cannot appear until towards the end of 1948.
The Medical and Health Services of the Colony have been benefited by a free grant of $670,000 which is to be used to provide and maintain over a period of five years 18 new mobile and static dis- pensaries, almost as many as there are in the country at present. Mostly they will be established in those parts of Sarawak which at present lack any form of medical service. Owing to lack of staff only two dispensaries, both mobile, will be established at once. The training of the dressers and others required to man and work the rest of these new dispensaries is being undertaken forthwith. The full scheme will not be achieved until the third year.
Council will be glad to learn that free grants to a total of nearly $1 million have just been approved tb carry out two important educational schemes, namely the establishment and maintenance (1) of a teacher training institution and secondary school and (2) of a long-house school for Iban speaking married couples. Approval was received too late for the details of expenditure to be incorporated in the printed draft estimates before you. Council will bear with me if I describe these schemes in some detail as both are of great importance to the future of education in the Colony and the progress of its peoples.
As you are aware, there is a widespread demand for education throughout Sarawak, especially among the large section of the population for whom educational facilities hitherto have been almost entirely lacking. The need for primary schools is obvious and pressing but the teachers are not avail- able. A training institution capable of turning out 50 trained teachers a year is essential as a first step to the provision of primary schools. At the same time, to maintain a supply of suitably educated persons not only for training as teachers but for the staffing and expansion of Government services and the proper development of the Colony, a secondary school, to bring selected pupils from existing primary schools up to the Cambridge Senior Certificate standard, is an equally vital need. A few Mission Schools provided some secondary education before the war, but ceased to function during the war years, and are insufficient, now that they are re-starting, to meet present demand, apart from making up the losses of the war period.
These two institutions, a teacher training centre and a secondary school, are therefore the Colony’s most urgent educational requirements. At the same time the construction of permanent buildings is impossible at present owing to shortage of materials and staff. In view of the expense and delay that would be involved in permanent building, both needs are to be met under a single scheme which will make use of the existing temporary buildings at Batu Lintang, originally constructed as a Military camp and used later by the Japanese as an internment camp. This will meet immediate needs at a comparatively low cost and admit of replacement in due course by permanent establish- ments on a smaller or larger scale when the long- term requirements of the Colony become clearer.
At the Batu Lintang centre accommodation will be provided for 200 secondary pupils and 100 student teachers, who will have separate dormitories and class-rooms. A single European principal will be in charge of the whole centre with an Asiatic Assistant Principal in charge of each of the two wings. There will be nine other teachers, three for the training college and six for the school. The principal and four teachers will be resident. It is anticipated that 7 months will be required for the necessary construction work before pupils can be received. The grant made from the Colonial Development and Welfare Fund provides for the capital expenditure and the running of the centre for a period of five years.
Before describing the long-house scheme, it is appropriate at this point to make mention of the generous gift of £50,000 ($425,000) received from the Rajah to be used for the furtherance of education amongst the inhabitants of Sarawak. On behalf of the Government and the people of Sarawak I wish to express publicly our sincere thanks and appreciation for this generous action on the part of His Highness who has thus given con-
vincing proof of the close personal interest he continues to take in the welfare and progress of the people of this country. It is proposed to use this gift to provide the permanent establishments which will in due course replace the temporary buildings at Batu Lintang and to name them the "Rajah Brooke Training Centre."
The long-house scheme has been designed to meet the special needs of the large Iban-speaking population, living in the interior of the country, whose educational welfare has in the past been almost completely neglected. If their living con- ditions are to be improved, it is not sufficient merely to provide primary schools for the children : the adults too must be taught to read and write in their own vernacular and educated in elementary hygiene and improved methods of agriculture. The present scheme proposes to attack this problem by selecting 30 young married couples from various long-houses and giving them a two year course in these practical matters. They will then return to their own com- munities to spread the new ideas. The training centre will itself be a model long-house, in which the trainees will live and work. The Agricultural Education Officer, Mr. Bewsher, will be the Principad of the centre, assisted by his wife, who is a trained nurse. They are both known to most of you; they have a sound knowledge of the people, their language and customs, and I think you will agree with me that a better choice could not be made. The staff will include in addition one male and one female teacher, one craft instructor and one clerk, and provision is also made for visiting craft instructors. The scheme is naturally on a small scale, as it is in the nature of an experiment. The long-house school will be situated at Kanowit, the economic hub of a large interior area, where it will have considerable demonstration value beside its primary object. The grant made covers the cost of erecting the long-house school and the run- ning of two courses of two years each, lasting from May next year to April 1952. If this experiment proves successful I hope that it will be possible to establish more schools of a similar kind in other parts of the Colony to serve the needs of the upriver people.
All the schemes which I have so far mentioned are financed from the $5 million allocated specific- ally to this Colony from the Colonial Development and Welfare Fund. At its last budget meeting a year ago I informed Council that Sarawak would in addition receive the benefit of topographical, geological and other surveys, of the scholarship schemes and of other services paid for from a central fund. A very considerable measure of assistance is being given to the Colony from this source.
An aerial topographical survey of certain selected areas began seven months ago. It will be some time before new maps of these areas can be pro- duced but the photographs taken of these areas have already proved of considerable assistance to the Lands and Surveys, the Agricultural and Forestry Departments and to those concerned with the development of our mineral resources.
A team of experts is now touring Sarawak investigating our coal deposits. All known deposits are being examined. North Borneo is included within their sphere. As a result of their work we should be in a position to know before .the middle of next year what, if any, coal deposits in the Colony, having regard to their quality, extent and accessibility, merit further detailed examination with a view to their exploitation.
In this connection I might mention the Admiralty survey, carried out during the year by h.m.s. "Sharpshooter," of the Batang Lupar from its mouth to Lingga. If the Selantik coal measures are found to be worth exploiting, the value of Lingga as a possible port of exit can be assessed from this survey. H.M.S. "Sharpshooter" also surveyed the Rejang River as far as Sibu and as a direct result of the work done a 9,000 tons cargo ship, the "Hindustan", was enabled to enter the river in August and cleared for Australia with a cargo of logs and sawn timber.
Dr. Edmund Leach travelled all over Sarawak for three months making plans for the com- prehensive Socio-Economic Survey, which is to follow later. This survey, though the benefits to be derived from it may not be so readily apparent, is of great importance. It is needed to ensure that the measures taken to improve living conditions do not conflict with but follow lines best suited to the stage of development which the people have reached and to their customary ways of life and thought.
A scheme has been approved, and $118,000 provided, for a survey of the fisheries of Sarawak over a period of two years. Mr. E. Banks, who has had long experience of this country and is known to most of you, will conduct the survey. He is undergoing a course of training in certain technical aspects of his work and is expected to arrive and begin work early in the new year. He will be assisted by a master fisherman who will investigate the possibility of employing power methods and of improving fishing technique in waters near Sarawak. The survey is a necessary preliminary to the preparation of plans to help the fishermen of Sarawak. Amongst other things that will be investigated, is the possibility of producing fish meal locally, both a high grade edible meal and a lower grade meal for agricultural use.
Two further schemes which have been approved are shared jointly with North Borneo and Brunei. One is a scheme for a Malarial Research Survey of the three territories over a period of 3 years. From this survey it is hoped to obtain sufficient inform- ation about the causation and incidence of malaria in British Borneo to enable the most effective measures to be taken to deal with this menace.
The other joint scheme covers a period of 4 years and is a Scholarship Scheme to enable residents in Borneo territories to obtain the qualifications necessary for appointment or promotion to the higher grades of the public service. A sum of $42,000 has been provided for this purpose. Un- fortunately, owing to the low educational standards pervailing here as a result of the Japanese occupation, there are at the moment very few prospective candidates possessing sufficiently high educational qualifications to take advantage of this scheme. When the Batu Lintang secondary school has been in operation for a couple of years, it is hoped that a satisfactory number of candidates will be forthcoming.
I have mentioned only those schemes which have been approved and on which work has alreadv started or is about to start. Action is being taken in connection with the other schemes, which I described to you in May last, for the development of our agricultural resources and the improvement of communications. I shall hope to be able to report further progress at your next meeting.
Sarawak has had the benefit of visits from a number of experts who have studied local conditions and given us practical and helpful advice. They
have come from the Colonial Office, the staff of the Governor-General, that of the Special Commissioner, from the British Council, the United Nations Secretariat and elsewhere. Three technical advisers to the Secretary of State for the Colonies, who deal with medical and health affairs, with surveys and with fisheries, were particularly helpful. It is in large part due to their assistance that it has been possible to make an early start on the develop- ment schemes which fall within their spheres. It is fashionable in certain quarters to complain about the interference of Whitehall in local colonial affairs, its failure to protect local interests and its ignorance of local conditions. Sarawak has good reason to be grateful for the personal study of local conditions made by the Secretary of State's advisers, for the sympathetic interest taken in its affairs by the Colonial Office and for the prompt, practical and generous measure of assistance it has received not only from the Colonial Development and Welfare Fund but in the matter of urgently needed supplies of all kinds and in many other ways. Sarawak and its people have benefited very considerably from the fact that it is a full member of the Colonial Empire.
I do not propose in this address to give a detailed review of the activities of the various departments of Government during the year. I have referred to some of them, directly or by implication, in my review of the Colony’s financial position and of the developments now being initiated. An annual report of the Colony for 1947 will be published in due course and will contain a full account of them. There are however one or two matters which I feel should be mentioned now.
The trade of the Colony has not so far been markedly affected by the economic crisis through which the United Kingdom and the rest of Western Europe is passing. Some effect there must be and Sarawak, as a member of the sterling bloc, has its small part to play in helping towards recovery. By reducing the consumption of petrol, by restricting the import of luxury or unnecessary articles and ceasing to import goods whose purchase requires gold dollars, by avoiding any unnecessary reduction in the Colony’s surplus funds invested in England, we can help. The greatest help we can give is by increasing production for export, particularly of those commodities, such as rubber and jelutong, which earn gold dollars. Sarawak is doing all these things.
The supply position has steadily improved throughout the year. The rationing of all com- modities with the exception of rice and padi has ceased. Supplies of foodstuffs are being main- tained at an adequate level. The padi purchasing scheme sponsored by Government has, on the whole, been a success and will be continued for a further year. The local production of padi has increased but it must be increased further.
The task of preparing the Revised Edition of the Laws of the Colony, which this Council entrusted to the Chief Justice as Commissioner, has now been completed and three volumes are in the press. It is hoped to bring the Revised Edition into force by proclamation early in the New Year. It will also be necessary to make provision for the preparation of additional volumes dealing with subsidiary legis- lation.
I have already commented on the good work done by the Public Works Department despite serious difficulties. The shortage of qualified engineers has postponed the preparation of water supply schemes urgently needed at Mukah and at Sarikei
and Binatang. To relieve the situation at the two last named places arrangements have been made to supply water by means of barges, until a proper water supply can be provided.
The reorganisation, recruitment and training of the Sarawak Constabulary has proceeded satis- factorily throughout the year. An experienced police officer from Malaya has been appointed as Commissioner. Although seriously below strength in gazetted officers and trained personnel and handicapped by a shortage of transport, the Force has coped effectively with the increase in crime that followed the war. The incidence of serious crime in Sarawak is now little, if at all, greater than it was in pre-war days, a tribute both to the good work done by the Constabulary and to the law-abiding character of the people.
The activities of the Medical and Health Depart- ment have been curtailed by the lack of qualified doctors and of trained personnel. There are vacancies for six Medical Officers and a nursing sister. It is hoped that two or three of these will be filled early next year but, despite the unremitting efforts made on our behalf by the Colonial Office, doctors like civil engineers remain singularly elusive. There are now four Sarawak boys studying medicine in Singapore, two of them with the aid of scholarships, one of which was provided by this Government and the other by the Trustees of the Nuffield Foundation. Those who qualify will provide valuable recruits for our medical service but we shall have to wait five or six years for them. Dr. Liston of the Colonial Medical Service has been appointed Director and assumed control of the Department in July.
The staff of the Education Department has been strengthened during the year by the appointment of an Educational Adviser, Mr. Earnshaw, who acts as Director, and of an Education Officer. Mr. Earnshaw's wide and varied experience in Africa is proving of great value in planning the organisation and future development of education in this Colony.
Progress is held up by the lack of qualified teachers. This will be remedied by the Batu Lintang Training Centre, which I described earlier in my address. In the meantime nineteen student-teachers, comprising Malay, Dayak and Kenyah boys, have already begun training. Despite the shortage of teachers, it has been possible to open seven new Government Schools catering for Dayak, Kenyah and Kayan pupils. Five Mission Aided Schools have been re-opened and fifteen new Mission Schools established, mainly in the Dayak areas of the First and Third Divisions. Fourteen new Chinese Schools and eight new Private Schools, most of which are controlled by Dayak School Committees, have been registered. Evening classes have been organised in Kuching to assist entrants to the Government Service and have proved popular and successful.
Unfortunately similar encouraging progress cannot be recorded among the Malay community, who have in the past been specially favoured in the matter of Government schools. Anti-cession feeling has been particularly strong among Malay school teachers most of whom have been recruited and trained in Kuching. This led to the mass resignation of 87 out of 62 Malay teachers in April and the closing of 22 out of 62 Government Malay schools. Some of these teachers later
rejoined the service and seven of the schools have since been re-opened. This has been a serious set- back to the cause of Malay education but one that I hope will be only temporary. Schools will be re-opened as teachers become available.
There has been a considerable amount of activity during the year on the part of that section of the Malay community, centred for the most part in Kuching, who opposed the cession of Sarawak to His Majesty’s Government and are still unable to reconcile themselves to the change. In December last all Government servants on the Establishment were asked whether in view of tlie change in the status of Sarawak to that of a Crown Colony they were prepared to give loyal service to the new Government or wished to resign on conscientious grounds. Approximately 13% of the Government staff concerned resigned : all of them were Malays and 90% were stationed in Kuching. A number resigned on genuine conscientious grounds but many were influenced by the threat of social and religious boycott in the Kuching Kampongs and by the misleading reports that were then circulated—an, I may add, continue to lie circu- lated—that Mr. Anthony Brooke would shortly arrive in the country and take over the govern- ment. There is no reason to believe that Mr. Anthony Brooke himself had anything to do with these reports but their circulation provides a means whereby the more irresponsible and unscrupulous anti-cessionists can extract contributions and sub- scriptons. Much propaganda has been put about during the year in an attempt to persuade the people against cession but the bulk of the Population remain unaffected. I have toured Sarawak comprehensively and had many frank talks with leaders and responsible representatives of all sections of the various communities. Everything that I have seen and heard leads me to believe that an overwhelming majority of the people are in favour of or content with cession and that genuine opposition is confined, to a small section of Malays and Moslem Melanaus. No one can deplore more than I do the fact that the Malay com- munity is divided within itself by this issue and I give you my assurance that Government will do all in its power to heal the breach.
I have detained Council a long lime but I must crave your further indulgence while I speak of the political and constitutional developments that are now being initiated. In addresses made at the last two meetings of this Council I reminded members of Government’s intention to associate the people of Sarawak more closely with their Government and give them a greater say in the management of their own and their country’s affairs. This question has continuously engaged the close attention of myself and my advisers. As a result of many discussions and prolonged con- sideration a Note has been prepared setting out a scheme for the development of Local Government in Sarawak. This Note has been laid on the table of this Council, and I trust members will study it closely. I shall welcome any constructive criticisms or suggestions that members may wish to put forward.
It is considered that training in the art of self- government, of which the people of Sarawak have as yet no experience, can best be given in two ways: one is by the introduction of selected Sarawak citizens in greater numbers into the higher ranks of the Central Government Service, and the other, and more important is by the development of local government institutions.
At your last meeting I announced that as a first step District and Divisional Advisory Councils were being established on a representative basis in order to provide a recognised and ready means of consult- ing the people and enabling them through their representatives to express their views to Govern- ment on all matters affecting their welfare and progress. At this meeting you are being asked to vote the funds which will enable experiments to be undertaken in the establishment of a number of local authorities. Since training and experience in public finance is the essence of local as well as central self-government, it is proposed that each of these local authorities should have its own treasury. The items of expenditure which will be met by these treasuries and the sources from which they will derive their revenues are set out in the Note. Five Local Authorities, each with its own Treasury, are now to be established at Bau, Batang Lupar, Saribas, Sibu and Sebauh. The people concerned have been fully consulted and have expressed their agreement with these proposals.
Owing to the diversity of races in Sarawak and the different stages of development which they have reached, it is necessary to proceed cautiously in the early stages. If these initial experiments are successful and prove generally acceptable to the people, more local authorities will be established. Eventually the scheme will provide a net-work of elected and racially representative local authorities in each District vested by statute with limited executive and financial powers. These local authorities will elect representatives to an inter- racial District Advisory Council, where they will be able to represent the views of their people to the District Officer representing the Central Govern- ment. The District Council will provide an electoral college for the election of members to the Divisional Council. The Divisional Council in its turn will act as an electoral college for the elec tion of unofficial members to the central legislature, that is to the Council Negri, until such time as better standards of education and living justify a wider extension of the franchise.
Mr. President, Members of Council, you have listened patiently to a very long address. The year has been one of considerable activity. Sarawak is making steady progress towards recovery from the effects of the war and enemy occupation. The various Departments of Government are being strengthened and re-organised with a view to pro- viding the community with the higher standard of social and other services required by modern conditions. Measures have been initiated to develop the country’s natural resources, diversify its economy and improve the standard of living of its people. The first steps on the long road that leads towards self-government are being taken. My final words to you are that you, by your labours in this Council room and by your deeds, your words and your influence in whatever part of the country you reside, have your part—and it is an important part—to play in the progress and development of Sarawak."
The Financial Secretary.
The following extracts are from the speech of the Acting Financial Secretary in moving the second reading of the Supply Bill:
...............As this time last December, you passed a Supply Bill which budgeted for a deficit of $4,606,486,I am very pleased to be able to report to you, that on the provisional figures at present before me, it seems highly probable that the deficit
for 1947 will not now materially exceed $750,000, and it the present encouraging returns of revenue continue for the next few weeks, further substantial reduction of this sum seems possible.
This large reduction is due to two main factors— the first and most important has been the except- ional buoyancy in the revenues due to unexpectedly heavy rubber, sago and illipe nut exports, and other revenues, and thus increases have brought in over $4,903,000 in excess of the original Estimates. Although by comparison with the prices of all other natural products the price of rubber is still low, yet our planters have, aided by the Rubber Regulation Fund, made most strenuous and praise-worthy efforts at rehabilitation, as the following figures will show.
The total volume of exports of rubber for the 8 1/2 months in 1946 was 23,518 tons, and that for the 10 months of 1947 to the end of October being 27,754 tons. This, in a full year, would be over 33,000 tons, and compares very favourably in the circumstances with the annual average pre-war exports.
The exports of sago have so far totalled 35,000 against a pre-war average of roughly 25,000 tons.
Although this forecast I make is optimistic I wish to call your attention to the need for the extension of Government Social and Health services. We are receiving, and will continue to receive, substantial help from the Colonial Develop- ment and Welfare Fund, not only in respect of Capital Expenditure, but also in respect of Annually Recurrent Charges on the various approved schemes. At the end of five years, these Annually Recurrent charges will fall to be met by the Colony’s revenues, and to meet these and other services extra revenue will have to be found. We cannot stand still, and these services must continue to advance and expand. To do this we must have additional revenue and that revenue must come from the public.
I would draw your attention to the fact that not less than 69% of the total revenue of the Colony is derived from Customs Duties—the remaining balance arising from payinent for specific Govern- ment services, licences and direct taxes. This is an undesirable feature of our finances, and I must warn you that it will be necessary to adjust this proportion so that a larger share of the public revenues is raised by direct and more stable means.
There still exists, unfortunately, the impression (and one which I wish to dispel) that Government is an entity entirely divorced from the public. This, of course, is not so. Government is the trustee of the public, purse, and it is the public's money which pays for the services it receives. If the public requires an extension of services or greater grants, for instance, to schools, then it too must play its part.
Government does not of itself possess a bottom- less purse, and it cannot pass on that which it does not receive. The public must therefore be ready to accept both new and heavier taxes to enable Government to meet those extra commit- ments which are so desirable in the interests of, and for the welfare of, the people. On several occasions approaches have been made to Govern- ment for aid for a variety of purposes, yet on not one occasion has one single concrete proposal been put forward suggesting new means of raising additional revenue.
In this connection I may mention that the question of Income Tax is receiving the serious consideration of Government. This, however, is a step that requires careful investigation, and both care and thought are being given to all aspects of the problem.
Let us now turn to the Supply Bill itself, and the copy of the Estimates for 1948 which is on the table before you, and in doing this I would like to mention the very careful and detailed scrutiny the Finance Committee appointed by you from your numbers have given to every item you are now being asked to vote.
We are entirely satisfied that no unnecessary expenditure has been included, and that no essential item for which funds could be voted has been omitted.
The Revenue Estimates disclose that no important increases are expected over the Revised Estimates for 1947, but on the expenditure side there are one or two items to which I would particularly like to draw your attention. The first of these is the continued expansion of the Agri- culture Department. We must continue to expect further increases here as our activities extend in this field. We must endeavour so to increase our production of rice and other foodstuffs that our dependence on other countries is reduced, and that the strain on our foreign exchange resources is relieved.
The Constabulary Vote shows a marked increase.; the re-organisation of the Force is proceeding steadily and the measures so far taken have already had a marked effect on the reduction and detection of crime.
The Medical and Health Department continues to expand and schemes under the Colonial Develop- ment and Welfare Fund for the bringing of medical facilities to persons not in close proximity to Government stations are now well in hand.
A considerable increase will be noted in the sum allocated to Public Works. This department is the hardest hit of all in respect of senior technical personnel, and of the vast amount of rehabilitation that has to be undertaken only a proportion can be handled in each year. You will be interested to know that of the figures of $2,414,000 for Special and Extraordinary Expenditure no less a sum than $1,552,000 or 64% is for works of a rehabilitation character, and it is particularly important to note that this sum exceeds the total estimated deficit.
You will note that the item for Food Control and Supplies, which appeared as a charge in the Final Supply Bill 1947, has disappeared from the main heads and now appears as an Appendix to the Estimates ; the reason for this is that it was decided during the year that the Supplies Organisation should be placed on a semi-commercial basis, and that all costs incurred in the adminis- tration of this department should be met from the profits accruing from the sale of supplies.
I have noted from the Malayan Press references to large deficits in the administration of their equivalent organisation. I am pleased to be able to report to you that although we were faced with many of the difficulties encountered in Malaya, these were on a smaller scale, and we were able so to adjust our prices that small profit on turn-
over was taken; the object of taking a profit being firstly to cover the cost of operating and thus spread the incidence of that cost evenly, and secondly to build up a reserve to meet those unforeseen and unexpected losses which are not infrequent in these uncertain days. We have now reached a situation where that reserve is considered to be adequate to meet any eventuality, and in con- sequence the loading of prices of articles for sale is being reduced.
You will have been disappointed during thia session that no Bill has been brought before you to deal with the question of debts and other allied problems arising from the period of enemy occupation. I refer to the much publicised and eagerly awaited "Debtor/Creditor" Relationship Bill.
This is a question of such complexity that it has been impossible to reach a stage where a Bill whose provisions would be uniformly fair to the main volume of debtors and creditors could be prepared. It will be as much a disappointment to you as to me, particularly those who have looked forward to an early raising of the moratorium.
As soon, however, as a stage is reached when a satisfactory Bill can be presented, and this will certainly occur before next May. it may be necessary to call a special meeting of this Council. It is the desire of Government that this piece of Legislation should appear on the statute book at the earliest possible moment."
Notes and Comments.
The Sarawak Gazette unbends sufficiently to wish its readers a Happy New Year.
The Sarawak Gazette respectfully congratulates His Excellency the Governor on being awarded the k.c.m.g.. in the New Year Honours.
His Excellency the Governor-General arrived in Kuching on December 15th and left on the follow- ing morning. His Excellency the Governor left Kuching for Jesselton on December 30th and passed through on December 31st on his way to Singapore.
As is reported elsewhere in this issue the Council Negri met in December. It is becoming increas- ingly clear that the unofficials require a leader and honesty compels us to admit that it is unlikely that he will be found elsewhere than in the European community. The absence from the Council’s discussions of Father Anthony Mulder, who is still, we believe, on leave, of Mr. Bewsher. who has joined the Government service, and of Father Howes, who, in the celebrated "cession" Meeting, substituted for Mr. Bowsher. is sorely felt. Mr. Khoo Peng Loong valiantly opposed the second reading of the Trade Unions and Trade Disputes Bill, and made one interjection in the Committee stage of the Circuit Courts Bill, but after that he appeared to think that he had gone as far in discourtesy as could be permitted and the Acting Financial Secretary (Mr. Gascoigne) was allowed to get away with his Supply Bill scot-free, and this although, as we understand on very credible authority, vivacious discussion was over-
heard outside the Council Chamber regarding the alleged iniquity of the provisions made for building houses for the “ang-mo perentah." Mr. Ong Hap Leong and Mr. Tan Bak Lirn raised a variety of matters on the adjournment but, as the President pointed out on more than one occasion, adequate replies cannot be expected if the provisions of Standing Orders regarding the giving of notice are not complied with. Those Standing Orders which deal with the asking of questions and the moving of resolutions remain a dead letter because un- officials refrain from taking advantage of the rights which they confer with the result that the proceed- ings on the first day, after His Excellency the Governs has left, are purely formal. The “standing members" still remain an anomaly. The doubt that exists as to whether or not they are in essence “official" members contributes to their inarticulacy. This failing, which is common to all members, but, it is understood, would certainly not be common to “official" members if they were given half a chance, is the direct result of nearly one hundred years of benevolent despotism interspersed with periods of semi-benevolent bureaucracy. It should be candidly confessed that lack of educational facilities must also bear a large part of the blame. No one is more aware of this fact than the “standing" and "unofficial" members themselves. We hope that the Native Officers concerned will not mind us recording that it was a most instructive experience to hear one very ex- perienced and efficient Native Officer attempting to persuade, unfortunately in vain, another very experienced and efficient Native Officer to raise on the adjournment the question of the extension of the "Simanggang Road." An able leader of un- officials, with a power of expressing himself firmly and clearly and with a wide knowledge of the people and customs of this country, is much wanted, but it is not, thank heavens, for the Sarawak Gazette to suggest where he may be found. Perhaps a Divisional or District Advisory Council will provide the solution for it appears from all reports that in some of these assemblies at any rate the repre- sentatives of the people are making themselves heard.
The Council Negri period was as usual attended by a good deal of festivity. The weather was un- kind to the garden party at the Astana but seemed to do little damage to the spirits of the huge con- course of guests. At a reception at the residence of the Acting Chief Secretary (Mr. Aikman) a film in six reels of colour was shown depicting the centenary celebrations of 1941. It is understood that this film was made on behalf of the Sarawak Government and has recently been discovered in Singapore. It is difficult to exaggerate its immense success. The beauty of the subject, the skill of the photography, the memories evoked by those faces which we shall see no more, and, it must be added, the efficiency of the operator, Mr. L. D. Kennedy, all combined to make this a most impressive and entertaining evening. It is to be hoped that it will be found possible to show this film to a much wider audience. It is salutary to be so forcibly reminded that even before the dawn of the brave new world there was a Sarawak which could rightly take great pride in herself. Not the least pleasurable part of the evening was the sound of hoarse chuckles emanating from one of the principal male stars. Temonggong Koh. sitting in the front row of the auditorium, whose frequent appearances were twice greeted with applause.
The official report of the General Meeting of the Sarawak Association in London and an account of the cocktail part y which followed are reproduced on another page. Mr. Aplin in a covering letter urges that more persons working in Sarawak should join the Association. It was a wise decision to throw open the doors to everyone, quite irrespective of the date on which their connection with Sarawak began. If any Sarawak reader would be willing to act as a kind of corresponding secretary in the Colony, thereby constituting the link between the Association in London and the members out here, he is requested to communicate with the editor. It is understood that very little work will be involved but more information is being sought on this point.
The many friends of Mr. J. A. Smith, until recently Sarawak Government Agent in London, will be delighted to hear that he has been awarded the o.b.e., in the New Year Honours.
The Sarawak Gazette congratulates the following gentlemen who have been awarded the British Empire Medal :
Abang Mustapha bin Abang Haji Abdul Gapor.
Mr. Limah Bee.
Mr. Peter Liew.
Mr. Jugah anak Lapoh
We much regret to read in the Straits Times of December 18th of the death in Jesselton of Mr. G.C. Woolley, Grand Old Man of North Borneo, and brother of a famous archeologist and a parson V.C. He had been in Borneo for forty-six years. In the first part of 1945 Mr. Woolley, at the age of 67, suffered a very severe ordeal for one month in the cells at Lintang Camp. This sentence had been awarded to him for translating the Malay half of the Japanese-controlled local paper, the unlawful smuggling of which into camp was the cause of the death of Mr. Le Gros Clark and six other internees. Mr. Woolley endured a terrible experience for one of his age, since it included innumerable vicious assaults, with great fortitude. According to the report published in the Straits Times he refused to give evidence against the Japanese in question on the grounds that reprisals merely bred bitterness. This is just the attitude we would have expected of a great English gentleman.
We were very sorry to hear of the death of Elsa Dick, wife of W. F. Dick, who left the Govern- ment service in 1939 after serving as Resident in Kuching and Sibu and for one period acting as Government Secretary.
On Friday, December 19th, the Kuching branch of the Red Cross was inaugurated at a public meet- ing under the, chairmanship of Dr. Liston, the Director of Medical and Health Services. Keen and efficient officers were duly elected and it looks as if this new venture will achieve the success which the Sarawak Gazette cordially wishes it.
The Acting Director of Lands and Surveys (Mr. Mace) has received a request for specimens of native antimony and is prepared to put persons in possess- ion of such in contact with the inquirer.
We have, very much pleasure in publishing in this number the first of a short series of articles by “Optimistic Fiddler," the Honourable Mr. J. B. Archer, c.m.g., m.s.s. Mr. Archer needs no intro-
duction to the majority of our readers. He first came to this country as an administrative cadet in February, 1912, and, having had wide experience in all parts of Sarawak, he became Chief Secretary in 1939. In 1941 he retired but continued to serve the Government until the Japanese arrived on which date he joined “the Astana Party," the members of which suffered for forty-eight hours the worst treatment that was inflicted on any class of civilian internees in Sarawak throughout the occupation. During the B.M.A. period Mr. Archer served as "Political Adviser," and on the resumpt- ion of civil government he became Chief Secretary again, finally relinquishing office on the Cession of Sarawak on July 1st, 1946. As Officer Administering the Government, in the absence of His Highness the Rajah, it fell to him to hand over Sarawak to His Majesty's representatives. In spite of this colourful record the Sarawak Gazette is inclined to think that Mr. Archer’s virtues were perhaps most fully appreciated when, in Kuching internment camp in June, 1945, when tempers were frayed, divisions accentuated, hopes downcast, and animosities intensified, amidst a community in which Sarawak residents formed only a small minority, he topped the poll at the quarterly elect- ion for the Camp Committee.
Here is more fodder for students of folk-lore, this time from the report of an Agricultural Officer’s (Mr. Kay) trip in the Ulu Sadong: "At Merbau Sarawak seems to have a story which makes the one about Lot’s wife a very insignificant occur- rence. Here a whole kampong was turned into rock for its wickedness and there certainly is a long high rock in the hillside which you are shown as being the former kampong. One of our Agricultural Inspectors, a Sea Dayak, tells me there is a similar story in connection with some rocks near Triso. Near Lebor is an oval hollow cut in the ground perhaps three feet deep with a crocodile carved and modelled in earth in the middle. It is covered with coins and I noticed one ten cent note. Enquiries elicited the story that the original earth for the crocodile came from Brunei, given by the Sultan. The coins are in connection with some religious ceremony. We were told that once someone stole some of the coins and set off for Kuching but he died before he got there. Perhaps someone interested in the folk-lore of Sarawak....................
will care to delve farther into these rather interest- ing occurrences."
We hear from Mr. Harrisson in Bareo that he has been excavating some large stone "dolmens" (tables) of unknown origin in the Kelabit plateau, and has found stone implements and pottery of great antiquity which may add considerably to our knowledge of the earliest cultures in Borneo. He has also obtained over one hundred jars, plates, etc., of interest, several of them very early Chinese. He hopes to arrange a special exhibition of these and other items in Kuching in April. His collectors have obtained some two hundred birds and mam- mals so far, two or three of which may be new to science. Apart from this his principal amusement is duck-farming. He left four ducks in Bareo in 1946. There are now scores at most villages and he is running a fine flock of thirty prize specimens. He says that, as he had just given some to visitors from the Akah River, the first impacts of this new culture diffusion should reach Marudi any time. A traveller in the Ulu can look forward to a nice roast duck to take with his borak at each long-house.
The principal topic of Kolabit talk, reports Mr. Harrisson, is the visit of the Governors to Lawas, and every incident is recalled and recounted in detail. He adds that there is also the epic tale of how they carried the District Officer, Baram, right through the Kelabit plateau.
Representations have been made to us regarding the desirability of identifying officials to whom reference is made in the Sarawak Gazette, by their names as well as their appointments. The same suggestion was put forward about a year ago from another quarter but was turned down on the grounds that it would introduce too strong a personal element into this journal. Our critics, however, insist that the reform would increase both the interest of the Gazette for ex-Sarawakians and its value to posterity. Consequently we have bowed to the storm and the innovation appears for the first time in this issue. Once again we emphasise that more constructive criticisms of this nature are badly needed.
The following extracts from the Sarawak Gazette of 1871 afford an interesting comparison with the current canine menace in Kuching, which was the subject, of a satirical epistle in our last issue. Incidentally we are a little staggered at the calm assumption, which seems to be common to the Editor of 1871 and our correspondent, that this nuisance afflicts the tender ears of Europeans only. Actually it is the European who primarily affects the doggy cult, the Malays in particular regarding this friend of man with a great deal more antipathy.
"No. 18. Wednesday, 31st May, 1871.
Dog Notice.
The Singapore Police, in accordance with a notice made public on the 28th ult., have been making a raid upon vagrant and ownerless dogs in that place. On Monday and Tuesday the 1st and 2nd inst. 335 are said to have been executed. Some regulation about the same animals in our bazaar might not be amiss, as more than one complaint of the annoyance caused by them to Europeans at night has reached us."
"No. 19. 16th June, 1871.
The dogs which are being slaughtered in a whole- sale manner in Singapore are said to be utilised after death as manure for cocoanut and other fruit trees. An enterprising planter is reported to buy their carcases for the purpose.”
It may be of interest to posterity to note that, at the turn of the year, many European households in Kuching are attempting to curtail their expenses by cutting down their domestic staffs owing prin- cipally to the high rates of wages demanded by servants, compared to their wages in pre-war days but far be it from us to say compared to their deserts. Some European women are doing the household cooking and a few the "boy’s" work as well. It is understood that the savings thereby affected have exceeded all expectations. We are informed of one gentleman, sent to the bazaar to buy the family's customary daily ration of forty cents worth of bananas, being so laden down with his purchase, and not having the heart to say that, sorry, he had meant twenty cents worth, that he arrived home looking like a cross between a fruit grove and a millionaire’s Christmas tree.
The Editor has received the following letter from the "Britische Zone, Deutschland" :
" Messieurs !
have you received my letter before the months? A newer please, if you have interesting party for poor German!
Answer if you please!
Please enclose some used postage-stamps from the islands and countries of Asia. Indonesia, and others !
Thousand thanks before
Yours very truly
(Indecipherable)
Give it spices for the daily use in Sarawak."
Sarawak and the Crisis.
The following message has been received from the Secretary of State for the Colonies:
"For some months now Colonial Governments have been pursuing a policy of restricting to the greatest possible extent imports from all sources including the United Kingdom for the following reasons.
2.
Balance of payments difficulties make it most important for Colonial Governments to restrict imports of all United Kingdom goods which can be sold for dollars or fur hard currency which are made wholly or largely of dollar materials or which are in short supply and can be used in trade negotiations in order to obtain essential supplies.
3.
It is furthermore unportant from the point of view both of the Colonies and of the other countries in the sterling area that Colonial sterling balances should not decrease although it is recog- nised that for certain purposes (e.g., in order to provide goods required us incentives to production or in connection with Colonial Development Schemes) some running down of the balances may be inevitable.
4.
However it is no part of the Government's policy that Colonial territories should be pressed to practise austerity simply for the sake of austerity, when neither supply nor balance of payments con- siderations require it. Accordingly Colonial Govern- ments which are given a very wide discretion in the matter of import licensing against the background of the above principles have recently been informed that this whole question has been considered again by the United Kingdom Government in the light of the experience which has been gained since the present policy was adopted, and that as a result some relaxation appears to be possible where this can be done without detriment to the supply and balance of payments position. It has been suggested to them that there is no objection to their relaxing the restrictions on the import into their territories of goods from the United Kingdom and any other Colonial territories, which do not fall into any of the classes referred to in paragraph 2 above to the extent that is possible without detriment to their territories’ sterling balances. In order to assist them in framing their new arrangements Colonial Govern- ments have been furnished with a list of the most important classes of goods falling under paragraph 2 above.”
E.C.A.F.E. and Sarawak.
The following is the text of a speech delivered by Tuan Haji Mohamed Eusoff on behalf of the Malayan Union, Singapore, North Borneo, Brunei and Sarawak on the admission of this group of territories as an Associate Member of tine Economic Com- mission for Asia and the Far East at the Second Session of the Commission held at Baguio in the Philippines.
"On behalf of the five territories which I have the honour to represent, namely the Malayan Union, Singapore, North Borneo, Sarawak and Brunei, I thank you for admitting them as a group to be an associate member of this Commission. I welcome this opportunity to make a few brief remarks about these territones and their economic problems.
The Malayan Union consiste of the whole of the Malay Peninsula except for the northern portion, which is part of Siam. Although it has less than six million people and is only the size of England, it is the world’s leading producer of rubber and tin and also has a considerable output of other commidities such as coconut and palm oil.
Its main product and export is robber, produced partly by estates and partly by small-holders. Perhaps a third of its population depend on rubber for their livelihood. Although much rehabilitation is still needed, the output of rubber this year may reach the pre-war level of about 600,000 tons, worth over 200 million U.S. dollars. Nevertheless, during this summer a number of estates were working at a loss and neither wage-earners nor small holders could maintain their pre-war standard of living. This was because the United States restricted the use of natural rubber in order to achieve a large output of synthetic rubber. The United States has played a leading part in the international efforts to achieve greater world pros- perity by reducing discrimination of all kinds of international trade. We take this opportunity to appeal to her to allow natural and synthetic rubber to compete on equal tenus. If this is impossible, we ask her to restrict the protection she gives to her synthetic rubber to the absolute minimum needed for her national defence, and to use fully the alternative of stock-piling natural robber. We ask her to remember that the standard of living of millions of people, mostly small-holders, not only in Malaya but in all the robber producing areas throughout the region will be depressed if she discriminates against this product.
The second major product and export of the Malayan Union is tin. Much of the machinery and equipment for tin mining was destroyed, and at present we are producing only about half our pre-war output of about 75,000 tons a year. How- ever, rehabilitation is now making much more rapid progress. We have our own tin smelters; clearly, unnecessary transport is saved if tin is smelted on the spot. Here again we would like to make a friendly appeal to the United States. That country, so rich in many resources, has no tin but, it has a tin smelter in Texas, which must be subsidised in order to compete with ours. Again, we ask that, if we may not be permitted to compete on equal terms, at least the output of the Texas smelter will be limited to the minimum deemed esential.
The island of Singapore contains less than a million people. It has some industry, but it lives largely by trade. Its geographical position, and the long experience and trade connections of its people, enable it to do a large volume of entrepot or re-export business to the benefit of all. Singa- pore hopes that this Commission will do all in its power to promote greater freedom of trade within this region.
The other three territories—North Borneo, Brunei and Sarawak—are in the northern part of Borneo, one of the largest islands in the world. Their populations are small, less than a million in the aggregate. They have few roads; and com- munications, many by sea and river, are poor. They produce rubber, largely by small-holders, oil, timber and other products, but their resources are by no means fully developed. North Borneo,, in particular, has wide and varied natural resources which need more labour, as well as capital, for their development.
One problem is common to all five territories, and I think to most of the countries represented here. That is the problem of rice. Our people are rice eaters. They do not take kindly to flour. Their pre-war consumption of rice was about 16 ounces per head per day. Most of the rice was imported. Despite strenuous efforts to increase our own production, we can produce little more than a quarter of our needs. We appreciate the work done by the International Emergency Food Council, and by the Special Commissioner of South-East Asia in trying to make the best use of such limited supplies as are available for export. Nevertheless, the ration in Malaya is only 4.6 ounces a day, the lowest in the world, and less than half the ration of India or Japan. We shall be most grateful for anything that can be done to give us more rice.
We are recovering well from the war and from the neglect of health, education, and most physical assets during three to four years of occupation by the Japanese. We did not suffer as much as some countries, although North Borneo was badly devastated. Our great difficulty, I venture to repeat, is the shortage of rice, which is costing us five times its pre-war price—and fifteen to twenty times on the black market—while the price of our chief export—rubber— is little higher than pre-war. The scarcity of rice is the great obstacle to our economic progress.
We shall be very happy to co-operate to the fullest extent possible, with our limited staffs, in the work of this Commission. Wo suggest that a good method would be for the five territories jointly to have some person as their correspondent for E.C.A.F.E. ; he would supply E.C.A.F.E. with all the information it may require, from time to time, about them.
We offer E.C.A.F.E. our best wishes for success in its endeavours and we thank the Government and people of the Philippine Republic, the people of Baguio and the Secretariat for the excellent arrangements made for the present meeting.”
An Incident of that December.
In December, 1941, the M.V. "Nam Hoi" was chartered by the Government to transport padi and other foodstuffs from Sibu to Mukah. Her arrival at Igan coincided with enemy bombing, the anchor
was dropped and the crew went ashore and refused to continue with the voyage. As the cargo was very urgently required at Mukah, and it was dangerous for the vessel to remain at Igan which was on the daily route flown over by Japanese aircraft, the then District Officer, Mukah, telegraphed to the Resident asking for permission to take a volunteer crew from his headquarters to obtain possession of the vessel and complete the voyage. The Resident approved the scheme subject to a direction that the District Officer was to remain in his station.
Volunteers were called for and the response was prompt, the new crew consisting of the following persons :—
Native Officer Abang
Mostapha .. Captain
Haji Zahawi, Tua Kam-
pong and Tuan Imam First Mate
Tuto bin Tajudin (deceased) ... Second Mate
Albert Galli (Sarawak
Electricity Supply Com-
pany) .. Chief Engineer
Taha bin Haji Mohamad ... Second Engineer
Jaya bin Haji Talip Engineer
Ex-constable Salleh bin
Abang Kut Crew
Ex-constable Bujang
(deceased) ... Crew
Salim bin Mohamad ... Crew
Beki bin Haji Talip ... Crew
Within half-an-bour of volunteering the crew had provisioned themselves and set out on bicycles for the Kut and Igan. They travelled all night which was in itself a praiseworthy effort considering the age of some of the members. When they arrived at Igan the regular crew refused to board the vessel to show the volunteers how the engine worked. We have received the following account of an epic voyage from an authoritative source :
“Not one of the volunteers had any experience of a marine diessel but by pulling and twisting every knob she was eventually started.
The hook was pulled up. Captain Mostapha rang down slow ahead and the “Nam Hoi" went full astern. Chief Engineer Galli could not remember which knob he had twiddled to get the ship moving and for two long tanjongs the “Nam Hoi” careered astern with the skipper playing a fanfare on the telegraph. Eventually she was stopped and the hook was dropped to enable the engineers to make a proper survey of the engine. Unfortunately, however, scores of Igan people had abandoned the kampong and taken refuge in temporary shelters concealed among the nipah palms on the bank alongside which the “Nam Hoi” was anchored. These gentry told the crew in no uncertain terms to keep moving along and after several abortive attempts to find a haven the Skipper in desperation decided to put to sea.
As soon as they came out of the nver it became obvious that a very nasty sea was running and the majority of the crew were in favour of turn- ning back. The Skipper and the Chief Engineer, the latter refreshing himself with copious draughts from a bottle of whisky I had given him, however decided that it would be highly injudicious to risk fiddling with engine or the ship now that she was going full in the right direction and they determined to carry on.
Haji Zahawi, the Tuan Imam, took up position on the bridge and prayed loudly and
unceasingly until he left the ship at Mukah to go ashore. It is commonly believed that he as much as anybody was responsible for the successful conclusion of the voyage.
At 3 p.m. and at dead low water the "Nam Hoi" arrived off Mukah and anchored. As this was just about the time that enemy planes invariably flew over Mukah, I went out with two barongs and took all the crew off. Fortunately no plane came over that afternoon and after dark the crew returned to the “Nam Hoi" and brought her into harbour.
A few days later a signal was received from Sibu asking us when we intended returning the “Nam Hoi." Our reply given in the heat of the moment is now unprintable."
It is understood that His Excellency has ex- pressed his appreciation of these services in a letter to every individual member of the volunteer crew.
Safety First Week in Kuching.
Six traffic accidents, none of them serious, in the last six months, is a record for which many capital cities might envy Kuching. But the figure is an indication of the small number of cars rather than of the road sense of Kuching's pedestrians, cyclists and motorists and with the recent increase in the volume of traffic the Municipal Board decided to organise a Safety First Week to educate the public in the rules of the road.
The week began on Monday, December 15th, with an exhibition on the walls of the Pavilion in Rock Road of posters on Safety First submitted by students of the Kuching schools. A majority of these depicted sensational accidents with the un- fortunate victims lying in pools of blood. The pictures proved a great attraction and during the week there was seldom a time when there was not a group of interested spectators clustered round these gruesome warnings. Some good entries were submitted by the Chinese schools but the outstand- ing poster came from a student of the Maderasah Melayu who was awarded the First Prize. Con- solation prizes were awarded to other entrants.
During the week some of the Constabulary were on special traffic duty and a jeep, equipped with the public address system, patrolled the more con- gested areas of the town. From the loud-speaker a booming voice admonished the jay-walker, gently- chid the erring cyclist and rebuked the incautious driver. One observer commented that this method undoubtedly startled the miscreants and he likened the journey of the jeep down Gambier Road to the passage of a stem headmaster through an unruly playground. Groups of Boy Scouts were also com- missioned to patrol the streets and to report the registration numbers of cars whose drivers had shown commendable care and consideration. Evening lectures were given at the Chinese Chamber of Commerce to the taxi-drivers, bus and lorry drivers, and rickshaw-pullers, representatives of whom had earlier attended a conference and promised their full co-operation. The lectures for the motor drivers were well attended but the number of rickshaw-pullers who came to the lectures was considered disappointing.
It was hoped to secure from Singapore some films on Safety First for showing in the Kuching cinemas and arrangements were made for free exhibition to
all school children. Unfortunately the films failed to arrive and the children had to be content with the Royal Wedding and a number of news-reels, some of which they had seen before. These were not, received with marked enthusiasm by an audience which would probably have regarded even a good cartoon as a poor substitute for the success- ion of horrible accidents with which they had expected to be entertained.
A competition was organised among the schools for the best essay on Safety First. Among notable entries was one from an Iban student at the Teacher Training Centre who delivered a powerful attack on the principle of Safety First, concluding with the remark that “if this motto be applied to life in general, the word ‘history’ is out of the dictionary."
The devices of modem propaganda were not neglected by the organisers of the week. The Press assisted in the campaign by publishing notices and articles, and the Post Office made its con- tribution by marking all letters with a special rubber stamp.
It is difficult to know whether the campaign has achieved any useful results. Those who watched the traffic carefully noticed an improvement in road manners during the week, and attributed it more to the activities of the road patrol than to any other factor. This would seem to indicate that, if any permanent improvement is to result, a regular patrol should be instituted to check the faults of all users of the roads and if necessary to bring legal action against those who from carelessness or selfishness endanger the lives of others.—(Con- tributed.)
Sarawak Association.
General Meeting
Mr. A. B. Ward was elected Chairman.
The principal item on the Agenda was to discuss the future of the Association. The Chair- man in his remarks stated that, of the replies received from members at home and abroad to the circular, there was a very large majority for reconstituting the Association and he asked that, in due fairness to those unable to be present at this meeting, their opinions should be borne in mind, although of course whatever is decided at this meeting is final.
Professor W. E. Le Gros Clark proposed that the present Association be wound up and the funds used for a memorial (possibly at Burrator) to those Sarawak Officers and Members of the Association who died in Sarawak during the Japanese occupation. This was fully discussed but all Members agreed that such a proposal should come from other sources and, if anything of this nature was suggested, the Members agreed that the Association should associate themselves with it and subscribe from their funds if subscriptions were asked for.
Finally the Chairman proposed (seconded by Mr. W. F. Dick) that the present Association be liquidated and a new one formed, present Members automatically becoming Members of the new Association and that membership of the future Association be open to anyone connected by official.
residence or business relations with Sarawak, either in the past or in the future. The motion was carried unanimously.
Further discussion took place on a name for the new Association, its official address and whether it would be strong enough to exist under the present circumstances.
It was proposed by the Chairman (seconded by Mr. J. A. Smith) that the new Association be termed "The Sarawak Association (reconstituted 1947)" and that the present meeting appoint a Committee with powers to negotiate and to go into the matter of affiliation with the Malaya Association on the understanding that the identity of the Sarawak Association was kept and to amend the present rules for submission to the next General Meeting. This was unanimously carried.
Mr. H. D. Aplin was elected Hon. Secretary and Treasurer and the following Committee was elected :—Messrs. A. B. Ward, F. F. Boult, J. C. Swayne. E. G. Taylor and Lt. Col. J. P. Mead.
The following members attended the meeting :— Messrs. A. B. Ward, W. F. Dick, G. A. C. Field, F. F. Boult, E. Hose, C. O. Gange, E. G. Taylor, H. La Chard, S. Cunynghame, J. P. Mead, J. C. Swayne, J. A. Smith and H. D. Aplin.
The Committee earnestly hope that now that the Sarawak Association has again come to life new members may be forthcoming and put the Associa- tion on a really sound basis.
The Hon. Secretary will also be glad to hear from existing members and also those who wish to join, telling him of their permanent address and giving their titles, decorations etc., with their occupation and dates so that a full informative list of Members can be made. It may be some time before each Member can be supplied with a list and printed copy of the rules owing to the shortage of paper.
H. D. Aplin, Hon. Secretary.
Cocktail Party.
The first re-union of Members since 1939 was held at the Savoy Hotel on 15th October, 1947, when Members and their guests met at a cocktail party. From all accounts this was most successful, everyone seeming eager to renew old friendships and helping the party to go with a swing. There was no lack of good things, both solid and liquid, one of the "old brigade" remarking that Sarawak folk did not seem to have lost their powers of suction.
There were about fifty present, mostly those who have retired from Sarawak. The Members were very glad to meet Mr. and Mrs. Dawson as a link with the present and it is understood that next year the Committee hope to arrange a dinner at a more seasonable time of the year when perhaps many more Members will be in this country on leave.
Now that the Association has been revived and re-constituted, the Committee earnestly hope that new Members can be induced to join to put the Association on a sound footing. Though it has been reconstituted, its objects remain the same, namely, generally to further the interests and prosperity of Sarawak and to encourage intercourse between its Members, whether residing at home or abroad and to keep them in touch with Sarawak and its
activities. To carry out these objects it is hoped that anyone who is or has been connected, officially, by residence or who have business relations with Sarawak, will join the Association so that the past and present can mingle upholding the traditions of Sarawak under the One Hundred Years of Rule of the three Rajahs, which should not be forgotten, and at the same time assisting to further the future prosperity of the country.
The following Members and Guests were present:—
Mr., Mrs. and Lt. D. A. Aplin
Mr. and Mrs. H. Blatcher Mr. F. F. Boult
Mr. and Mrs. H. La Chard Major S. Cunynghame
Mr. W. F. Dick
Mr. E. Hose
Mr. and Mrs. J. P. Mead Major and Mrs. Richards Mr. and Mrs. E. G. Taylor Mr. and Mrs. G. A. C. Field Mrs. T. A. Reid
Mr. and Mrs. C. W. Dawson Mr. and Mrs. Crowther Mrs. Waldo Harnack
Mr. and Mrs. A. B. Ward Mr. and Mrs. R. N. Baron Mrs. Eve Hussey Sir George Tomlinson Mr. J. A. Smith The Hon. T. G. Cochrane Mrs. J. Baring-Gould Mr. and Mrs. J. C. Swayne Dr. and Mrs. C. O. Gange Mrs. B. A. Trechman Mrs. C. Pitt-Hardacre Mr. and Mrs. P. H.
Flood-Page
Mr. and Mrs. C. McAlpine Mrs. S. A. Turner
(Contributed.)
Many Years Ago.
I can’t abide those people who ceaselessly blow- off the "things-are-not-what-they-used-to-be-when-I- was-a-boy" note. Of course they are not and a good thing too. The man who says that he enjoyed his school days is a liar, and the man who asserts that Kuching, say, half a lifetime ago (if we accept the three score years and ten theory) was all beer and skittles is just getting senile. Nevertheless it was lather a nice place and the Editor has asked me to tell you something about it.
Let me say, however, that I don’t expect some of you will believe me; the credulous and those nice people who always agree with me will, but now- adays there are, I know, many who will simply say, "Oh, there’s that old liar Optimistic Fiddler again !".
You must remember that Kuching half a life- time ago was in many ways not even Edwardian: it was must definitely Victorian. I will give you just one instance. The man who looked after municipal matters not only arrived down to office in a one-hoss-shay but had to use the camel trans- port business before die Suez Canal was opened. This is perhaps an extreme example but it just shows.
I see round the town all the "Safety First" posters, and white lines and zealous officials telling us what to do to avoid a messy death. This goes strangely with my memories of a more peaceful Kuching. There was indeed one motor car, and if the water did not boil in the front part it went. 1 seem to remember, too, a motor bike but as it had no water system it was generally on fire.
What we did use of course were rickshas. I don’t mean the decrepit looking things which perambulate miserably around the town to-day. The ricksha pullers took pride in their vehicles and the speeds they attained were amazing. Big Pots had their own private riskshas, and if one was very corpulent or wanted to put on dog one had both a
puller and a pusher. They were nice to ride about in and one saw more of the beauties of the place than one does, for instance, in a Jeep. The local ladies of frail virtue found them particularly useful and altogether they were an asset and a delight.
Motor trucks and lorries have ruined the fine teams of bullocks which used to draw our heavy traffic. They were slow and they were meandering, but they got there. Enormous laden handcarts with iron-shod wheels were tugged and pushed about; if one wished to see the impossible achieved here was one's chance. There were some pony gharries (maybe the word is unfamiliar to you) and at least one rather dashing dog-cart. Bicycles wore a luxury for the few; mostly we walked. The other day whilst regarding that, one might almost say Palladian, block of Government Offices, which so offends the eye, I realised that the only old Government buildings left are the Clock Tower block minus about half of it, the block known as the Pavilion, the present jail, the women’s clinic, the fort looking place where we Rotarians meet and part of the old jail. The rest has all been built since those days, and the less said about its taste and architecture the better.
Talking about the old jail there is a curious story. In my day it was a three storey building and on the top storey was a big cell occupied by female prisoners. One night a male prisoner managed to get out of his cell on the ground floor and work his way through to the top one. The only way to the roof, through which he hoped to emerge, was by means of the female cell (you know what I mean). In he got and confronted seven surprised but alert females. The story here is a bit confused, but it appears that each and everyone of those seven women agreed not to give the alarm if he would attend to their natural wants. Well it was a case of do or die and he girded up his loins. Alas! the spirit is willing but the flesh is weak and that valiant man fell down at the seventh, unfortunately a singularly unprepossessing specimen. Yes, she did! That measly what-do-you-call-it daughter of the horse leech gave the alarm and in he went again to his cell on the ground floor.
As I said the old what is now called secretariat block was in fact the main Government offices; and as is right the only office to remain in the same occupancy is that now used by the Chief Secretary. Except for the years in which the Japanese used this as a jail (with pigstye outside) it has always been the office of the chief executive and gruesome stories, on the lines of Bluebeard, used to be told about its private safe. Where now the Deputy Chief Secretary sits was the late Rajah’s office. From there he commanded a one-eyed view of everything and everybody : next door, now given up to cipher and secrecy, was the District Office. The present Secretariat was the Public Works and Survey Office (note the amalgamation) and the opposite block was the Post Office. What might now be called the legal block was the Court of Requests, Registration, Land and Municipal. The present Resident’s and District Office was the Treasury and that extraordinary affair the Sarawak Officers' Bank, whilst the Treasurer sat in glory in what is now the Supreme Court. The Auditor had a little cubby-hole which, had just been added on. What went on up in the Clock Tower I never quite fathomed but I fancy it was something to do with agriculture. The dispensary was where the present Clinic is and the Medical Officer lived over the shop.
The Pavilion was divided into three—ground floor, Principal Medical Officer and more of the dispensary: first floor, European hospital : top floor, nurse’s quarters. Bang opposite on the other side of the road were the Rajah’s stables. This was a graceful building surrounded by areca palms and “pinang laka,” and complete with coach-house, harness room and hayloft. Once when I was lying ill with fever I was awakened each morning by the swish of horses being curry-combed and the cries of “hold up!’’, common to stables the world over. Liter one breakfasted to the sound of grateful ponies packing up their oats and munching grass. And this, mark you, where now police are busy putting down lines and warning us to avoid death by looking both ways.
That dismal expanse of waste ground in front of Ward’s Rents was then a charming public garden. If you want to see what it looked like go up to the Museum and see the photographs of it there. Here the Sarawak Rangers’ Band played twice a week. If the late Rajah was in Kuching he always attended band evenings. The few European women used to put on their best hats and sit with him. Old Pedro Solosa would hand him the programme and woe betide any woman if she chattered during any of the Rajah's favourite pieces. One very arch lady did attempt one day to get him to hand her the programme. Plaintiff requests merely received a grunt; very coy, she leant over and murmured, "Kasi sama sayha, Rajah." On the next band evening the Rajah was in Simanggang.
What are so rudely called “Ward’s Rents" occupy the site of the old Rest House. It was a crazy old building full of passages and corners. There was, however, a very superior Rest House known as the Outstation Rest House, and part of this is now the house called “Aloha." The present Rest House was the Residency, and a very good one it made too. A really charming garden, stables and site, it looked out upon the Museum grounds where the Curator lived in a rather peculiar “Swiss Chalet” bungalow, now the Library.
There were giant angsenna trees round the Government offices and if you wanted to visit the little shop, where now Chiang Wah Onn is, one had to brush through a pleasant tangle of plane trees, ixora and hibiscus bushes.—(To be continued.)
O. F.
Stories of Old Sarawak: 7.
In the heyday of the Miri oilfield, in the nineteen twenties, "itu Company” employed a considerable number of Americans. It was in the days before the “American way of life” had become an article for export and a profound knowledge of the geography and polities of the world was not to be expected from an isolationist nation. Nor was it necessary to propitiate less advanced peoples by any exaggerated courtesy or concern for their feelings. In these respects the American was, however, probably very little worse than the more insular among the other half of the Anglo-Saxon race.
During the period of which we are writing His Highness the Rajah decided to pay a visit to Miri where he had not been for some years. Proper preparations were made in the oilfield for the great occasion, and, as the royal launch came over the
bar, the heads of the Government and Company Departments, the latter including one American, were drawn up on the wharf. The launch tied up and in due course the General Manager escorted His Highness down the line of his subordinates, all standing strictly to attention and staring straight in front of them. The Rajah graciously shook hands with each, but, when he came to the American, there was no hand there. Stricken with amazement its owner had clapped it to his brow and taken one uncertain step backwards. "Gawd Rajah!" he exclaimed, "Gee, I olways thort you were a blaak bairsted."
That America.
We are indebted to a leading firm of Kuching merchants for the opportunity of publishing the following shining example to local traders of hustling “enterprise," emanating from the United States of America. We trust that some of our readers will learn this effusion by heart and recite it on appropriate occasions.
"Gentlemen,
In case you choose send on your account your countrys products I can sell faster and export any american merchandises needed by your people, Since gvnmt. controls eliminated prices advanced considerably, results of highest wages, expenses, strikes, shortages, millions of demands from every country, while productions are not in normal times scales, thousand of buyers ready, cash money at hand often paying in advance are waiting to secure their needs, but against all these odds if your money is here. I can buy and ship after fulfilling legal requirements here within reasonably short time/
My extensive price list 1948 see in the files of your chamber of commerce there, a very handy fa cili ty shortens times of correspondences, inquiries, etc/ UNDER EXISTING SITUATIONS HERE most you need is deal with an extremely honest, efficient, dependable firm, have all these qualifica- tions and more I OFFER MY SERVICES/
Except manufacturers in their only one line exporters does not keep merchandises, when an order is received they get in touch with sources and buy on account of their respective clients EXACTLY SAME WAY I OFFER MY UTMOST EFFICIENT SERVICES,
My terms are : Irrevocable letter credit without recourse, payments in newyork against usual docu- ments, if your orders value is $500-15% $1000- 10% Above $1000-5% commission paid to me, plus consular fees-find cut there from your gvrnmt- packing, deliveries to s/s-always every mer- chandises are not in ncwyork-insurance, shipping etc fees too paid by you, all these expenses on the value of your each order issue 1/e accordingly, giving all these details separately in your instrction to bank all to be paid here to me against demnnts, as explained above/ If you want representation first you must prove your abilities in getting orders place them with me, thus de facto proving your abilities we can arrange this too, merely add your commission on above detailed scales of my com- mission/
My references are: Babayans lmtd, Toronto, Canada/ Chles, Ketchian co, incorporation, Boston Mass/ these firms have entirely different type of large businesses are not interested at all with this my line, but knowing me closely they give refer- ences on me/ Hoping that you consider these a ll important points seriously and havepbactica l business for our mutual interests/
Very truly yours
Messers-----------------, 29 park road, kuching;
calling your attention on my this revised circular wish you kindly read from first to lastword for your advantages keep yourself informed on existing situations here/if you want sell your countrys any products about it please read my this circulars first lines/if you want representation am not manufacturer, exporters here does not keep merchandises, but about it read my practicable offer in detailed way above/on the other hand if you want import there any american merchendises- no matter what it is I can find it for you-and fulfill my above detailed terms conditions than feel assured that I am always at your disposal rendering services which must be beneficial, advantageous, profit- able, practicable to you and to me too/please note that time is dear, short, valuable, expensive here, any step we take means expenses, avoid any un- necessary inquiries, none essential curiouseties etc; these are all my experiences-as neither you nor I can not afford all in loosing our times at the end of it nothing to be gained by you and by me also/place practicable orders/if and when you read these lines surely you find them all practicable and profitable to you and to me/these are essential principles of any business transactions/In case you are not interested please refer or pass these lines to others who are interested in practical business and avoid to loose in van times mtually/”.
This Sarawak.
(With apologies to the New Statesman and Nation.)
Conversion of Lunatic Shed into Bachelors’ Quarters.—Published Government Estimates.
The Directors of the Club have decided that in future, commencing from 19th December, Rotary meetings will be at 7 o'clock for dinner up to 7.45 p.m. in order that general discussion amongst members may be discouraged.—Sarawak Tribune.
AN APOLOGY.
In our news item on the Kuching Rotary Club published in our issue of yesterday we stated that the meetings "will be at seven o'clock for dinner up to 7.45 p.m. in order that general discussion amongst members may be discouraged." This of course should have read "in order that general dis- cussion amongst members may be encouraged." We apologise for any inconvenience that might have been caused.—Sarawak Tribune.
The allocation of guns has now been decided upon, the deciding factors being
(1)
Priority to padi planters.
(2)
Equity of distribution.
(3)
Loss of gun through enemy action.— A monthly report.
(The Editor is unable to follow the example of our illustrious contemporary and offer a prize for the best entry in this column. Contributions from all parts of “This Sarawak" will, however, be warmly appreciated and the most favoured will be given pride of place.)
Fifty Years Ago.
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, JANUARY 3rd, 1898.
PROCLAMATION.
WHEREAS it has been brought to my notice that Dyaks who are natural born Subjects of, and have been brought up in the Sarawak territory, have been and are being called out to carry arms, and in other ways are being engaged in warlike and Military operations in North Borneo, among and against tribes and inhabitants of that State who are not in any way hostile or enemies to Sarawak :
I now issue and send this Proclamation to be made known among the Sarawak Dyaks, wherever they may be located, that I direct them to return to their natural homes within three months from this date, and that those who do not comply with this Proclamation will be liable to he considered as outlaws.
This order is not intended to be permanent, and will be rescinded when judged advisable.
Given under my hand and Seal this 10th day of December, 1807.
C. BROOKE.
Rajah
ORDER.
No. XXV, 1897.
Export Duties.
It is hereby enacted by an Order passed in the Supreme Council this 13th day of December, 1897, that the Export Duty on all Jungle and Sea Produce which have heretofore incurred a duty of 5% will, on and after the 1st day of January, 1898, be increased to 10% ad valorem, and also the Export Duty on Bilian and other Timbers will be increased from $1 to $2 per ton of 40 Cubic Feet.
CHARLES 8. PEARSE.
Treasurer of the Sarawak Government.
Treasury, Sarawak,
13th December, 1897.
THE GOLD WORKS AT BAU.
On Tuesday the 30th November the extensive machinery erected by the Borneo Company Limited at Bau, was put in motion in the presence of His Highness The Rajah, who himself placed the first ore to be treated in the machine.
His Highness was shown the whole process by Messrs. Wood and Owen, the Officers in charge of the works, and everything worked smoothly and
without a hitch and, in spite of the size of the works, no vibration whatever could be felt which shows the very substantial nature of the foundations. Those who have had the construction of this edifice and the arrangement of all its intricate and numerous procedures, which seem almost endless, deserve great credit for this immense work just now approaching completion.
Sarawak Library.
The following new books have recently been received :—
J. B. ARCHER, for Librarian.
News from Far and Near.
FIRST DIVISION.
The Honourable the Resident (Mr. Morse) reports that the District and Divisional Advisory Councils met for the first time in November. He adds that he is attempting to devise some method whereby the members will have to speak and not just sit and listen to what he and the District Officers have to say.
The District Officer, Kuching, (Mr. Outram) reports that the big event in the Kuching Courts in November was the preliminary inquiry into, and subsequent trial of Tan Ah Chuan on, a charge of murdering Chang Neaw at the 3 1/2 Mile. Pending Road, on the last day of October. The case attracted considerable public interest, which the Honourable the Resident thinks was probably due to the fact that the accused was a Hokien and the deceased a Kheh. From the evidence it appeared that the deceased had been speared to death when caught in the act of stealing the accused’s veget- ables. Tan Ah Chuan was ultimately convicted of culpable homicide not amounting to murder and sentenced to four years’ rigorous imprisonment.
A Kuching landlord was, in Kuching District Court in November, fined $250 for raising the rent of premises Without the permission of the Rent Control Committee and ordered to repay $280 rent which had been illegally collected.
The District Officer, Kuching, reports that two Lund Dayaks were convicted in the District Court, Kuching, in November for failing to comply with Orang Kaya Sidik’s order to assist in transporting the District Officer’s baggage from Kampong Segu to Kampong Munggu during that officer’s visit to those kampongs. He says that such cases might have been over-looked in other circumstances but in view of certain anti-cession elements now work- ing amongst the Land Dayaks it was considered necessary as a matter of policy to call the defaulters to account. Each of the accused was fined ten dollars.
The District Officer, Kuching, says that no crime of importance was reported during Novem- ber but disquieting rumours of gang activity were forthcoming from the 15th Mile, Simanggang Road, and Quop areas. This so far amounts only to suspicious movements of strangers at night. No serious offence had been disclosed but the police were investigating.
The District Officer, Kuching, visited Quop on November 18th and heard a civil case between the present Committee and the former Tua Kampong. The plaintiffs were unable to prove their claim that the defendant had retained the 1946 Kampong funds, but Spencer Chung and the other members of the 1941 Committee were ordered to pay over to the present Committee the balance of 1941 funds, which they admitted having divided between them for safe-keeping when the Japanese occupied Sarawak. On his return the District Officer visited the estate of Mr. Kimura, a Japanese, near Quop. He says that this must be one of the best examples of a model vegetable garden and padi farm in the country.
The District Officer, Bau, (Mr. Lloyd Thomas) reports that the charges of criminal breach of trust and contravention of the Movement Control Rules in respect of 32,240 lbs of Government rice against Lee Kok, manager of Siniawan Co-operative Society, were dismissed in November and the accused was discharged.
Two Chinese were sentenced to two months’ rigorous imprisonment in Bau in November for mining without a licence or lease.
The District Officer, Bau, reports that Kampong Tanjong at Singghi was almost deserted when he visited there recently. Many people have erected houses at the bottom of the mountain and prefer to remain there. He says that the position is com- plicated by the increasing number of Christians in the area who want to leave the kampongs and form communities of their own. The land ouestion is of course also causing trouble. The Honourable the Resident comments that this tendency is by no means new, as it existed as far back as 1935. He does not see why the Dayaks should be com- pelled to live in the mountain when all their gardens arid padi lands are situated at its foot.
The occasion of the final census enumeration coincided with a Malay wedding at Buso which was attended by members of two notorious “anti- cession” kampongs in Kuching. The District Officer, Bau, says that an augmented staff of enu- merators at Buso were subjected to a certain amount of verbal unpleasantness and "kachau” but pro- ceeded with the work in an admirable manner and no serious incident occurred.
The District Officer, Serian, (Mr. Roberts) reports that the actual food shortage is grave. No kampong is suffering actual famine but most are undergoing great hardship. Two Dayaks were sent to Kuching in November for medical treatment. Both were diagnsoed as dietary deficiency cases. So far as is known only three kampongs out of approximately one hundred have enough rice to carry them through to next harvest.
The Native-Officer-in-Charge, Lundu. (Abang Suhaimi) reports that the total number of cases heard in the Lundu Courts in November was one civil case in the Petty Court. There were no prisoners in the jail throughout the month.
SECOND DIVISION.
The District Officer, Simanggang, (Mr. Griffin) reports that as a result of a suggestion made by Mrs. Winter a Medical Aid Post has been established in her bungalow at Sabu. The Simanggang dresser visits the post twice a week. On the first three visits ninety-four patients, excluding repetitions, were treated. Almost all the patients were women.
The District Officer, Simanggang, reports that as a result of a measles epidemic there at least two children are known to have lost their sight.
The District Officer, Simanggang, says that at a meeting of the Simanggang Dayak Advisory Board the Simanggang Penghulus agreed to follow the suggestion of Mr. Edward Jerah, b.e.m., that the gift of money made by His Highness the Rajah to the Dayaks of the Second Division should be handed over to the Dayaks in the Lubok Antu District for the purpose of erecting a school at Lubok Antu. Pengarah Jimbun and Penghulu Ngali, both from the Ulu Ai, were present at the meeting and expressed appreciation. The Kalaka and Saribas Districts had already agreed to waive any claim to a share in the gift. The work of erecting the school and teacher's quarters at Lubok Antu will be put in hand immediately.
The District Officer, Saribas, (Mr. Waine) reports that on November 17th an enquiry was held in accordance with section 77 of the Criminal Procedure Code into the case of a Dayak named Buan anak Ah Kuee. Several reports had been received that a strange Dayak had for sometime been causing trouble among the Dayaks of Ulu Layar and Spak. A warrant was issued for his arrest but before this was executed the Dayak con- cerned was brought into Betong by the son of Peng- hulu Igoh and others. At the enquiry Buan claimed to be the grandson of Penghulu Beriak of Sarikei and nephew of Native Officer Benedict Empam. He was detained while these claims were invest- igated. Both were found to be false. Buan admitted that he had lied in this respect and gave
the names of relatives in Mukah who would be prepared to stand as surety for his good behaviour. At the end of the month a reply was still awaited from Mukah.
As a result of the District Officer, Saribas, telling the Penghulus that the Saribas Local Treasury would in future be responsible for the Dayak schools the “Chairman'' immediately called for monthly reports from the three schools in Baku, together with details of expenditure. The master at Plandok tendered his resignation and the master at Sanin was about to follow suit. However the District Officer managed to straighten matters out both with the Penghulu and masters concerned.
The District Officer, Saratok, (Mr. Wilson) reports that, when the District Dayak and Malay Advisory Boards held their first meetings in November, discussion was unexpectedly lively. He adds that the subsequent meeting of the District Advisory Council was not very successful as the members had already dealt with the topics which interested them in the Board meetings.
The following is an extract from the November report of the District Officer, Saratok. “The Kabong herd has been in a decline since it was broken up. The only seizeable (sic) bull remaining is impotent and the cows are reported to be in a bad way.”
The District Officer, Saratok, reports that sago workers are now very well paid and can earn $5 a day if skilled, payment being based on a percentage of a man's output.
THIRD DIVISION.
The Honourable the Resident (Mr. Barcroft) thinks that it is undesirable to “lend" padi to Dayaks who complain of food shortage. He adds that a small amount of padi has been made avail- able for cash and there is a possibility of lending sago (lemanta).
One hundred and forty-two “minor operations” were performed by the Government medical authorities in Sibu in October.
The following is an extract from the October report of the District Officer, Sibu, (Mr. Fisher) : “From two areas come reports that engkabang is flowering again this year. It is too early to predict accurately the size of the crops but it is not likely to be as large as last year.'"
In Sibu District in October a Dayak dreamt that he was ordered by an "Antu" to set fire to a farm- ing hut owned by another Dayak. The District Officer reports that he forthwith did so and the hut was burnt to the ground. There was no loss of life or limb but some household effects were consumed in the fire. The offender was dealt with under the Tusun Tuuggu and was ordered to pay pemali and to compensate the owner for his loss.
The District Officer, Sibu, reports that one Dayak night school has been permitted to start with the authority of the Director of Education and another is likely to start in the near future.
22,000 piculs of rubber were exported from Sibu in November compared with 5,000 in October. The District Officer says that this was partly due to the reduction in export duty and partly to the extra shipping space made available by m.v. "Hung Hai." He adds that the better price was a big contributing factor. On the other hand the figures for sago exported showed some reduction. The District Officer makes the interesting comment that "92% of this commodity is being exported direct to Liverpool, Antwerp and Marseilles."
The Honourable the Resident at the Sibu Chinese Headmen’s meeting in October publicly congratulated Mr. Wong Sing Kheng on reporting two extortioners who were subsequently convicted.
In Sarikei in October five Dayaks were charged in the District Court with theft in a building. The magistrate amended the charge to one of house- breaking, stayed the proceedings and transferred the case to the Resident’s Court. In the Resident’s Court four of the accused were convicted and one was discharged. The District Officer, Lower Rejang, (Mr. Dilks) comments that the father of the discharged man "was supposedly heard to remove a charm which he had placed on both magistrates. Unwittingly charmed, the magistrates in question accompanied Their Excellencies the Governor-General and the Governor on tour." (The Sarawak Gazette fails to understand this reasoning. The obvious explanation of the fact that the magis- trates accompanied Their Excellencies without dis- aster was that the charm had been removed.)
The District Officer, Lower Rejang, makes the interesting comment that the respective "pro- cession" and "anti-cession" parties amongst the Malays in his District "are reported to have been at variance before the war and it is thought that the present political animosity is the old feud revived under new banners."
According to the District Officer, Lower Rejang, young padi, particularly in the Bunut area, has been affected by "army-worms.” He adds that "it is understood that army-worms are a pre-war pheno- menon and have nothing to do with the recent Military Administration.''
The District Officer, Lower Rejang, reports that the Bee Ann Factory, Binatang, has experimented with the extraction of gutter-percha from the leaves of the trees. The results were encouraging but the cost was too high to make the project worth while at existing selling prices.
The District Officer, Kanowit, (Mr. Drake) reports that during the second half of October many Dayaks came in to fill in their War Damage Claim forms, mostly in respect of guns lost. He says that Penghulu Skudan’s latest idea is that Emperor Hirohito, on behalf of the Japanese, or possibly the Japanese concerned in the dumping of Dayak guns in the Rejang River, should be brought back to Sarawak, at their own expense, to be sued for replacement of the guns. The Penghulu does not seem to like the idea of merely registering a claim.
The following is an extract from the October report of the District Officer, Kanowit. "A large crowd of Dayaks went down to Sibu in two Govern- ment launches on 27th October to inspect the
Rantau Panjang Experimental Station. They seemed duly impressed but Penghulu Empam 1, the leader in all padi affairs, stated that they would not really be convinced unless they could go again just before the harvest, and actually see the amount of grain to be harvested. He seemed most impressed by the number of Dayaks in the locality who were following the Government lead, and by the amount of padi generally, planted in the Igan."
A Dayak girl was murdered in a langkau in which she was sleeping in Kapit District in October.
The Penghulus of the Balleh appear to be averse to the idea of a Native Treasury on the grounds that it is an advance in a direction with which they are not familiar and because their anak biak are not prepared for the change. The Assistant District Officer, Kapit, (Mr. Rennick) reports that intensive measures are being taken to spread enlightenment.
The following is an extract from the October report of the District Officer, Mukah. (Mr. Morison) : "In Oya there was a case in which a husband caught his wife in bed with a third party. On the approach of the husband the third party jumped out of the nearest window and was there- upon hotly pursued. After an exciting chase the husband brought the third party down with a well- timed rugby tackle. This might have ended rather unpleasantly were it not for the fact that the wife turned up in time and prevented the two struggling men doing any serious hurt to each other by seizing hold of the husband from behind thereby allowing the third party to escape."
The District Officer, Mukah, reports that an interesting feature of the sago boom throughout the Coastal District is the temporary migration to the towns of women and children from the smaller coastal kampongs in order to have a share in the high profits made by sago workers.
FOURTH DIVISION.
The Honourable the Resident, (Mr. Gilbert) reports that Mr. Stone, Chief Photographer of the Central Office of Information, London, arrived in Miri on October 15th after an exciting journey from Bintulu. His launch ran ashore at Tanjong Payong during the night. The launch was high and dry for several hours but eventually refloated. She arrived off Miri in bad weather with an improvised rudder and, when trying to cross the Miri bar, the rudder proved ineffective, and the launch went ashore at 11 p.m. The Assistant District Officer, Miri, (Mr. Morris) luckily heard her engine and realised that she was in difficulty. He immediately turned out the Miri Government launch and went to the rescue. Both launches were eventually brought into the river. The Resident adds that had not the Assistant District Officer acted promptly Mr. Stone’s launch would have become a total wreck.
The District Officer, Miri, (Mr. Lascelles) reports that the Young Malay Association Club rooms were broken into on October 11th. A number of photographs, books and publications obtained from the Central Office of Information were stolen and the badminton court was wrecked. There seems little doubt, says the District Officer, that this was
the work of a larrikin element whose “political” ideas are at variance with those of the Young Malay Association. No arrests had been effected.
Two cases of typhoid fever were treated in Miri during October.
The District Officer, Miri, reports that Sarawak Oilfields Limited were not at the end of October, engaging any Sea Dayaks. Despite this, however, a number of Ibans continued to arrive in Miri to seek work with the Company.
The District Officer, Miri, says that at Kuala Suai the Wakil Tua Kampong erected pane hangs to mark the channel, apparently in pursuance of a promise by the owners of a launch to pay $5 per month. When the owners failed to implement their promise he promptly retaliated by pulling out all the panchangs.
The following is an extract from the October report of the District Officer, Miri : “As the difficulty of procuring U.S. dollars increases so the availability of goods of U.S. and Canadian origin increases. As a general rule these goods are pro- cured from Singapore by agents and no payment is made in U.S. dollars. The quantity and variety of consumer goods available locally is steadily increasing. So much cloth is available that many traders are embarrassed by the size of their stocks. Unfortunately as yet there has not been any appreciable fall in price as traders who purchased at premium prices are unwilling to sell at a loss and prefer to hold on to their stocks with the hope that they will be able to profit by any future shortage."
On the night of October 29th—30th some eight inches of rain fell in the Miri town area. The District Officer says this resulted in the Brighton Road, being washed out in two places; the collapse of the partially built Junior Service Association Club ; the partial collapse of the roof of the Chinese Engineering Association; the collapse of two walls of the cinema; and the washing out of a number of vegetable gardens in Kampong Wireless area.
On October 26th, a Malay was taken by a crocodile a short distance above the Lutong bridge. The body was found the next day in Sungei Miri Kechil in a mutilated condition. As is usual, says the District Officer, fantastic stories are going round regarding the size of the culprit, one even placing the size of the crocodile as the width of the river.
The District Officer, Baram, (Mr. Morgan) reports that a contractor of the “Borneo Australian Timber Company” arrived in Marudi on October 9th with a view to fixing with the Divisional Forst Officer "the areas of timber that will be occupied by the company” in the Tutoh and Tinjar rivers.
The District Officer, Bintulu, (Mr. Drake-Brock- man) reports that in spite of their convictions in the District Court early in September for having moved and fanned outside Dayak Farming Areas Sangin anak Selepi and eleven of his followers con- tinued to break the law and were again brought before the District Court where they were convicted for the second time. Sangin was fined $100 and his followers $50 each.
CORRESPONDENCE.
TERMS OF SERVICE.
Kuching.
December 12th.
The Editor,
Sarawak Gazette,
Kuching.
Dear Sir,
With reference to the "Fifty Years Ago" in your last issue the following terms of service published in the Sarawak Gazette No. 59 of March 1st, 1873, a time when men were men, travelling was travel- ling, and the modern perpetual hankering after the luxuries and women of Europe was unknown, may be of interest to the young puppies of to-day who demand salaries sufficient to keep themselves in the situation of Rajahs and their wives in spoilt indolence.
"Maximum Salaries.
1st Class Divisional Residents ... $350
2nd Class Residents ... 230
Assistant Residents ... 150
Military Commandant in Charge ... 200
Medical Officer ... 300
Treasurer ... 300
Shipping Master ... 200
Head Magistrate ... 200
1st Class Assistants viz.
Treasury Clerks, etc. ... 120.
2nd Class Assistants viz.
Treasury Clerks, etc. ... 80
Naval 1st Class Commanders ... 150
,, 2nd „ „ ... 80
,, 1st Class Engineers ... 150
„ 2nd „ ... 80
Police Superintendent ... 80
Sergeants of Companies and
Storekeepers ... 80
Pensions and Allowances.
1.
On joining the Service if in Europe : £40 passage money.
2.
Sick leave after 5 years’ service :
$200 passage money and half pay for a term not exceeding 6 months.
3.
Sick leave under 5 years’ service : $200 passage money.
4.
Furlough after 10 years' Service :
$300 passage money with half pay for a term of 2 years. If sick leave has been previously granted then passage money to be $200 and term of furlough not to exceed 18 months.
5.
Furlough 2nd.
$200 passage money with 12 months leave on half pay after 5 years' full service from the expiration of the first furlough.
6.
Furlough 3rd.
Same as for 2nd leave.
7.
Leave on urgent private affairs :
Amount of passage money and allow- ance at the option of the Government.
8.
Pension :
After 21 years’ actual service of good character, half pay for life at the rate of salary on retirement. Pension to be paid in dollars.
9.
Casualties:
Pensions and allowances equivalent to the position of the officer and terms of service."
Yours faithfully,
One of the Old Brigade.
[It should be noted that these terms presumably refer, as did the terms published in our last issue, to the 4/2 dollar.—Ed.]
THEIR EXCELLENCIES ON THE COAST.
District Office.
Mukah.
7th December, 1947.
The Editor,
Sarawak Gazette,
Kuching.
Sir,
I was interested to read the account of Their Excellencies’ visit to the Coast District in a recent issue of the Gazette.
Perhaps readers would be interested to know a little more about what might be called some un- usual features of that tour.
In the first place the 'launches' which gave Their Excellencies such a warm welcome at Mukah had been in Mukah for some days prior to Their Excellencies’ arrival. They could easily have left Mukah before the 10th, but their owners and crews preferred to remain and greet Their Excellencies. By this decision they lost 2—3 days valuable trading time. Such time is of course particularly valuable at this season of the year when the weather is so uncertain.
Secondly the presence of a dozen or so old Melanau women who turned up dressed in their traditional costume to greet Their Excellencies in Mukah was J understand a most unusual occur- rence. Their costume, which consisted of black 'bajus' with gold ornaments, purple sarong and un- usual flat shaped ‘trindaks’ is seldom to be seen outside the kampong. In fact, I believe, it is true to say that such an event has not occurred within living memory.
Thirdly at Dalat at the dinner given in honour of Their Excellencies there was the unusual spect- acle of Dayaks, Chinese Liko and Moslem Melanaus all being present at the same meal.
Yours faithfully.
W. G. Morison.
NIAH CAVES.
Department of Agriculture,.
Sarawak.
Kuching, 22nd December, 1947. The Editor,
Sarawak Gazette,
Kuching.
Dear Sir,
Arising from the interesting article on the Niah Caves that appears in your December issue I feel that some information as to the manorial value of the guano obtained from the caves may be of interest.
Similar deposits of course occur m other parts of Sarawak. Whilst the deposits are of definite value for local use as a manure they are probably of little interest from the point of view of a possible export trade outside Sarawak as their composition is usually very variable and the deposits are com- paratively small.
Pre-war Analyses of the Niah guano, confirmed by the results of recent examinations, show that the Niah guano, whilst in no way outstanding amongst materials of its type, is still a useful organic manure containing considerable quantities of available nitrogen and phosphates as well as some calcium. The older material in the deeper deposits contains very little nitrogen but is rich in phosphate and in fact approximates in composition to a rock phosphate; the fact that it contains little nitrogen means that it is unlikely to give immediate returns when used as a manure and this may account for the fact that it is usually regarded as of little value as a manure.
Information with regard to the response of Sarawak's soils to fertilisers is scanty but there is no doubt that large responses can frequently be obtained to applications of phosphatic fertilisers especially in the presence of some lime. Large responses have also been obtained by applications of nitrogenous fertilisers when applied in com- bination with applications of phosphatics. The prime need of course of most soils in the tropics is for organic manures and it is not yet possible to give a definite opinion as to how far it is desirable under Sarawak conditions to use guano in place of the more bulky organic manures and to supplement such organic manures with imported inorganic fertilisers. Experiments are being conducted which it is hoped will throw some light on the matter. The fact remains however that imported fertilisers are at present extremely expensive added to which increasing anxiety is being felt by high authorities with regard to the world’s supplies of phosphates.
It is obvious I think that Sarawak’s guano deposits may be of some importance in the develop- ment of the country's agriculture and it does seem desirable to take some precautions to see that they are utilised to the best advantage.
Yours faithfully,
R. W. R. Miller, Acting Director of Agriculture.
Acknowledgment.
The Chairman of the Organising Committee, Royal Wedding Celebrations, acknowledges with thanks the following donations towards the Celebrations Fund :—
Receipts
Total subscriptions received as per above list ... $926.50
$926.60
Payments
Cost of 11 silver medals for winning football team ... $ 27.50
Ice water and lemons for football teams 7.00
Ice cream for school children ... 350.00
Taxi hire and receipt Book ... 4.00
Electric current & allowances to boys,
8 shows at Sylvia & Lilian ... 360.00
Cheque to Chief Secretary for Pauper
& Leper camps ... 178.00
$926.50
Audited and found correct.
Kuching, 9th December, 1947.
A. G. TAYLOR,
Principal Auditor.
W. L. P. SOCHON, Chairman, Organising Committee, Royal Wedding Celebrations.
J. T. C. de SILVA, Honorary Secretary and Treasurer.
From “Adversity”: Internment Quarterly.
(The following story was published in "Adversity" on January 1st, 1944.)
BON VOYAGE.
She was a dull-looking merchantman lying along- side at Birkenhead of some 6,000 odd tons, com- pletely grey and black, with a sizeable gun on her poop and the Dutch flag flying from her stern ; but there was no ‘‘Blue Peter” aloft to tell possible spies that she was to sail that afternoon.
We got away in the early evening with 2 other ships, one of which I subsequently re-encountered at Durban, and set a northerly direction passing within sight of the Isle of Man. Several other vessels joined us on the way until we stopped the following day without a view of land but some- where. we estimated, off the mouth of the Clyde.
A number of our neighbours here left and many new ones joined us, but the convoy was soon formed of some 40 ships in 4 or 5 lines with a black ‘British India-man' as commodore. We had a good position as second ship on second port line, our speed was 8 3/4 knots and the commodore was on our starboard bow. Four destroyers were escort- ing us, more or less off the 4 corners of the convoy.
On the 13th of August, 1940, we had formed the convoy and I think it was on the evening of the following day that we were suddenly brought to our feet by a bump apparently from under amid- ships that shook the ship from stem to stern. The response to our alarm signals was immediate; the whooping of destroyer sirens came from ahead and astern, signal flags were being run up from all bridges and the forward starboard warship, which up to then had appeared to be far off on the horizon, was zig-zagging her way through the con- voy towards us at high speed. The naval response was so prompt in fact that any doubts were removed as to the possibility of the jolt having
been caused by the dropping of a depth-charge as a signal for the convoy to close in for the night. Although we were eventually told that all was clear, such an incident was bound to react on an already keyed-up crew, and suitcases were packed with essentials and lifebelts taken down from the tops of cupboards.
Nor were feelings calmed the next morning when we found that all our escorts had left us during the night : but the day dawned clear, which was a change, and with a strong wind blowing, a feeling of maritime security prevailed. So pleasant was the day with the heavy seas, high wind and spray flying through the rigging that after break- fast (5 courses!) I went out to sit on deck before the approaching gale really developed. And I was alone there scrutinising our neighbours in convoy through my binoculars when, at 20 minutes past 10, there was a dull pop (it was little more) to starboard, and a Greek freighter in the next line of apparently some 2,000 or so tons was seen to be enveloped in black smoke coming from her port side. She turned abruptly to port and ploughed her nose straight into the sea with her propeller still revolving uselessly high in the air. Within 3 minutes—though it seemed less than a single minute to me—there was just a gan in the line : not a lifeboat, not a raft to be seen. The following ship had slowed down but the other 38 went straight ahead zig-zagging in their lines. The officer on watch on the, bridge had been the only other person on the “Alcinous," on which I and one other passenger were sailing, who had wit- nessed the Greek’s loss, but now flags were flying like bunting all round us and the commodore was flashlight signalling incessantly. Such a vessel is the only one allowed to use a wireless transmitter in convoy and she was certainly using hers then, for a time-bomb in the cargo had been our fear too, hut such freight does not explode in boiler-rooms !
So quiet had been the explosion that the doctor had heard nothing of it in his surgery; and be was especially incredulous since, as he wisely pointed out, with the waves at their then height, if there was a U-boat in the convoy its conning-tower must at times have been awash and someone have noticed it. However he had not long to wait to find that we were only too right, for at just before 12.15 a muffled metallic bang with a tremendous jolt emanated from beneath our own forward well- deck. “That’s us alrightly,” as I remarked to my stablemate as my Rolls razor flew off the shelf and actually whisked through my hair. We were sitting in our spacious cabin just prior to lunch and our lifebelts were within a few inches of our hands. To get to the open was our first thought, but the doorway on to the deck was blocked by a solid mass of water. The doctor the other side of the ship dashed straight through and was nearly knocked flat, but I waited a moment until it had cleared somewhat. We were not under the sea as at first had appeared, but a large part of it seemed to have been hurled up on to the bridge and officer's flat and was then cascading down over the companionways above us.
Out on deck we reviewed the situation. The ship was only listing slightly to port and down by the bows, and the captain ordered everyone to stay on hoard. Some of the officers were detailed to see that none of the panic-stricken crew left the vessel, but despite their activities, the height of the seas (and our maindeck was only some 6
feet above waterline), and the size of the boat, 2 Chinese managed to launch a lifeboat from the stern, which was indeed a credit to their training. Once away these two idiots were unable to regain the ship, and after futilely waiting about for half an hour—during which time we expected a second torpedo every minuté, and no one would cross the long main deck amidships for fear of her breaking her back under him by a second hit—we left them to their fate. During that half-hour much had been happening on board, which was probably why that time was not nearly so frightening as the night that followed ; the forecastle and No. 1 hold were on fire ; there were 2 tall ventilators from the No. 2 hold, reaching almost as high as the bridge immediately behind them acting as gargoyles, for the seas rushing through the now-half-empty No. 1 hold into the No. 2 were pouring via the venti- lators in torrents on to the well-deck ; the fire- fighting appliances had been manned by Europeans ; the wireless operator had called for help and the engines were again working ; though the electric windlass, derricks, kitchens, radiators and lights were all off. Our personnel was still mainly ranged above decks in their lifebelts in dismal expectancy, hut the most terrifying thing in that first period was any noise, and every so often we all jumped to our feet as a small roar of exhausts would come from the funnel aft as the engines were used to put the ship stem-on to the waves again. Our No. 1 hold was filled mainly with cotton and cotton goods beneath a top cargo of whisky, and one of the first sights I remember seeing after we were hit was dozens of Johnnie Walkers still going strong across the broad Atlantic! Incidentally, shortly after we were hit the commodore had fired a shell in the general direction of the U-boat which we heard whistle overhead.
About 1 o’clock a naval sloop appeared and asked us in very ‘Oxford Oxford’ whether we had any casualties—none, and whether we had seen the U- boat—no. Also he told us that he had wirelessed for destroyers for our aid; he had picked up the only 6 survivors of the crew of 25 of the Greek; he had picked up our 2 deserters (and clapped them in irons); that we were 390 miles from the nearest land which was the roast of Ireland, and that he would escort us either until we were met by a Canadian war-ship on a run to Newfoundland, or- back home to nearest port. To my great dis- appointment our captain replied that since we appeared to be slowly sinking, we were on fire and the extent of our damage was not known, he chose the nearest port : and off we set. By cutting off all electric connections forward of the bridge block we soon got our equipment working again and hot meals and drinks once more available, though volumes of smoke continuously belched from forwards. That evening, when it was almost dark, we tried to get some relief fire-fighters from the sloop, but almost as soon as our boat touched the water her propeller was fouled by yards of cotton streaming from our damaged hull. It was rowed over, however, but found that the warship was rolling so badly that nobody could be got off her, and the boat had almost been swamped several times in the effort. It was difficult enough getting the boat-crew back ourselves and the boat was impossible. It was sunk without trace. That night was one of the most terrifying I can ever remember, for the wind and sea had been rising all day and in addition to the noises of water above and below, the wind whistling round the ship, and
the respirator pump, a terrific bang and clatter had now set up as the waves dashed through the now-3-parts-empty No. 1 hold and into the No. 2 hold, there lifting up a number of one-ton dredger buckets and crashing them against the bulkhead. The whole ship echoed! But it was hugely due to these heavy buckets being against the bulkhead between the Nos. 1 and 2 holds that it was only pushed back a few feet and that the entire No. 2 hold was not also completely wrecked by the explosions. No-one slept much that night and a cork lifebelt is not exactly a spring mattress any- way. Frequently I went out on deck to watch the firefighting against the glow, and to carry hot drinks and food and get some myself. It came to an end eventually however, like a nightmare, and with the dawn, the gale rapidly moderating and the friendly sight of the sloop ever zig-zagging backwards and forwards about a mile or so ahead of us, optimism and jocularity returned. We had had to travel a long way south during the night to keep our bows away from the seas, but we never saw the coast of Ireland though we passed between some lighted Irish fishing boats in the darkness.
By the middle of the next day the fire was out and the ship tidied up. The chief officer had just come off a long spell on the bridge at noon the day before and yet this gallant Dutchman alone in a smoke-helmet had descended into the blazing hold to deal with the fire, and for 24 hours on end had continued the perilous work. Despite the fact that both his eyes had been nearly blinded by smoke and there were bruises all over his body, he still remained the essence of cheerfulness while he had to supervise the unloading of the cargo when we returned home. Unfortunately on one of the trips with food and drink to the well-deck and the return journey with salvaged whisky and bits of torpedo the chief steward had broken his arm—our only casualty.
The originally called-for destroyers never turned up at all and we were told that they had had to go on to our late convoy in which two more ships had been torpedoed shortly after ourselves. Of 2 sub- sequently requested ones we only saw the lagging as naval crow’s-nest signalled to naval crow’s-nest (our own had, incidentally, been left dangling on one rope by the explosion) that an unescorted incoming ship was being chased on the surface by a U-boat not far from us. We were, however, joined by a naval ocean tug—one of the most businesslike vessels I have ever seen and fairly bristling with guns and depth-charges—but this we did not need, and sent off. A flying-boat reported us safe off the mouth of the Clyde and at least a dozen naval vessels escorted us up the river to Greenock where we anchored. The next day assistance stood by as we weighed anchor since we were afraid of pulling off our bows, and 3 tugs aided us to navigate upstream to Glasgow. We were an object of interested comment on both banks as we passed along with the two black balls hanging over our damage, and the customs officers in Glasgow were extremely generous over our salvaged whisky. Two incidents on this homeward journey come particularly to mind. Only the sloop knew to where she was taking us until we were nearing land, and we had been chaffing my stablemate that it was sure to be Glasgow after the difficult journey he had had getting from his home there to join the ship at Birkenhead only a week or so before. So when the captain was told, he
chalked up “GREENOCK" in large letters on the bridge and we all had a hearty laugh. The second was when we passed through a large patch of heavy oil. There was no sign of any wreckage to indicate the. grave of a surface vessel, and we guessed we had been revenged.
It is easy enough to exaggerate on such occasions and the size of the holes either side of our hull was variously estimated. The portside (on which the torpedo entered) had a hole only slightly larger than the starboard side; and the chief officer reckoned that a bus could easily be driven through the No. 1 hold. Certainly from inside the openings appeared gigantic, reaching upwards as they did from keel-plate almost to deck. But it was not until the Nos. 1 and 2 holds batch covers had been removed in port letting in some daylight from over- head, that the real extent of the damage inside could be appreciated and the perils and difficulties which the mate had had to face when dealing with the fire became apparent. Even moving about down below then was hard enough, and previously with only a flashlight it had been like going into the bottomless pit. Originally the No. 1 hold had been filled with crates of whisky on a lot of cotton and cotton goods : now all that remained in the enlarged hold was a mass of black and twisted metal with a floor of broken bottles on a carpet of sodden cotton, covered with a swirling mass of seawater in which a jellyfish or two were floating aimlessly about. The front bulkhead of the hold had been shifted at an angle many feet forwards, telescoping the lower part of the forecastle, the whole of which was completely burned out; the keel-plate was bent and the deck was permanently waved. Personally I lost nothing except the crease in my trousers and all’s well that ends well, they say.
Kuching Market Price List.
Average monthly Market Prices (November 21st to December 20th).
COLONY OF NORTH BORNEO.
NOTICE OF SALE
The following vessels are surplus to North Borneo Government requirements and tenders will be received by the Tenders Board, Jesselton, for their purchase.
75 FOOT MOTOR FISHING VESSELS.
These vessels are of similar type and are in good condition.
Length — 75 ft. Draft — Loaded 11 ft. 6 ins.
Beam — 18 ft. 9 ins. Light : 9 ft.
Depth — 8 ft. 8 ins.
Construction — Wooden. Fitted with Blackstone Marine
Engine EPWMG 4 developing 160 B.H.P. at 600 R.P.M.
Cargo capacity — 40 tons.
Speed — Approx. 8 knots.
90 FOOT MOTOR FISHING VESSEL.
VESSEL. PORT OF COLLECTION.
M.F.V. 1552 Labuan, North Borneo.
Length — 90 ft. Draft — Loaded : 12 ft. 6 ins.
Beam — 23 ft. 7 ins. Light : 10 ft.
Depth — 10 ft. 9 ins.
Construction — Wooden. Fitted with Crossley Engine H.R.4, 220 H.P., 4 cyl.
Auxiliary — Southern Cross 9/7 H.P. and Electrical Unit.
Cargo capacity — 80 tons.
Speed — Approx. 9 knots.
MOTOR FISHING VESSEL HULLS WITH CERTAIN ENGINE PARTS REMOVED.






