VOL. LXIII.
No. 962.
The Sarawak Gazette
Price
KUCHING, Wednesday, November 1st, 1933.
20 CENTS.
Contents.
The Sarawak Gazette		 			
WEDNESDAY, NOVEMBER 1st, 1933.

Marriage.
BINNIE-FOX. -A marriage has been arranged, and will take place shortly, between Richard Douglas Binnie, B.Sc., A.M.I. Struct. E., of Point House Hotel, Blackheath, Sarawak Civil Service (retired), eldest son of the late Mr. R. Binnie and Mrs. Edith Binnie, of Blackheath, and Elise Jacquilene Fox, widow of Mr. William Fox. -Times.

Engagement.
PRETTY-BOUCH.HISSEY. -The engagement is announced between Eric Ernest Falk Pretty, Malayan Civil Service, second son of Mr. Herbert Pretty and the late Mrs. Pretty, of Elmhurst, Reading, and Merrall Josephine Bouch-Hissey, only daughter of Mrs. Franklin Dyall, of 3, Justice Walk, Chelsea, and White House, Trottiscliffe, Kent.

Death.
DOUGLAS. -On 3rd September, 1933, very suddenly, Reginald Stair Douglas, of Belswood, Hartley Wintney, late of Sarawak Civil Service, second son of the late Sir John Douglas. Funeral at Hartley Wintney on Thursday next, at 2.30 p.m. -Times.

Local and Personal.
OCTOBER.
His Highness the Rajah expresses thanks to all communities for their kind message, forwarded by wireless, on the occasion of His Highness’ birthday.

His Highness the Tuan Muda accompanied by the Government Secretary, Mr. C. D. Adams, Mrs. Adams and Mrs. J. G. Anderson, proceeded to Bintulu by H.H.M.Y. Maimuna on 18th October, returning to Kuching on 21st October.

We are informed that His Highness the Rajah gave a dinner party at the Savoy Hotel. London, on the occasion of His Highness’ birthday. The following were present: -Their Highnesses the Rajah and Ranee, Lord and Lady Inchcape, Dayang Elizabeth, Dayang Valerie, Dayang Anne, Messrs. Peter Brooke, J. C. V. C. Brooke, Mr. and Mrs. H. A. Adams and Miss Adams, Messrs. H. C. P. Adams, G. T. Bates, R. D. Binnie, Mr. and Mrs. F. F. Boult. Messrs. J. R. Combe, G. St. F. Dare, Mr. and Mrs. P. H. Flood-Page, Mr. G. M. Gifford, Mrs. Graham Scott, Mr. and Mrs. C. S. Griffiths, Mr. R. K. Hardwick. Miss Hissey, Messrs. E. S. Holl, C. H. Willes Johnson, Professor W. E. Le Gros Clark, Messrs. C. F. C. Macaskie, G. T. M. MacBryan, Mr. and Mrs. A. H. Noble, Mr. and Mrs. F. A. W. Page-Turner, Mr. Edward Parnell. Mr. and Mrs. C. E. Pascoe, Messrs. E. E. F. Pretty, T. A. Reid, J. A. Smith, Mr. and Mrs. J. C. Swayne, and Mr. E. M. Woodward.

His Highness the Rajah, accompanied by Her Highness the Ranee, Dayang Valerie and Mr. E. S. Holl, Private Secretary, left Marseilles for Singapore by s.s. Ranchi on 20th October. Their Highnesses are expected to arrive at Kuching by s.s. Marudu on 13th November. We understand Mr. and Mrs. H. A. Adams, and Miss Adams, are also arriving by this vessel and are to be the guests of Their Highnesses.

H.M.S. Herald, Captain E. F. B. Law, R.N., arrived at Pending on 27th October, and remained in port until 30th October. Captain Law was the guest of His Highness the Tuan Muda at Astana. A number of Officers were the guests of Kuching residents. We are informed that H.M.S. Herald will spend several more week ends with us. A very welcome and popular addition to our community.

Race week passed off with its usual round of festivities. A most enjoyable dance was given by His Highness the Tuan Muda at Astana on 10th October, and by the Government Secretary, Mr. C. D. Adams, and Mrs. Adams, at The Residency on 7th October. An account of the races appears elsewhere in our columns.

The “Medah” Bangsawan, whose final performance in Kuching took place on 30th October, is proceeding to Miri. We take this opportunity to congratulate the actors, actresses and all concerned for their excellent performances. The Bangsawan was a great asset to the race week festivities.

H.H.M.Y. Maimuna left for Sibu and Miri on 11th October, conveying many race week visitors back to their stations.

We welcome hack to Kuching Dr. E. M. Marjoribanks, Mr. J. O. Gilbert and Mr. W. J. Chater by s.s. Marudu on 2nd October; Mrs. L. N. Reynolds and Master Reynolds by s.s. Kudat on 9th October; Mr. G. St. F. Dare and Mr. L. D. Kennedy by s.s. Darrel on 30th October. Congratulations to Mr. W. J. Chater who, while on home leave, was presented with the Freedom of the City of London.

Obituary.
It is with deep regret we have to report the death of Dr. L. H. Krol, late Leader of the Geological Surveyor Dutch West Borneo Dr. Krol, with his wide knowledge and cheery manner, was always a welcome visitor to Sarawak. While on leave in Holland early in 1932 severe illness developed, which later turned to cancer, and Dr. Krol passed away on the 15th August last.
The sympathy of all who knew him will he extended to his wife and son in their sad bereavement.
It is with deep regret we have to report the death of Mr. R. S. Douglas, late of the Sarawak Civil Service, who retired on pension in 1922. Mr. Douglas joined the service on 17th November, 1896, and served practically all his time in the Fourth Division, fourteen years at Baram and ten years at Miri, where he founded the Government station, when the Sarawak Oilfields, Limited, commenced operations there. He attended an important Peacemaking with the Kenyah tribes of the Batang Kayan, Dutch Borneo in 1909 and brought all the Kelabit tribes in the head-waters of the Baram River under the Sarawak Flag in 1906. Mr. Douglas was the first Officer to reach the head-waters of the Baram River and to explore the country between the headwaters of that river and the Tatau, Limbang and Trusan Rivers. He erected Lio Matu Fort near the Dutch Border in 1900. Officers of the Sarawak Civil Service and all communities will join us in tendering our deep sympathy to Mrs. Douglas in her sad bereavement.

A Day in a Rickshaw-Puller’s Life.
I had a horrible dream sometime ago, that I was socially degraded and enjoyed life in the capacity of a rickshaw-puller. My knowledge of English and Euclid’s theorems were gone from me and I was just an ordinary rickshaw-puller, ignorant, and with a craving for opium, bemoaning the adversities of life while sitting on the footboard of my vehicle and smoking a long queer pipe.
It was just near the junction of a busy street that I made my contemplation. My aching heart longed for the good old days when a motor car was a luxury, when people used rickshaws and paid handsome fares, and when there was plenty of opium to smoke. Now people prefer cars to rick-shaws because the former are cheap, convenient and fast, and if ever I were to catch the man who invented the motor car, I would give him the best biding of his life. My contemplation was short when a stentorian voice barked, “Hoi, curse you, get away from that corner or I shall take you to the police station for breach of Municipal law.” It came from a bearded Sikh policeman, and I promptly changed my parking place, cursing inwardly at the whole tribe of Sikhs, which rather surprised myself as I never swore before, or even wished anyone ill. But my trouble was forgotten when a fat Towkey emerged from a shop, for he was Towkey Wong Ah Fatt himself, the philanthropist, and to my supreme joy he waddled to my rickshaw and got in.
I took him to his house about half a mile away, and he paid me with a dollar note, mumbling all the time, “Don’t trouble yourself, don’t trouble yourself, you may keep the change.” I was highly elated and thanked him profusely. One dollar! Enough for opium and food for three days! May all the gods bless Towkey Wong Ah Fatt.
“Hey, cha, cha.” a Malay was calling me obviously for his better-half, who was with him. That was the worst part of it. They always economize when their better halves are with them, but nevertheless I walked up to him.
“Cha (a corruption from a Chinese word meaning carriage), how much do you charge us to take us as far as Kampong Satok.” “Thirty cents,” I lied courageously, like all rickshaw men do.
“What; thirty cents for half a mile? Preposterous! I paid ten cents last time.”
“All right twenty-five cents then,” I pretended to soften.
“Allah be blessed, we would rather walk,” cried the Malay.
“Then walk,” I said impertinently, and left them with great dignity. So long as I had that one dollar in my pocket why should I care for that paltry ten cents. My old friend opium was calling me anyway and I heard the call.
I left my vehicle on the parking place and entered into my paradise, an opium den, feeling that I had done a good job for the day. -(Contributed.)

A Depression Story.
An old, grey-haired agricultural labourer told a friend of mine the other day that although “things are no better, this depression is nearly over.”
“Why do you say that?” asked my friend.
“Well,” explained the old man, “I have seen several of these depressions. They come every so often, and usually last about the life of three pairs of trousers. I am wearing my third pair now, and they are so thin that when I sit on a penny I can tell whether it is heads or tails.”

Examinations of the Institute of Book-keepers.
The results are encouraging, as all the six candidates who sat for the examination were successful. Of the Stage 1, the one taking the Ninth Place especially deserves mention, considering that this examination is held all over the British Isles and Colonies.
Those who took the Stage 1 are the senior boys of the St. Thomas’ School, and had spent their evenings in study at the Nanas Road Evening Commercial Class. The Stage 2 passes obtained their coaching by correspondence from the Bennett College and The School of Accountancy, Glasgow, respectively. -(Contributed.)

Children Risk Death!
DANGER OF WEARING A CELLULOID BANGLE:
Thousands of school-children in Malaya, mainly those among the poorer classes, are daily risking serious injury through the apparently harmless practice of wearing bangles.
These ornaments, made of celluloid, are worn by almost every child in Singapore. They are so cheap that even the poorest boy or girl can buy one. They are made in attractive colours and cost no more than half a cent each.
But they are highly inflammable and may be set blazing by the tiniest spark from a match or a cigarette.
The “Sunday Times” has been asked to warn parents against allowing their children to buy these dangerous trinkets and to ask school-teachers to discourage the wearing of them.
The bangles are manufactured in Japan and are being imported here in huge quantities, so great is the demand for them.

Car Raffle.
Mr. Kelley’s car which was raffled on Saturday, 28th October, was won by Miss Wong Ah Lian, c/o Keng Lee, of Limbang. Ticket No. 438.

The Nordic Myth.
When Herr Hitler speaks of making Germany as far as possible a Nordic nation, by the prosecution of Jewish and other undesired elements, he does not have the authority of an anthropological expert. Anthropology, like the genealogy that Lord Raglan has been discoursing upon, is a rather treacherous field for the tyro.
Indeed, the facts of Germany’s racial make-up seem to be distinctly against the Nazi chief’s favourite ambition. Professor Le Gros Clark, of London University, who, with Professor F. G. Parsons, made certain anthropometrical observations on German prisoners during the Great War, writes that since the sixth century the broad-headed Alpine race has been slowly and steadily supplanting the long-headed. Nordic type throughout Germany, until now there is no part of Germany where Alpine or Slav characteristics do not predominate among the people.
For drawing attention to these conclusions the Professor will doubtless be accorded a prominent place in the Nazi black book. -Edinburgh Evening Despatch.

OLD SARAWAK.
From the Sarawak Gazette 61 Years Ago.
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE
No. 51 SATURDAY. 2ND NOV., 1872. Price 5 cents.
ITEMS.
Our readers will be glad to see the Notice we print in another place that the new Hotel will be open for the reception of visitors at Christmas next. The building stands upon some rising ground to the right of the Rock Road, scarcely five minutes’ walk from the riverside, and at the same end of the town as the Public offices, the Steamer’s wharf, the Fort and the Church. From the nature of the ground on which the building has been erected, the top of a hill sloping East and West having been levelled to make room for its foundations, there is a good clear view in either direction, and the house itself stands in the open. The extensive clearing once cultivated by the Sugar Company is at no great distance, and over this some excellent snipe shooting may be had at the proper season, which is now commencing. Visitors may be reminded that Kuching possesses a Library and Reading Room, where the English Paper may be seen on the arrival of the steamer, as well as a Billiard Room for those whose tastes are that way 
inclined. The first of these is close to the Hotel, and the other about ten minutes’ walk from it.
The Tariff of charges which is being published we believe is calculated to give satisfaction, and the general management of the Hotel will be found to be in efficient hands.

Sarawak Library.
Kindly presented by Mr. B. A. Trechman: -
Kindly presented by Mr. R. G. Aikman: -
Purchased by the Committee: -

First Division News.
DISTRICT COURT.
September, 1933.
The Acting District Officer, Mr. W. S. B. Buck reports: -
General. -His Highness the Rajah’s birthday was celebrated on 26th, a Public Holiday being observed.
His Highness the Tuan Muda presented Long Service Decorations to a number of Government servants.
The Acting Assistant District Officer, Mr. W. H. C. C. Morice made a tour of inspection In the Munggu Babi district from the 5th to 9th, and another tour of the Samarahan district from 18th to the 21st.

UPPER SARAWAK DISTRICT.
September, 1933.
The Assistant District Officer, Mr. R. G. Aikman, reports: -
Agriculture. -The Dahan Rubber Estates harvested 26,000 lbs. of dry rubber during the month. The rainfall at Bau was 5.16 inches. The highest recorded in 24 hours was 2.25 niches and the daily average was .17 of an inch. The rainfall for the month at Dahan Rubber Estates was 7.12 inches.
General. -On the 3rd I visited Gunong Singghi, walking up from Buso by way of Musi and returning next day via Pangkallan Singghi On the 14th 1 walked across from Poak to Kampong Danoh on the
Left-Hand Branch. Proceeding by way of Pangkallan Ampat and Sennah I arrived at Kampong Sennah Serimut and there met Mr. S. G. Hansom, Acting Assistant District Officer, Sndong. A settlement was arrived at regarding the long-standing farming land dispute between the Sennah Land Dyaks and those of Temah on the Sadong side. A boundary was laid down which will be surveyed in due course. I returned to Bau by way of Tebakang and the Simanggang road and arrived back on the 22nd. The 26th, being the anniversary of the birthday of His Highness the Rajah, was observed as a Public Holiday and the Government Offices were closed. I proceeded to Kuching on the 25th returning to Bau on the 27th.
Gold Mining. -The Huan Gold Mining Syndicate, Limited, at Buan, near Buso, commenced leaching on the 14th. This brings the number of companies now operating by the cyanide process to thirteen.
The price of gold reached a new high level of $55.75 per ounce during the month. A number of the Companies me now having a half-monthly clean up and often sell the gold thus obtained at a higher price than they might have received at the end of the month. Prospecting operations are still being carried on as briskly as ever throughout the district and, though there must be many disappointments, a number of these prospectors report satisfactory results and are accordingly optimistic. A comparatively large amount of ore is still obtained from caves and crevices high up in limestone cliffs, in one case some four hundred feet up a vertical cliff face, and the percentage of actual gold won from such ore is remarkably high. Seventeen General Prospecting Licences were issued during the month Seven applications for Exclusive Prospecting Licences were received and four such licences were issued. The actual gold obtained by the following companies for the month of August, 1933, was: -

LUNDU DISTRICT.
September, 1933.
The Acting Assistant District Officer, Mr. E. H. Elam, reports: -
Agriculture. -There has been a great demand for the Government pure line swamp padi seeds, and these have been distributed, one gantang per person. All hill farmers took advantage of the very dry weather from 18th to 20th to burn off.

SADONG DISTRICT.
September, 1933.
The Acting Assistant District Officer, Mr. S. G. Hansom, reports: -
Agriculture. -During my recent visit to Tebakang, I noticed a number of exceptionally good Dyak “burns,” many of which have been more than usually successful. Burning oil, including down river, bus now generally been completed, and a considerable amount of padi has already been planted.
Two sacks of seed padi were supplied by the Agricultural Department to the Bugis Headman, Haji Abu Bakar, for planting on the Bugis padi reservation at Tanjong Beluku.
General. -I left up river on the 11th instant, visiting Gedong Serian and Tebakang. I met the Assistant District Officer, Bau, Mr. R. G. Aikman, at Kampong Serimut, when the Sennah-Temah boundary dispute was settled. Mr. Aikman accompanied me back down river returning to Bau via Serian and the Kuching-Simanggang Road.
Tuesday the 26th instant, the birthday of His Highness the Rajah, was observed as a Public Holiday and Government Offices closed.
The rainfall for the month was 5.39 inches.

Rugby at Kuching.
SEASON OPENS BEFORE BRILLIANT GATHERING.
The social season at Kuching reached its climax on the afternoon of Tuesday, 10th October, on the K.F.C. padang when twenty-one stalwarts, both good and true, turned out to give an exhibition of rugby football to the awe-struck inhabitants of the town.
At first it appeared as if there would be a slight hitch in the proceedings, as the spectators, by this time numbering a round dozen, far outnumbered the players. The ratio however adjusted itself, and eventually twenty-one enthusiasts took the field.
After a few formalities had been settled, such as the position of the goal-lines and the advisability of having scrums, and there had been a short wait for those inevitable offenders who agree to play and let everyone down at the last minute by not turning up, the game commenced. Whites defended the road end mid kicked off. At once the two packs got down to it and rush and counter rush followed, till a movement by the Whites starting on the right resulted in the ball passing on to Anderson who scored a nice try. He himself converted with a pretty drop-kick. The habit of converting tries by means of a drop-kick may be frowned on at Twickenham or Murrayfield, but we doubt if any wearers of the rose or the thistle ever tried to place-kick a heavy rugger ball with a pair of rain-sodden gym shoes.
Whites continued the pressure, the game being enlivened at times by the efforts of certain members who seemed somewhat uncertain as to whether the game was rugger or soccer, and eventually Field scored a second try. Half-time came with Whites leading 8 to nil.
The ground was very heavy after the recent rains, and all the players wearing gym shoes, they found tricky footwork somewhat at a discount. Kick and rush tactics paid best.
The White forwards started the second half with a “body-line” offensive, but, unlike their fellow sportsmen in the cricket field who use the ball as the spear-head of attack, the White forwards regarded it as a somewhat unnecessary adjunct and following the sound old Scottish maxim of “To hell with the hall-get on with the game,” they were rewarded with such success that when the ball was rediscovered Pollard and Taylor between them got a try at the corner. The kick failed.
Colours roused themselves and reached, their opponent’s line, but lost control of the ball when Hudden had a grand opportunity of turning defence into attack. He however dallied by the wayside and Tait brought off a fine tackle. Shortly after this Lascelles, who all through had played a sterling game, scored a fine try after picking up in the loose. It was the best individual effort of the match. Crossley just failed to convert, a fine kick hitting the upright.
Whites retaliated and Field had a nice run and kick across, Millar and Taylor were up to score but were ruled off-side. One of their forwards scored after some good passing shortly after, but was unfortunate in choosing the wrong line to fall across and the game closed with Whites triumphant by 11 points to 3.	:
The outstanding players were Field amongst the backs, and Lascelles and Millar forward. Thanks are due to all who gave the spectators, both European and Asiatic, a most enjoyable twenty minutes, and especially to (a) Macpherson, but for whose energy and enthusiasm the game would never have taken place: (b) P. M. Adams, who handles a whistle as wisely and discreetly as he does a racing pony ; (c) those players who, having left their playing days long behind them as they thought, once again donned the jersey; and last but not least (d) the soccer players who nobly stepped into the breach and did their damdest at it strange, and to them unpleasant, version of their own sport.

Cricket.
KUCHING versus OUTSTATIONS.
Played at Padungan, 8th October.
Kuching won the toss and the ticklish decision being decided of whether to bat first after a bad night, when neither the hand nor the eye is top steady, and then field during the heat of the morning, outbalanced the soundness of the old adage that the side winning the loss always bats first, Kuching batted. The opening batsmen seemed to have less of the “morning after the night before” feelings as runs came briskly, 60 being hoisted with only three wickets down. During this period Harding had come under severe censure by cleverly catching Hammond while fielding as “sub,” and Taylor who hit one 6, and three 4’s was well taken at first slip. Moir was caught when he seemed set for a big score, and then a rot setting in, no one could stay with Hannigan, who carried his bat.
Chaplin, although he came in for some punishment, bowled really well and kept up his speed and direction very well. Gilbert, who attained some success, belongs to the Verity rather than the Larwood school of thought, while Crossley, who did great execution amongst the “tail-enders,” is rather of the “tear-‘em and worry-‘em” school.
Outstations started in disastrous fashion and actually lost 8 wickets for 42 runs. Hudden, who hit three 4’s and looked dangerous, was very nicely held in the slips. The game looked as good as over when Farrelly joined Chaplin. The confidence of the outstation supporters was rather shaken by the newcomer’s hazy idea as to the prevailing fashion in which pads are being worn this season. Nothing daunted, however, the pair added 26 invaluable runs, Chaplin batting really nicely and Farrelly by missing all the bad balls, stopping the doubtful ones, and hitting the good ones to all parts of the field, proved himself a splendid man at a crisis. On Chaplin’s dismissal White carried on the good work and 13 more runs were added in the rain, and things were beginning to become critical for the men of the metropolis when Harding retrieved his reputation by bringing off a second clever catch, for his own  side this time.
The intricate mathematical knowledge required to keep a complete bowling analysis being too much for any Outstation officer on a Sunday morning, the valuable records of this historic game are of necessity incomplete, but at the fall of the 8th wicket Hannigan had taken 4 wickets for 14, and Hammond 4 for 26.
The game was free of that rough unruly element which so often enters into a “needle match” of this description, and that section of the crowd which tended to become boisterous was easily kept in order.

KUCHING.
Full scores were: -
Bowling analysis: -

Kuching Football Association.
PRESENTATION OF SHIELDS, CUP AND MEDALS.
Instituted in 1926, the 8th final of the “James Buchanan” Cup knock-out departmental competition was played on the 14th October on the K.F.C, Ground. The finalists were the Medical “A” (holders) and the Police “A.” Both teams had an easy passage in the Cup Tournament until they met in the final. The Medical “A,” who have held the Cup for the last two seasons, were beaten by a single-goal margin.
A large crowd saw the K.F.A. 1st Division League Final match between the Medical “A” and the Police “A” at the Padungan Ground on Saturday, 21st October, which has brought the local soccer season to a successful close. The Medical “A” defeated the Police “A” by 4-2 in a fast clean game.
It was on the whole a pleasing game to watch with the honour going to the proper quarter, as the Medical “A” showed a very high standard of efficiency, especially in their forward line combination.
A new 2nd Division League was instituted this year with the object of giving more encouragement to weaker teams and in order to make the games more equal. Eight teams participated in the new Division and the Sarawak Chinese Football Association 2nd XI had the honour to be the first to win the 2nd Division Championship.
Mr. J. P. Baird has been kind enough to donate the new Trophy called “The Padungan Shield” for the annual 2nd Division League Tournament. This shield, which was made locally, was given to mark his past connection with the Association as its President ever since its inception.
Thanks to the courtesy of Mr. D. V. Murphy, the Constabulary Private Band was in attendance and played selections on the ground before the match and again during the interval.
Thanks are also due to Messrs. The Borneo Company, Limited, for presenting 11 Silver Medals to the winners of the “James Buchanan” Cup Competition, and to the Datu Amar and other Malay gentlemen for presenting one set of Silver Medals to the winners of the 2nd Division League.
His Highness the Tuan Muda who was present kindly gave away the Shields, Cup and Medals to the Captains of the respective winning teams at the conclusion of the game.
Mr. J. P. Baird. President of the Kuching Football Association, in a short speech, thanked His Highness for the honour in gracing the final League match and for giving away the various trophies. His Highness congratulated all the winners for their success and complimented the two teams playing that day for their good, clean and hard game, and praised the work rendered by the officials towards the success of the Association.
The results of this year’s competitions were as follows: -

Sarawak Chinese Football Association.
LEAGUE FINAL.
The final match of the S.C.F.A. Football League was played on the Padungan Ground on Tuesday, 10th October, the competing finalists being Freddy Lim’s XI and Weng Sheng’s XI.
One of the conditions of the League was that the three teams which finished 1st, 2nd and 3rd in the League contest were required to play again for the final by a knock-out system, which was duly drawn for, and the winner of this final was to hold the Championship of the S.C.F.A. League.
This new regulation has made the tournament more competitive and interesting from the beginning to the end.
This year’s championship goes to Freddy Lim’s XI, which team had put up a plucky fight against Weng Sheng’s XI in the knock-out final and won the game by 4-3.
The Acting Government Secretary and Mrs. C. D. Adams were present, and at the conclusion of the game, Mrs. Adams presented the Championship Cup to the Captain of Freddy Lim’s XI and Silver Medals to the Members of the team.
Dr. Wong Cheong Way, President of the S.C.F.A., expressed thanks to the Acting Government Secretary for the honour of his presence and to Mrs. C. D. Adams for giving away the prizes. -(Contributed.)

Malay Football League Table.
The following are the positions in the Malay Football League Competitions up to 30th October, 1933.

Sarawak Turf Club Autumn Meeting, 1933.
This was quite the most successful meeting of recent years and was well attended by all communities. As always late in the season the weather was uncertain and threatening on both days, only a little rain fell, however, on the second day. The going was holding but, considering the amount of rain which fell in the few days prior to the meeting, the course was in excellent condition.
His Highness the Tuan Muda and Astana party were present on both days. On the first day His Highness had the pleasure of leading in White Label, who sprang a popular surprise in the Datus’ Stakes. At the conclusion of racing His Highness very kindly distributed the prizes to the successful owners.
With the exception of Division III, the fields were above the average. It is very gratifying to notice new blood in Division I in Polo, Burong Gruda and Rhubarb. Polo was brought down from North Borneo by his owner Mr. H. M. Ince, and he has the distinction of being the first owner to race from there under our rules. Polo unfortunately went lame in the last few days of training and, although he ran once on each day, he was not in form and was withdrawn from his other engagements. Now that the ice has been broken we hope to welcome other owners. The great difficulty in the past has been communication, but the direct service from Jesselton now makes things considerably easier. Burong Gruda and Rhubarb were both making their first acquaintance with racing and should both develop into good ponies. Under lighter weights Burong Gruda ran into a place in both his races on the second day.
The Champion Cup went to a Second Division pony Silver Blaze, in the ownership of the Chan Bros. Kongsi. Had Mickey Mouse beaten Silver Blaze in the State Sprint instead of dividing it with him, Flying Fox would have retained this Cup. Damit was again at the head of the list of winning jockeys with six winners and five seconds.
Racing on the first day was marred by an unfortunate incident in the Ranee’s Cup. Coming into the straight Silver Blaze was leading with the whole course to race in. When Damit brought Flying Fox up to challenge and was overlapping, Bakar pulled Silver Blaze into him and bumped him badly. Flying Fox was knocked out of his stride, and as soon as Damit got him going again Bakar bumped him again. Silver Blaze passed the post first by half a length. In lodging his objection Mr. C. D. Adams told the Stewards that he was objecting to the riding of Silver Blaze only and he did not want the race. The Stewards questioned both jockeys, and after a short discussion suspended Bakar for the rest of the meeting. This probably cost him the jockey’s prize as he had already ridden four winners.
Flying Fox, although he just missed holding the Champion Cup, was the outstanding pony in Division I. He won the Rajah’s Cup over 1 1/3 miles under topweight for the fourth time in succession. The Brown Jack of the far East. Kim Mah ran very well and demonstrated his ability to carry weight over shorter distances. Sabar and Royston were disappointing. In Division II Silver Blaze, Mickey Mouse and Casanova all caught the Judge’s eye. Silver Blaze won two races in his Division and one open race. Casanova, running in the colours of Mrs. K. D. Thomas, is a pony which will soon be making the others gallop for the bigger prizes. And Division III -Gorgeous Wrecks and Resurrections-here Pengarah took turn and turnabout with Mudahan, followed by gallant stragglers. Full details of the results appear elsewhere.
CENTAUR.

RESULTS.
First Day.
Saturday, 7th October, 1933.
RACE 1. -2.30 p.m. THE TUAN MUDA’S CUP. 
6 furlongs.
DIVISION I.
Sabar led from Kim Mah, Flying Fox, Akal, and White Label, with Royston last. Kim Mah went to the front just before the road with White Label lying second and Flying Fox closing up. Kim Mah led on the ditch-side with Flying Fox going well in the middle of the course. Damit appeared to make his effort too late and just failed to get up to Kim Mah.

RACE 2. -3 p.m. THE SATOK STAKES. 
5 furlongs.
DIVISION II.
A bunched field to the 3 furlong mark where Silver Blaze pulled out closely followed by Mickey Mouse. Once in the straight these two had the race between them. Silver Blaze, disposed of Mickey Mouse’s challenge and won comfortably.

RACE 3. -3.30 p.m. THE B.C.L. STAKES.
6 furlongs.
DIVISION III.
Only three ran. Pengarah made all the running but just failed to stay the distance.

RACE 4. -4 p.m. DATUS’ STAKES.
3 furlongs.
DIVISION I.
Flamingo took up the running at once from Polo with the rest of the field closing up. In the straight White Label came through and, heading Flamingo, went on to spring a popular surprise. Flying Fox was travelling faster than anything else at the end of the journey and just did Flamingo out of the second honours.

RACE 5. -4.30 p.m. THE MATANG STAKES.
4 furlongs.
DIVISION II.
With Silver Blaze withdrawn from this race it looked a certainly for Mickey Mouse, and he was supported accordingly. Radio showed the way to Water Polo, Mickey Mouse, Jorrocks, and Casanova, at the fall of the flag. Mickey Mouse had the situation well in hand at the Ara tree. Casanova’s saddle slipped at the road.

RACE 6. -5 p.m. THE PENDING STAKES.
3 furlongs.
DIVISION III.
Pengarah jumped off in front and made all the running. Mudahan and Gruda had a good fight for second money.

RACE 7. -5.30 p.m. THE RANEE’S CUP.
1 Mile.
OPEN TO ALL DIVISIONS.
Silver Blaze led from September, Flying Fox, and Mickey Mouse, with Akal last. Flying Fox had moved up handy to Silver Blaze who was still leading at the road. In the straight Damit brought Flying Fox up to challenge Silver Blaze and was soon overlapping. Bakar pulled across Flying Fox and bumped him twice badly and got past the Judge half a length to the good. No one was surprised to see the red disc up, but Silver Blaze was permitted to keep the race and the jockey Bakar was suspended for the rest of the meeting.

Second Day.
Monday, 9th October, 1933.
RACE 1. -2.30 p.m. THE SLUMP STAKES.
5 furlongs.
DIVISION I.
Flamingo led from Kim Mah, White Label, and Burong Gruda. Flamingo still showed the way after entering the straight. Kim Mah then came up on the ditch-side with Burong Gruda racing wide under the stand. Weight began to tell on Flamingo in the last furlong and he gave way to Kim Mah who won strongly.

RACE 2. -3 p.m. THE EASTERN RIVER TANNERIES CUP. 
6 furlongs.
DIVISION II.
September and Silver Blaze made the running to the road with Mickey Mouse and Casanova lying handy. At the Ara tree Mickey Mouse and Casanova closed up and they were racing in a bunch. Silver Blaze found the pace and the weight too much for him, as did September. Noon took Casanova into the lead just before the post and kept him there to win cleverly. September stopped Silver Blaze from a place by a head.

RACE 3. -3.30 p.m. THE SARAWAK STAKES.
5 furlongs.
DIVISION III.
Pengarah made all the running and won comfortably. Three ran.

RACE 4. -4 p.m. THE TURF CLUB STAKES.
4 furlongs.
DIVISION I.
Flamingo got away at the fall of the flag from White Label, Kim Mah, Burong Gruda. Flying Fox, and Sabar last. This order was maintained into the straight except that Flying Fox had started moving up. At the Ara tree it appeared to be a race between Flamingo and Burong Gruda with the former beginning to feel the weight. Damit then brought Flying Fox through his field in a very well-judged finish and left everything else standing. Kim Mah was fourth. Rhubarb last.

RACE 5. -4.30 p.m. THE STATES SPRINT.
3 furlongs.
DIVISION II.
From an excellent start the field raced in a bunch all the way. In the last few yards Casanova, Silver Blaze. Mickey Mouse, and Radio, were racing neck and neck. Siran forced Silver Blaze into a slight lead, but Damit responded immediately on Mickey Mouse and, coming again in the last strides, these two passed the judge together. Casanova 4th.

RACE 6. -5 p.m. THE GOLD MINERS’ PURSE.
4 furlongs.
DIVISION III.
Pengarah led at first out found the weight too much for him. Mudahan took charge once in the straight and won without trouble.

RACE 7. -5.30 p.m. THE RAJAH’S CUP.
Round the course (1 1/3 Miles.)
A HANDICAP FOR ALL DIVISIONS.
The field appeared at the 5 furlongs with Silver Blaze and Mickey Mouse racing in front, followed by September, Flying Fox, with Akal last. Mickey Mouse and Silver Blaze were done with at the road, and September came on with Flying Fox making up ground steadily. Half-way up the straight Damit took Flying Fox into the lead. Medin shook up September, but there was nothing left in him.

Second Division News.
September, 1933.
Extracts from the Second Divisional Reports by Mr. J. B. Archer, Resident: -
I left Simanggang on the 7th and returned on the 18th, having visited Lingga, Kabong. Saratok, Roban, Pusa, Debak, and Betong. Nothing of much importance was brought before me, and most of the inhabitants were on their farms.
On the 10th Mr. Barcroft and I rode on horseback from Saratok to Hoban, a distance of 12 1/2 miles. This is the first time it has been done.
There was a ceremonial parade on His Highness the Rajah’s Birthday and I took the salute. Later I presented Long Service Decorations. All the European Officers in the Division and many Native Officers and other Government Servants attended.

SIMANGGANG DISTINCT.
September, 1933.
The District Officer, Mr. R. L. Daubeny, reports: -
Travelling. -On the 11th instant Mr. Fisher, Cadet, accompanied by P.N.O. Wan Abdulah, left for the Ulu Lingga by the overland route via Melugu and returned again on 16th instant.
General. -The Resident, Second Division, left for a general tour of substations on 7th instant, returning to Simanggang again on 18th instant. 
I regret to report the death from bronchial pneumonia of the young son of Awang Sipudin, Native Officer, who was the only grandson of the late Data Dulraschid.

BETONG DISTRICT.
September, 1933.
The Acting District Officer, Mr. J. J. Hill, reports: -
Agriculture. -The natives during the month have been preparing their padi farms. Burning off has been carried out in most parts, but the weather has been so unreliable that in many cases thoroughly successful burns have not been experienced.

LUBOK ANTU DISTRICT.
September, 1933.
The Assistant District Officer, Mr. A. Macpherson, reports: -
Police. -A platoon under “U”P.I. Abang Mentaril proceeded overland to Simanggang on 22nd to take part in the parade on His Highness’ Birthday. They returned on 28th.

ENGKILILI DISTRICT.
September, 1933.
The Acting Assistant District Officer, Mr. E. M. Selous, reports: -
Agriculture. -The weather improved during the second week and enabled the Dyaks to burn off a certain amount of their fellings. General reports are that the burns throughout the district were only fair, this would appear to be due to delay in clearing.
General. -The post of Capitan China, left vacant by Jap Khin’s resignation, has been filled by Toh Tai Peng of Chop “Meng Seng.”
Rain fell on nine days with a total fall of 7.07 inches.

SARATOK, KALAKA DISTRICT.
September, 1933.
The Acting Assistant District Officer, Mr. J. C. H. Barcroft, reports: -
Dyak and Native Affairs generally. -Reports from Kabong notify a severe storm on the 8th; great damage was caused, only one Jungket trap remaining standing. In view of the approaching Landas the majority of fishermen have decided not to effect repairs and the season is thus brought to an early close.
Very few Kabong Malays are farming this year, most of them preferring to work nipa palm.
Agriculture. -The rainfall was heavy again this month and many natives have not yet completed burning their farms; unless a period of dry weather ensues early next month, next year’s harvest will be jeopardized.
General. -On the 1st I returned to Saratok from Roban.
The Resident arrived in the Rentis on the afternoon of the 7th.
On the afternoon of the 9th the Resident witnessed the final of the Kalaka Football Cup between the Sarawak Government XI and the Kalaka Malays XI. The Kampongs played well but were lacking in combination and were eventually defeated 3-0. The Resident presented the Cup to the winners.

Third Division News.
SIBU AND KANOWIT DISTRICT.
September, 1933.
The District Officer, Mr. W. F. Dick, reports: -
Trade: -
Miscellaneous. -Mr. C. Pitt-Hardacre arrived by the Sri Mukah on Wednesday the 6th, to inspect the filing system in use at this Station. He left again the following day to return to Kuching.
Capt. and Mrs. Le Gros Clark left by H.H.M.Y. Maimuna at daylight on 10th to return to Kuching.
The outboard motor supplied to this Station in May last had done 330 hours running up to the end of this month, the only trouble experienced was with the propeller which was badly bent through constantly hitting driftwood. A new propeller put into use this month was found to be too soft for upriver work and is being kept for use in the main river only.
Mr. and Mrs. Kelley and their two children arrived on 19th, Mr. Kelley has been appointed in charge of the Constabulary and Prisons in the Third Division.
The Offices were closed on 26th in honour of His Highness the Rajah’s Birthday. A parade was held in front of the old Fort and the Acting Resident presented Long Service Decorations to Haji Mujitabah, Tuan Khatib, Matu, and Keshin Singh. Constable No. 548, Sibu.

SARIKEI, BINATANG, REJANG, MATU AND DARO.
September, 1933.
The District Officer, Mr. H. E. Cutfield, reports: - 
Trade: -Binatang and Sarikei.
General. -His Highness the Tuan Muda, accompanied by Messrs. Rennie, Lowe and Bateman on H.H.M.Y. Maimuna, called at Sarikei en route from Mukah to Kuching.

MUKAH DISTRICT.
September, 1933.
The District Officer, Mr. L. K. Morse, reports: -
Obituary. -The death of Haji Usop bin Haji Mohamad Taib, Tuan Imaum of Mukah. is recorded with regret. The deceased was a brother of Datu Awang Udin and was very popular with the local people.
Agriculture. -About two-thirds of the farms in the district had been burned off at the end of the month. Conflicting stories of the prospects of the illipe nut crop are current. It is too early yet to make any definite statement as to the prospects of a good crop.
Miscellaneous. -His Highness the Tuan Muda, accompanied by Capt. C. P. Lowe, Mr. A. A. Rennie, and Mr. R. H. Bateman, arrived at Mukah early on the 16th. His Highness made his official landing at 8.30 a.m. and interviewed the local chiefs. His Highness and party left for Oya at 5.30 am. The following morning. Messrs. Chaplin, of the Borneo Company, Limited, and Gifford, of the British American Tobacco Company, paid a short visit to the station during the month.

OYA AND DALAT.
September, 1933.
The Acting Assistant District Officer. Mr. N. E. Hughes, reports: -
Travelling. -On 9th September, I left for the Ulu Oya, accompanied by Mr. J. L. Noakes. Assistant Superintendent of Surveys, Dalat, who wished to make a preliminary reconnaissance before starting the survey of the Oya river.
N. Paku was reached on 12th September, and it was found that a substantial house had been erected, and was completed except for the kitchen.
Shipping. -On 4th September, the Juragan of m.v. Nam Hoi reported that he had encountered the wreck of a schooner about five miles off Plai’ee Puteh, a place half-way between Igan mouth and Oya. A search-party of police and coolies was despatched along the beach to look for survivors, and on the 5th news arrived that the wreck was that of the schooner Mas Igan which had cleared from Mukah at 2 a.m. on 3rd September, and which had sunk as a result of a severe storm the same night. Fortunately all the crew were saved and managed to reach Kampong Igan on the morning of 4th September.
Miscellaneous. -The chief event of the month was a visit paid to the district by His Highness the Tuan Muda, who arrived on 17th September, in H.H.M.Y. Maimuna, accompanied by Mr. A. A. Rennie, Treasurer of Sarawak, Capt. C. P. Lowe, Director of Public Works, and Mr. R. H. Batemen, Manager, Sarawak Electricity-Supply Company.
His Highness arrived from Mukah at 8.30 a.m. and landed half-an-hour later. After inspecting the Constabulary Guard of Honour and meeting the assembled Tua-tua Kampong and the leading Chinese, His Highness went into Court, and heard such requests as were forthcoming.
After inspecting the station. His Highness left for Dalat in the Maimuna.
After visiting the bazaar, the Mission, and the Survey Office, His Highness re-embarked in the Maimuna and returned to Oya, leaving for Sarikei the following morning.
On 26th September, His Highness the Rajah’s Birthday was celebrated at Dalat with a programme of festivities beginning with a large-scale tuba-fishing. Over 20 piculs of tuba had been collected from the Kampongs; the beating-out and mixing, were carried out under Government supervision, and at 9 a.m. a gun was fired from m.l. Leonora, and the tuba was thrown into the river at a point just below Kampong Kekan. Fish began to appear almost immediately and continued to come to the surface in good numbers, and the tuba fishing, which continued during the whole of the 26th and 27th, was unanimously acclaimed a great success.
The Oya river on this occasion presented a memorable sight, the whole reach below Kekan being filled with gaily decorated boats, of which well over a thousand must have been present. Most of these boats continued to float up and down the river until the evening of the following day, when, having reached the Kuala, they returned to their various kampongs in a long procession.
On the 26th Mr. L. K. Morse, District Officer, Mukah, presented Long Service Decorations.
At midday a luncheon was given in the Court House to which over fifty persons sat down. The guests included all available Government servants and the heads of the local Malay, Indian and Chinese communities.

Fourth Division News.
MIRI DISTRICT.
September, 1933.
The District Officer, Mr. F. G. Carpenter, reports: -
Trade: -
Staff. -Mr. R. G. Talbot took over the duties of Officer Supervising Police Sector vice Mr. W L. P. Sochon. who proceeded on home furlough on the 8th.
General. -I proceeded to Singapore on the 15th on urgent private affairs, and was still away at the end of the month.
Mr. E. O. Bruce arrived from Limbang on the 23rd.
Sanction having been obtained from Kuching, His Highness the Rajah’s Birthday was celebrated on the 25th. A very successful regatta was held, the main events being won by Limbang boats with the Brunei entries placed third.

BINTULU DISTRICT.
September, 1933.
The Acting District Officer, Mr. J. G. Anderson, reports: -
Agriculture. -There is every prospect for a good harvest next year, provided the pig and other pests do not play havoc with it, as everyone has had ample opportunity to burn off.
General. -A parade was held on the 26th, His Highness the Rajah’s Birthday, and a Royal Salute fired. The Offices were closed and a Public Holiday was observed.

BARAM DISTRICT
September, 1933.
The Acting District Officer, Mr. F. H. Pollard, reports: -
Trade: -
General. -The Vamco Timber Company of Lawas have leased the Bakong sawmill as from 1st October. It is to be hoped that the venture proves a success, as timber working provides a lucrative form of employment for the upriver people.

LIMBANG DISTRICT.
September, 1933.
The District Officer, Mr. E. O. Bruce, reports: -
Trade: -
Establishment. -Mr. P. M. Scott, Acting District Officer, took over the charge of Lawas District as from the 18th from Mr. W. P. N. L. Ditmas, who proceeded on home leave on the 19th via Labuan.
Miscellaneous. -The first regular overland mail from Miri to Limbang, via Brunei, was posted on the 6th and delivered on the 9th.
The time taken may vary 24 hours according to state of the tides at the coastal river-crossings.
26th September, was observed as Public Holiday, in honour of the anniversary of the Birthday of His Highness the Rajah. Offices were closed, flagstaffs dressed, and the usual salute fired by Sarawak Constabulary.
Tua Kampong Adis, of Buang Kuati, was awarded the Long Service Decoration, his appointment dating from 1904.

LAWAS DISTRICT.
September, 1933.
The Acting Assistant District Officer, Mr. P. M. Scott reports: -
Agriculture. -The Lawas (Sarawak) Rubber Estates, Limited, exported 43,456 lbs. of dry rubber during the month.
Rainfall. -The following rainfall was recorded: -
Trade: -
General. -The Conservator of Forests visited the Station on 1st September. He returned to Limbang on 3rd. On the 13th the Acting Commissioner, Sarawak Constabulary, and Mr. Talbot carried out an Inspection of the local detachment of the Sarawak Constabulary, and left for Miri via Labuan on the following day.

CORRESPONDENCE.
[The Editor is not responsible for the opinions of Correspondents.]
The Editor,
Sarawak Gazette,
Kuching.
SARATOK,
12th October, 1933.
SIR,
In view of recent correspondence appearing in your paper, it may be of interest to some of your readers to know that a Sailing Regatta was held at Kabong last April, when more than 50 boats of various classes competed.
The race for big boats with crews of eight was sailed of a course to sea and round a buoy of 4 miles, and in spite of a light and variable breeze, the winner crossed the line in 36 mins. 11 secs. In this event, 23 boats started and 18 completed the full course.
Three events for smaller sailing boats were raced over a course within the Kuala, but as a result of the rather sheltered position and indifferent breeze the times recorded were very poor.
Yours faithfully,
J. C. H. BARCROFT.

More Potted History.
The Editor,
Sarawak Gazette,
Kuching.
SIMANGGANG,
19th October, 1933.
SIR,
There is a certain class of reader who loves to pick holes in a story. They read a book not for the enjoyment it gives them, not for the knowledge they may acquire, and not for the scorn they later express to their friends at such rubbish being written. No, they read a book carefully and slowly with the hope of finding that the author (I am afraid, however, it is more often the authoress) has made a slip. I once read a fairy story in which lambs were playing about in the middle of winter, yet it did not detract from the charm of the tale.
I hope I am not in this class of reader, but have yon read “Panorama” by Charles Graves? It is a series of interesting and clever articles on various places and industries in England. In the first chapter Mr. Graves, describing the Scottish War Memorial, writes: -
“Here there is a memorial to the crew of the Carmania, which was sunk by the German ship, Cap Trafalgar; to the crew of the Sidney (sic) which was sunk by the Emden; to the crews of the Swift and Broke, which fell victim to German torpedo-boat destroyers; and there me others, all with the name of their victorious enemies carved beside them. There is no rancour here.”
Is Mr. Graves pulling our leg? If readers do not believe me the Sarawak Library number is T-G. 443 F.
Yours faithfully,
O.F.























