VOL. LXIII.
No. 953.
The Sarawak Gazette
Price
KUCHING, Wednesday, February 1st, 1933.
20 CENTS.
Contents.
The Sarawak Gazette		 			
WEDNESDAY, FEBRUARY 1st, 1933.

Death.
CHEW AH ONG (mother of Tan Cheng Pun), Tabuan Road, Kuching, aged eighty, on Thursday, 19th January, 1933. Deeply mourned by widower, children, grandchildren and great-grandchildren. (S.S. and F.M.S. papers please copy.)

Acknowledgement.
Tan Cheng Pun and family thank all friends and relatives who sent wreaths and letters of condolence and all those who were present at his mother’s funeral which was held on the 22nd January, 1933.

Local and Personal.
January.
His Highness the Rajah, accompanied by Dayang Leonora and Mrs. Bean, left for Simanggang by H.H.M.Y. Maimuna on 6th, returning to Kuching on 13th. During the tour His Highness visited Engkilili, Banting and Lingga. An account of His Highness’ tour appears in our columns.

Dayang Leonora left for England via Sibu and Singapore by H.H.M.Y. Maimuna on Tuesday 24th. We wish Dayang Leonora au revoir and bon voyage. A very enjoyable dinner and dance was held at Astana on 21st in farewell to the Dayang, and at the Residency, a dance on 23rd.

We note from the Official Gazette Extraordinary, of North Borneo, that His Majesty the King has been graciously pleased to bestow the honour of Companion of the Most Distinguishing Order of Saint Michael and Saint George, on His Excellency, Mr. Arthur Frederick Richards, Governor of the State of North Borneo. Our readers will join us in offering sincere congratulations to His Excellency.

At the annual general meeting of the Kuching Football Association held on the 14th January, the following were elected to serve on the Council for 1933: -President, Mr. J. P. Baird, Hon. Secretary, Mr. Tan Kui Choon, Hon. Treasurer, Mr. Robert Khoo, Committee Members, Messrs. W. H. Kelley, Datu Amar, C. P. Law, Rev. Father Barry, E. Reutens and Kong Yu Siong.

We are informed that for the convenience of the public, tickets of admission to the grandstand and enclosure at the Song Keng Hai Recreation Ground may be purchased at the Municipal Office in quantities of five and upwards at the price of ten cents each. These tickets may be used for any one occasion during the 1933 season.

Press telegrams of 6th January, include the information that Flight-Lieutenant Nicholetts has been selected to fill the place of second pilot, and navigator for the Royal Air Force non-stop flight from Cranwell to the Cape. Flight-Lieutenant Nicholetts will be remembered as a pilot of the flying boats which visited Kuching in 1931.

The Government Offices were closed on Thursday 26th, Chinese New Year, and Saturday 28th, Hari Raya. As was to be expected under present conditions, the festi-vities were of somewhat modest character as compared with previous years.

During the month Miss Riboet’s Malay Dramatic Co. “Orion” visited Kuching and performed at the Globe Theatre Hall. The performances were most enjoyable and Miss Riboet must be congratulated on the excellent acting, dancing and singing of herself and her company. Miss Riboet herself is a well-known singer of Malay songs. Her gramophone records being obtainable almost anywhere in British Malaya and Netherlands East Indies.

Mr. P. Murray-Scott left by m.v. Marudu on 14th for England via Singapore. Mr. Murray-Scott is proceeding on home leave.

We have received a copy of the seventeenth issue of Mirage full of interesting articles and excellent photographs. Mirage is to be congratulated on the energy, enthusiasm and ability of its Editors and contributors.

Young Angus had been out for the evening with his best girl. When he arrived home he found his father still sitting up.
“Ae ye been oot wi’ yon lassie again?”
he asked.
“Ay, dad,” replied young Angus.
“Why do ye look sae worried?”
“I was just wonderin’ how much the
evening cost.”
“No more than half a croon, dad.”
“Ay? That was no sae much.”
“It was a’ she had,” said Angus.

Visit of His Highness the Rajah to the Second Division.
HIS HIGHNESS MEETS DYAK CHIEFS AT ENGKILILI.
His Highness the Rajah, accompanied by Dayang Leonora and Mrs. Bean, left Kuching on Friday the 6th January in H.H.S, Maimuna and spent the night anchored off Lingga.
The next morning His Highness and party went ashore where they were received by Abang Medaut, Native Officer. His Highness visited several houses and met Malays and Chinese. Later His Highness transferred to the m.l. Betty which arrived in Simanggang at 3 p.m.
Here His Highness and party were received by the Resident, Second Division, and Datu Haji Dulrashid. After inspecting the Constabulary guard of honour under the command of A. S. I. Haji Ahmat Zaidell, His Highness met the rest of the European and Native Officers, Malay and Dyak Chiefs and representatives of the Chinese community. On arrival at Astana a party of Malay ladies were waiting to receive Dayang Leonora.
The next day His Highness, accompanied by the Resident, proceeded to Engkilili; Dayang Leonora and Mrs. Bean remaining in Simanggang.
At Engkilili His Highness was received by the Assistant District Officer and a large number of Dyak Chiefs and Chinese merchants. A guard of honour was furnished by the Constabulary. In spite of heavy rain His Highness received a warm welcome from his Dyaks.
The next morning His Highness, supported by the Resident, the Assistant District Officer, Engkilili, Datu Haji Dulrashid. Abang Abu Talip, Native Officer, and Lucas Chuat, Native Officer, met a large number of Dyak Chiefs. Amongst these were Orang Kaya Jaul, Penghulu Rumba, Penghulu Ringgit, Penghulu Lambai, Penghulu Goyang, Penghulu Sambau, Penghulu Suel, Penghulu Imong, Penghulu Nanang, Penghulu Kalong, Penghulu Jimbun, Penghulu Pertolongan Kana, Tuai Rumah Bungkong, Tuai Rumah Ranggau, Tuai Rumah Abong, Tuai Rumah Nuli, Nyindang, Jueng and others.
In addition a large number of Chinese traders and pepper planters had been called to meet His Highness.
For some, time His Highness heard certain Chinese traders in support of various petitions they had presented to Government, after which His Highness listened to certain pepper planters, who opposed the traders.
His Highness directed the Resident to deal with these matters, and the Chinese withdrew.
His Highness then addressed the Dyaks as follows: -
“Jadi aku betemu ka kita semua Penghulu Penghulu serta Tuai Tuai di ulu Batang Ai dalam sembilan pasal ti di-bri nemu enggau kita semua ti ditu.
1. Ka sa. -Aku endang sigi nemu ati kita enda brapa baik enggau Prentah dalam s’lama tu. Di mua Tuan Tuan di mua Datu enggau Abang Abang manah, tang diblakang lain ati.
2. Ka dua. -Aku nerang di mua kita semua anang kita enda arap ka jako Tuan Resident enggau jako Tuan Tuan enggau Datu jako Abang Abang, sebab semua utai di jako sida seniua tumboh ari mulut aku.
3. Ka tiga. -Kita agu bendar ka ninga pe-tenah jako endu anembiak, ti enda betuku enda bebunsu ari ulu ari ili.
4. Ka ampat. -Aku enda peduli agi enggau kita dalam ba penusah apa apa enti kita ati enda tentu enggau Prentah.
5. Ka lima. -Dalam kita ulu ulu enda tau ngalwi pak Prentah ti ka berumah.
6. Ka anam. -Dalam ba senapaug Prentah bedau ka bajual petrum serta ubat bedil, agi di tahan.
7. Ka tujoh. -Aku enda nyagi orang orang mudik bedagang bejaja ngalimpas kubu Lubok Antu ka ulu.
8. Ka delapan. -Pasal Asun aku udah besemaya enda kena ukom bunoh enda kena ukom tutup.
9. Ka sembilan. -Reti jako aku ti ndah aku pansut semua ba mua kita, aku meri kita semua ingat tu pengabis jako aku betumpu mulut kita semua.”
For those unacquainted with the Dyak language the following is a free translation: -
“I have come here to meet all you Penghulus and Tuai of the Ulu Batang Ai in order to inform you of nine points which I want you to know.
Firstly. -I know perfectly well that in the last year or two you have not been very loyal to Government.
To the faces of the Tuan Tuan, the Datu and the Abangs you pretend to be very good; behind their backs it is quite a different matter.
Secondly. -I now make it clear to you all that you must have confidence in the Resident, the other Tuans, the Datu and the Abangs, because , all they say to you are my orders and they are my agents.
Thirdly. -You are very foolish to believe all the stories, originating from no reliable sources, which are spread up and down the country. They have no beginning and no ending, i.e., are ridiculous.
Fourthly. -I shall not have any dealings with you in the future if you still continue your absurd attitude towards Government.
Fifthly. -You are not to live above the Government “paks.”
Sixthly. -As regards guns, cartridges and powder, no more will be allowed to be purchased.
Seventhly. -I shall not allow any traders above Lubok Antu.
Eighthly. -As regards Asun I have already promised that he shall neither be killed nor imprisoned.
Ninthly. -Now understand what I have said to you. I have told you all this in order that there shall be no more trouble or silly talk.”
Datu Haji Dulrashid and Abang Abu Talip having elaborated His Highness’ speech, a general discussion took place, many Chiefs speaking.
The Assistant District Officer of Engkilili added further remarks at the wish of His Highness, and the meeting terminated in a most friendly spirit.
It was made quite clear, however, that the Ulu Ai were responsible for bringing in the remaining rebels now in the Second Division, and that His Highness would only regard this as real proof of their loyalty. After visiting the Bazaar, where the Chinese fired off many crackers, His Highness returned to Simanggang after an enthusiastic farewell from the Chiefs, who had been entertained by His Highness after the morning’s meeting.
On the 10th His Highness visited the Simanggang Government Offices and Fort Alice, but nothing of importance was brought before His Highness.
His Highness had intended leaving Simanggang on the 12th, but owing to the state of the tides the departure had to be fixed for the evening before.
The next day His Highness and party visited Banting and in the evening invited a number of Balau Dyaks to the yacht.
His Highness finally sailed for Kuching in the early hours of the 13th.
It is impossible to overestimate the benefit to the Division from such a visit, and it is to be hoped that the Ulu Ai Dyaks will now give up the absurd attitude they have adopted during the past year or two.
It was a welcome opportunity also of meeting Dayang Leonora and bidding her good-bye before her approaching marriage.

Obituary.
One of the most respected members of the Japanese community resident in this country, Mr. S. Ujita, passed away quietly at 8 p.m. on the evening of the 27th January after a painful illness lasting several months. Mr. Ujita first came to Kuching from Singapore about twenty years ago and established himself in business as a dentist in this town. A kindly man of unassuming character, and even of retiring disposition, he was always ready to help others and freely give his services to the Mission Schools and poorer members of the community in Kuching Lately, soon after the Government established a Dental clinic to attend to the children of Government aided schools. Mr. Ujita held the post for some months but had to retire last year owing to the state of his health. At one time he numbered many Chinese amongst his clients but of late years the boycotts from time to time affected his business considerably. Never of very robust health the financial worries of recent years no doubt hastened the end. Deceased, who 
was just over 60 years of age, leaves a widow, two daughters and three sons (the last three still at school) who will have the deep sympathy of all who know them. 
The funeral, which took place at 4 p.m. on “Hari Raya” at the Roman Catholic cemetery in Kuching, was attended by all the Japanese community living in and around Kuching, by the Sisters of St. Teresa’s Convent, and many others. -(Contributed.)

Kulop Bintang.
Mr. W. F. N. Churchill’s story entitled “A Rogue at Kuala Temengor,” published in the December Blackwood’s, deserves to be ranked with the famous one of Sir Hugh Clifford’s about a seladang at a salt-lick in Pahang. Mr. Churchill makes no pretence of literary genius but the sheer excitement and horror of his tale-a perfectly true one-makes it unforgettable. Last year Mr. Churchill was travelling up the valley of the Perak River north of the remote town of Grik. One morning his camp was thrown into a state of alarm by the news that one of his five tame elephants named Kulop Bintang had gone “must” and had killed his attendant or gambala The animal was a menace to the district in this condition and Mr. Churchill, having nothing but a shotgun and revolver with him, had immediately to set off by raft down river to Grik to get a high-powered rifle. During his absence terrible things happened. On the night after his departure the members of his party occupied a halting bunga-low. At midnight they heard Kulop 
Bintang approaching. He charged the building, smashed one wall and threw out whatever furniture he could find with his trunk. Three men fled down a jungle path and Kulop Bintang went after them. Two left the path and escaped. Kulop Bintang kept on after the third, on that awful chase of more than a mile through the night ended in death for the human quarry. Then Kulop Bintang went back to the halting bungalow, under which several men were still cowering. Again the elephant charged, smashing board walls and heavy posts, and again there was a manhunt through the darkness, but fortunately without fatal result this time The next day Mr. Churchill (who had never shot anything bigger than a rabbit in his life) returned Aided by a plucky and experienced game ranger Mr. Churchill tracked the elephant all day and eventually brought him down at sundown, it was later found that Kulop Bintang had killed three men before his last outbreak, bringing his total of murders up to five. That ordeal in the halting bungalow at Kuala Temengor, as described by Mr. Churchill, is something that is not pleasant to contemplate. -Straits Times.

Broadcasting Hopes.
By his address to the Singapore Rotary Club Flight Lieut. Allen has done a great deal to dispel the mists of doubt and uncertainty which have hitherto surrounded the question of broadcasting in Malaya. A number of more or less optimistic reports have been available from amateurs, but Flight-Lieut. Allen’s opinions carry greater weight because he is a professional wireless specialist and has had an extensive experience of local conditions in the course of three years’ service at the Seletar Air Base. Accordingly it is gratifying to read his confident and clearcut pronouncement that “there is no major difficulty whatever in the way of broadcasting in this country.” By that simple sentence Flight-Lieut. Allen has probably done more to set the public thinking about broadcasting than many pages of the more or less technical matter that is being written about this subject in the Malayan newspapers every week. With that fundamental doubt out of the way, the layman with no technical interest in wireless begins to feel that at last he can safely agitate for Government to go ahead with the provision of adequate facilities. But Flight-Lieut. Allen had something even more interesting to say, “We have proved definitely,” he stated, “that the Empire broadcast is good enough for reproduction and re-broadcasting here after about eight o’clock at night.” That again is a welcome opinion-welcome to the layman who has been puzzled by the somewhat conflicting reports on the reception of the Empire service that he has read in the newspapers. Into his mind, by the friendly agency of the R.A.F. wireless specialist, is now implanted the conviction that with a certain appropriation from public funds he could hear momentous speeches at Westminster, opera at Covent Garden, and a hundred and other things which both the local and the European communities of Malaya would exceedingly like to hear.
Flight-Lieut. Allen went on to outline how this could be done. Naturally he did not commit himself to cut-and-dried proposals but he suggested broadly the facilities that would be required and that would be technically practicable if a broadcasting service were to be attempted over the greater part of Malaya. In the first place he envisaged a high-power transmitter in the centre of Singapore with a receiving station on the out-skirts of the city to receive the Daventry programmes and send on the music and speech by underground cable to the broadcasting station. That equipment alone would give a good evening programme for Singapore and up country within a radius of one hundred and fifty miles more or less. Then a second transmitter, working on short wave, would be required to reach the listeners-in in the country districts outside this radius. “The two transmitters (long and short wave) working together would give a perfectly good service,” Flight-Lieut. Allen said in his address, “and would appeal to the 
thousands and not to the few as far as the construction of receivers is concerned.” For Penang and Kuala Lumpur Flight- Lieut. Allen suggested regional stations receiving from the Singapore short-wave transmitter and broadcasting to their own areas.
How large the potential public is for a Malayan service of this kind is shown by the astonishing fact brought out by Flight Lieut. Allen that in Bangkok, where broadcasting is only two years old, there are already thirteen thousand persons licensed to own receiving sets and at least another twenty per cent, of “pirate” owners. If that is the reception given to broadcasting in Bangkok, what would it be in Singapore, with our large English-speaking community! A point to be stressed is that broadcasting of the Empire programmes in Malaya would have a definite political value. These are times when disruptive influences are at work in the British Empire and it is highly desirable that the tendency towards unity and towards a Malayan patriotism among the local-born population of this country should be furthered and to some extent supplemented by a sense of close relationship with the British Commonwealth of which this small country forms a part. Broadcasting will probably make no converts to British citizenship, 
but those who are already converted, or are firm supporters of the bond that exists between the Malay States and Great Britain, are only too anxious to be brought into direct communication with the heart of the Empire by means of the new service given by the British Broadcasting Corporation. -Straits Times.

The Malay College.
Colonel Rae is reported to have said at an Old Boys’ Association dinner recently that if the threatened closing of the Malay College was proceeded with it would show the British regime in Malaya to have been a failure. Why? Cannot the secondary schools of the federated Malay States turn out a sufficiently good type of Malay youth to qualify for responsible positions in Government service-which is the purpose for which the college at Kuala Kangsar was created? At the secondary schools the Malay boy of good family will not live in as aristocratic an environment nor enjoy as many amenities as he does at Kuala Kangsar, but perhaps a touch of democracy is no bad thing in a future official. The Malay College was probably a justifiable luxury in tunes of prosperity, although even then it would not have been unreasonable ask Malay families receiving quite sizeable incomes to contribute something towards the education, board and lodging of their sons. To-day the policy is not so generous and the students are 
expected to pay something, but obviously the cost to Government of keeping this highly equipped and expensively housed institution must still be considerable. The question of whether it is good policy to retain a local model of an English public school for the Malay upper classes is a delicate one and can only be answered by those who are closely in touch with social and political trends in the Malay States, but the opinion may be ventured that breeding in a Malay of good family is so innate that he is in no danger of losing it whether he spends his youth in the Anderson School at Ipoh or the Malay College at Kuala Kangsar. Good material will always be available from the secondary schools for Malay personnel in Government service, and Government now has to decide whether the deliberate perpetuation of the aristocratic principle represented by the Malay College is worth the expense involved. -Straits Times.

OLD SARAWAK.
From the Sarawak Gazette 50 Years Ago.
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE
1883. THURSDAY, 1ST FEB., 1883. [Price 10 cents.
TWO FACES UNDER ONE TURBAN, AN INCIDENT OF THE SARAWAK REGATTA.
New Year’s day 1883, the day of Sarawak Regatta, broke cool and clear, with a stiff breeze from the North-west blowing down the river, filling out the gay-coloured bunting, afloat and ashore, with which Kuching delighted to be festive. Kuching was en fete. So were the people. It was worth something to see the Malays, Dyaks, and Chinese, all dressed in their best, their faces agleam with pleasure-all showing plainly that they were out for a holiday, and that they meant to enjoy it.
There was moreover a goodly sprinkling of Europeans, and, evidently, to judge from the cordial grasp of the hand with which everybody else, they had “Auld-land-syne” in their minds and were not disposed to forget “auld acquaintance.”
But the most interesting and amusing event of the Regatta occurred in the giving of the Rajah’s prize, “value £25 for boats any size and crews unlimited” -open to all comers. This was the most important item on the programme. It was likewise the best contested race of the Regatta. Five boats started from Tanah Puteh, for the first mile or so of the two miles course they kept well together, but on nearing the metropolis the “Borak,” “Zem Zem.” and “Nombor Satu” were respectively forced to retire and to give place to the two “Rajahs.”
The race now becomes intensely exciting as the two boats-each with a splendid crew of about fifty men-pull for the winning post.
The “Rajah Laut” leads by half a length, when, to the astonishment of all, within a short distance of the winning post. The Doctor’s boat “Rajah Wali” putting on a tremendous spurt, seems to be coming in hand over hand; and, just misses a tie at the goal by barely two feet, thus handing over the laurels to Hadji Sudin’s “Rajah Laut.”
Hadji Sudin was now sent for by H.H. the Rajah, and conducted to the Court house, which had been gaily decorated and festooned for the occasion. Here, after congratulations from the Rajah and other gentlemen present, His Highness showed the Hadji a box on the table and. with an appropriate speech in Malay, he took out the Prize-an earthenware buffalo and handed it to the Hadji. The Malay thought there was some mistake. No. there was no mistake. It was decided by the prize. Then that Hadji’s face became a picture to be studied; not described. But he was not very long in this suspense. The Rajah kindly advised him to look inside, and saw nothing there but bits of paper, pressed tightly in-until some kind bystander, pitying the Hadji’s distress, began to empty the buffalo and the jocular remarks of the Malay chief.
At last, a little pocket was handed to the Hadji, and with trembling hands he opened it. The paper contained a solid bar of pure gold, nearly three inches long; equivalent to (£25) twenty-five sovereigns. Again that Hadji’s face changed. He turned his grateful eyes upon the Rajah like a man reprieved, and the heartbroke look gave place to one beaming with contentment and delight.
None of those who saw this incident will agree that the Malay is a stolid individual, expressing in his countenance neither pleasure nor pain.
Whether the Sarawak Malays are more intelligent than those of other countries, we know not; but this we do know, that from the Datu Bandar downwards, they met us on this New Year’s day with a genial smile, a cordial grasp of the hand, a “Salamatr taun baru” too hearty to be insincere.
GLYNDEOR.

Sarawak Library.
The following books have been purchased by the Committee: -

First Division News.
RESIDENT’S OFFICE.
December, 1932.
Extracts from the Divisional Reports by Mr. E. O. Bruce, Acting Resident, First Division: -
Mr. J. C. Swayne, Resident, First Division, proceeded on home leave, prior to retirement, on the 19th December, from which date I assumed the duties of Acting Resident. 
Bau and Sadong Districts were visited during the month.
Resident’s Court. -In the Resident’s Court, Kuching, Bok Jok was convicted and imprisoned for being in possession of instruments for counterfeiting coins.

LAND OFFICE.
December, 1932.
The Land Officer, Mr. T. M. Griffiths, reports: -
Quit Rent. -At the close of the year it is satisfying to note that although the Quit Rent has been reduced on rubber lands the amount collected compares very favourably with the previous year.
Comparative Quit Rent returns are as follows: -

DISTRICT COURT.
December, 1932.
The District Officer, Mr. R. E. Le Sueur, reports: -
General. -The offices were closed from 24th to 26th inclusive for the Christmas holidays and on 31st for the New Year.
Mr. J. C. Swayne left for Singapore en route for England on 19th December by s.s. Vyner Brooke on retirement from the service.
Mr. E. O. Bruce arrived in Kuching from home leave on 5th December, and took over the duties as Acting Resident, First Division
Obituary. -It is with regret I have to report the sudden death of Rajah of the Fire Brigade. Rajak joined the Police in 1913 and was transferee to the Fire Brigade where be served until his death on 24th December, 1932.

UPPER SARAWAK DISTRICT.
December, 1932.
The Assistant District Officer, Mr. R. G. Aikman, reports: -
Court. -One inquest was held on the body of a male Chinese named Chiu Chon found hanging in a garden near Bau Bazaar. A verdict of suicide was returned.
Agriculture. -There is a good deal of swamp padi planted in the vicinity of Bau and it appears to be doing well.
No reports are available as yet as to the condition of the hill padi. I am informed that this has been a very bad season for all fruit and further that there is no likelihood of an engkabang crop as the trees have not flowered. The weather has been very wet and stormy and severe floods were experienced just before Christmas.
In Siniawan they are said to have been the worst since 1914.
Rainfall. -The highest recorded in 24 hours was 4.10 inches, the daily average was .54 of an inch and the total for the month 16.24 inches.
Gold Mining. -The actual gold obtained by the following Companies for the month of November, 1932, was: -
The Krokong Mining Syndicate at Krokong commenced leaching during the month and this brings the number of companies now operating by the cyanide process to seven.
The following Gold Mining Statistics for 1932 which I have compiled may be of interest: -
The average price of Gold during 1931 was $38.57 per oz.
The highest price reached was $50 in November and the lowest $34.60 in February, March and April.
The average price of Gold in 1932 was $49.46.
The highest price being $54 in December and the lowest $45.75 in March,
The total production of Gold amounted to 8178.131 ozs.
The value of this Gold at the average price for the year amounted to $404,490.36.

LUNDU DISTRICT.
December, 1932.
The Acting Assistant District Officer, Mr. E. H. Elam, reports: -
Dyak and Native Affairs generally. -An accidental shooting affair took place at Kedaong when a Dyak named Konday was shot by his companion in broad daylight whilst aiming at a pig. The wound was not serious.
Agriculture. -Very heavy rains were experienced at the beginning of the month, 15.90 inches falling in 96 hours The greatest fall in any one day was 5.14 inches. The prospects for the padi harvest still appear to be very good.
Trade: -
Shipping. -On 8th fishing Kotak No. 2 (Kuching licence) was wrecked and completely destroyed off Tanjong Batu between Lundu and Simatan in very rough seas. The occupants, who were Chinese, got safely ashore and returned to Kuching from Simatan by s.l. La Follette.
General. -There was marked increase in the number of timber workers. This employment is very welcome as many, especially the Malays, have no more of last season’s padi left and were finding it difficult to obtain rice and provisions from the bazaar.
Rambungan and Sampadi were visited by the Native Officer. I went to Kuching for Christmas, arriving there on 23rd and returning to Lundu on 28th.

SADONG DISTRICT.
December, 1932.
The Acting Assistant District Officer, Mr. S. G. Hansom, reports: -
Dyak and Native Affairs generally. -During my recent visit to Tebekang it was reported that a number of land Dyaks from the Dutch side had settled in Sarawak Territory without permission. These Dyaks were later called down and those liable for exemption tax, forty in number, have paid for 1932.
Penghulus Berong, Ringkai, Buda and Rayang came down during the month, and had nothing to report.
Agriculture. -The burning off of local padi land still continues in a desultory manner. It would appear, however, that a larger area is under cultivation for padi in the district than has been known for some years.
Trade: -
General. -On the 1st instant I met the Resident, First Division, at Serian, later proceeding up river to Tebekang, where the Resident spent two nights, during which time Kampongs Pichin and Tebekang were visited, and a number of outstanding matters settled. I returned to Sadong on the 6th instant.
I proceeded to Kuching on the 30th instant overland via Serian and I was still away from the district at the end of the month.
Rainfall. -Heavy rain fell throughout the month, a total of 18.77 inches being recorded. The heaviest rainfall of any one day was 10.10 inches.

Chinese Affairs.
December, 1932.
Extracts from the Report of The Secretary for Chinese Affairs, Captain C. D. Le Gros Clark: -
The Secretary for Chinese Affairs proceeded to Miri on 19th December and returned to Kuching on the 31st. During his stay in Miri he visited the oilfields, including the new fields at Seria (Brunei). He also met the Chinese Chamber of Commerce, Mill, and discussed with the members a number of questions which have been referred to the Resident, Fourth Division, and to the departments concerned. Thanks to the new fields opening up in Brunei, the figures for unemployment in Miri and district are low, and there appears to be little real poverty. Despite the “Depression,” one may say that conditions in Miri remain comparatively favourable, both to employer and employee.
On the 23rd December telegraphic news was received from the Resident, Second Division, that an alleged attempt had been made to burn down a portion of the Engkilili bazaar. During the Secretary for Chinese Affairs’s absence from the First Division, arrangements were made to send up a representative from this Department. He was met at Lingga by the Resident, Second Division, who informed him that the situation was again quiet. It is suspected that the trouble is an echo of the constant pepper disputes between financier and planter in that district, and the rumoured attempt of the Towkays to close their shops as a protest against certain Court rulings affecting debts by planters resulted in this act of vengeance by certain unknown persons.

Sarawak Union Club.
MR. C. F. C. MACASKIE AND MR. R. L. MOIR WIN THE DOUBLES CHAMPIONSHIP.
Kuching, 12th Jan., 1933.
The 5th annual open Tennis Championship tournament in both Singles and Doubles was run under the auspices of the Sarawak Union Club and participated by representatives of the Sarawak Club, Sarawak Union Club, St. Michael’s Club and Land and Survey Club.
The Doubles final was held on the 5th January between C. F. C. Macaskie and R. L. Moir versus Wee Ah Chew and Chan Kheng Hai. the former winning the game easily by 7-5, 6-4, 11-9. The winning pair were decidedly superior in their service shots.
There was a large gathering who witnessed the Singles final, which took place on Saturday, 7th January. Among those present were the Bishop of Labuan and Sarawak, The Ven. Archdeacon Champion, The Government Secretary, The Secretary for Chinese Affairs, Misses Andrews, Backus and Olver, Messrs. Wee Kheng Chiang, Tan Sum Guan, and Rev. F. H. Hollis the honorary secretary of the Club.
Ong Eng Hin and Wee Ah Chew, who were both representatives of the Sarawak Union Club, met in the Singles final. It appeared to be an easy victory for Ong Eng Hin, who won the match, the scores being 6-3, 6-3. Most of his shots were back-hand drives to the baseline with clever placing on the sidelines. Wee Ah Chew was a favourite figure in the Championship tournaments, and was expected to beat Ong Eng Hin, but during the first few games be obviously overstrained himself when he tried to return all difficult shots mi the sidelines, and from then onwards he became tired and unsteady in his play.
The Club members were at home after the match and before requesting the President of the Club to give away the prizes, the honorary deputy secretary, Mr. Tan Kui Choon, in voicing the opinion of the members said that their presence in such a gathering was the best possible proof that among the many amusements of the people Tennis holds a high place. He expressed words of thanks to Dr. P. T. A. Chette, the honorary secretary of the tournament, for his valuable services rendered towards the success of the tournament, and to Mr. Mills for umpiring the games. He also expressed sincere thanks to His Lordship the Bishop for gracing the occasion with nis presence. He said they were very glad to have the pleasure of having a distinguished competitor in the person of the Government Secretary, Mr. Macaskie. who participated in the tournament. As he was one of the best players from British North Borneo, he believed that by his entering the tournament it would eventually bring up the standard of Tennis in Kuching, and 
would encourage local players to take a keener interest in the game. The competition in all the games had maintained a high standard, certainly higher than previous years.
Before presenting the prizes to the winners in the tennis and billiards tournaments, His Lordship the Bishop, as President of the Club, made a short speech and congratulated the winners on their success.
The results were as follows: -

Second Division News.
December, 1933.
Extracts from the Second Divisional Reports by Mr. J. B. Archer, Resident: -
I left Saratok on the 1st. having seen Mr. R. L. Daubeny take over the Kalaka District from Mr. L. K. Morse, who proceeded to Kuching the same day en route for England on furlough. I reached Simanggang the same night.
The Right Reverend the Bishop of Labuan and Sarawak visited parts of the Division during the month
Mr. Leach, of the Survey Department, ascended Bukit Sadok (2,700 feet) and was able to take useful observations from the summit.
Owing to the absence of European Magistrates up river. Messrs. Morice arid Fisher were granted District Court and Magistrate’s Court powers respectively.
Early in the month news of Asun’s surrender at Nanga Mujan reached Simanggang. He arrived in Simanggang on the 21st in charge of Mr. Macpherson. Accompanying Mr. Macpherson were Penghulus Sambau, T. R. Ranggau. Nyindang, T. R. Abong, Rantai, etc.
Mr. Macpherson and I proceeded to Kuching on Boxing Day, together with Abang Abu Talip, Asun and others, and were still away at the end of the month.
Most of the native inhabitants in the Division were busy on their farms during the month. It is pleasing to notice that Malays and down-river Dyaks have in many cases increased their area under padi.

SIMANGGANG DISTRICT.
December, 1932.
The Cadet Officer, Mr. W. H. C. C. Morice, reports: -
Dyak and Native Affairs Generally. -Penghulus Kalong, Lambai, Goyaog, Sait and Linang visited the station in connection with their work during the month.
Trade: -
General. -On the 5th the Right Revd. the Bishop of Labuan and Sarawak arrived on a visit to the district.
On the 6th Mr. D. A. Leach, Assistant Superintendent of Surveys, arrived from Betong and returned to Kuching on the 7th. Mr. W. H. C. C. Morice paid two visits to Engkilili during the month, from the 9th to 14th, end from 28th to 31st. Mr. R. L. Daubeny arrived from Saratok via Betong to spend Christmas in Simanggang.
The Government Offices were closed from the 24th to 27th. On 27th the Resident. Mr. J. B. Archer, and Mr. A. Macpherson left for Kuching to discuss matters in connection with the Asun affair. On the 21st Mr. A. Macpherson arrived in Simanggang from the Ulu Ai, bringing with him Asun and followers.

ENGKILILI DISTRICT.
December, 1932.
The Assistant District Officer, Mr. A. Macpherson, reports: -
Agriculture. -There was heavy rain during the month which was of assistance to the swamp and big jungle padi farmers. The scrub hill padi is being choked by weeds as a result. The pepper crop is nearly over.
Generally speaking the crop was not good.
Trade: -
General. -Messrs. Morice and Summers visited the station. The Resident came up on the 24th, returning on the same day.
The Assistant District Officer was still away at the end of the month.

SARIBAS DISTRICT.
December, 1932.
The Acting Assistant District Officer, Mr. J. R. Combe, reports: -
Trade: -
General. -The District Officer, Saratok, Mr. R. L. Daubeny, arrived here on 21st December in m.l. Elizabeth. He left for Simanggang on 23rd December and returned to Betong on 28th December. On 29th morning he returned to Saratok.

KALAKA DISTRICT.
December, 1932.
The District Officer. Mr. R. L. Daubeny, reports: -
Agriculture. -Weather has been exceptionally bad during the month. Heavy seas have been continuous, the local boats being held up at Kabong for as much as live days at a time, this causing considerable delay in regard to delivery of mails, etc.
Trade: -
General. -I visited Kabong on 13th and returned to Saratok again on 14th. On 18th I left for Simanggang to spend Christmas there by kind invitation of the Resident, visiting on my way, Kabong, Puna, Debak and Belong. I returned to Saratok again on 29th via Betong, Pusa and Kabong.
T.K. Abang Drahi reported the loss of a local sago trading boat of Kg. Bungin, Saribas, off Palo, Daro, during a violent storm on 13th instant. It is feared that the four occupants have been drowned.

Third Division News.
December, 1932.
Extracts from the Third Divisional Reports by Mr. C. D. Adams, Resident: -

SIBU AND KANOWIT DISTRICT.
December, 1932,
The District Officer, Mr. W. F. Dick, reports: -
Trade: -
Land and Survey. -Application was received from Messrs. J. Reid & Co., of Singapore, for permission to erect a Sawmill in the Retus, Igan.
General. -His Highness the Rajah, accompanied by Dayang Leonora, arrived by s.s. Auby on the 4th, they left for Kanowit and Kapit on 6th, accompanied by the Resident, and returned on the 9th. On the 10th His Highness inspected the Sibu Hospital, and Dayang Leonora, accompanied by Mrs. Dick, the Rev. J. M. Hoover and myself, went to Selalo and inspected the Kuang Hua School. Her Highness remarked on the spotless condition of everything.
His Highness the Rajah and the Dayang left on the 14th, accompanied by the Resident and Mrs. Adams, on a visit to Dara, Paloh, Sarikei and Binatang, returning on the 18th. On 19th His Highness and the Dayang sailed for Kuching per s.s. Auby.
The offices were closed on 24th and 26th for Christmas and again on New Year’s Eve 31st instant.
The District Officer, Mukah, Mr. J. J. Hill, Assistant District Officer, Kapit, Mr. D. C. Hudden, Assistant District Officer. Sarikei, Mr. F. L Crossley, Officer-in- Charge, Matu, Mr. G. F. J. Pegler, Land Officer, Sarikei, Mr. K. E. Parker, visited the station for Christmas and New Year, Mr. and Mrs. Kidd of the Tanah Estates, Kanowit, visited the station for Christmas.

KAPIT DISTRICT.
December, 1932.
The Acting Assistant District Officer, Mr. D. C. Hudden, reports: -
Obituary. -On the 12th. T. R. Bantar. from Mujong, reported that Gasar ipar Lenggi was drowned at the Mujong rapids. The body has not yet been found.
Native Affairs. -All the Dyak Penghulus and the principal Dyak Chiefs came down to meet His Highness the Rajah.
General. -The principal event of the month was the visit to the station of His Highness the Rajah on the 7th.
His Highness, who was accompanied by the Resident, Third Division, Mr. C. D. Adams, spent two nights at Kapit, and on the 6th sat in Court where several matters were brought to his notice.
His Highness left for Sibu in m.l. Chamois on the 9th.
Mr. D. C. Hudden, Acting Assistant District Officer, left for the Nanga Mujong on the 16th, and returning the same day.
Mr. and Mrs. Black, of the Sarawak Steamship Co., visited the station during the month.
The Acting Assistant District Officer, Mr. D. C. Hudden, proceed to Sibu by s.s. Angby on the 22nd, to spend the Christmas holidays, and was still away at the end of the month.
Government offices were closed on Christmas and Boxing Day.
Rainfall. -The total rainfall for the month was 14.13 inches.

MATU AND DARO DISTRICT.
December, 1932.
The Officer-in-Charge, Mr. G. F. J. Pegler, reports: -
Agriculture. -Local padi is well advanced and promises a good harvest. On one or two farms harvesting has already commenced.
Trade: -
Remarks. -Imports increased; Exports decreased.
General. -The Agricultural field Officer, Mr. G. M. Goodall, visited Matu on the 2nd instant and left for Paloh on the 4th instant.
His Highness the Rajah, accompanied by Dayang Leonora, and the Resident and Mrs. Adams, visited Daro and Paloh on the 14th instant. Various matters were put before, and dealt with by His Highness.
On the 23rd instant the Officer-in-Charge proceeded to Sibu for the Christmas holidays and was still away from the district at the end of the month.

OYA AND DALAT.
December, 1932.
The Acting Assistant District Officer. Mr. N. E. Hughes, reports: -
General. -Rough and stormy weather has been prevalent during most of the month and on the 9th, 10th and 11th instant the wind reached gale force.
Trade: -
General. -Mr. N. E. Hughes, Acting Assistant District Officer, Oya and Dalat, left on local leave on the 14th.
The Assistant Superintendent of Surveys. Mr. J. L. Noakes, visited Oya and Dalat on his way to Kuching, and again on his return, when he made the through trip from Sibu to Mukah in a day.
I visited Oya and Dalat on the 22nd and settled all outstanding matters. On the 23rd I proceed via the Sungei Kut to Sibu for the Christmas and New Year festivities.

SARIKEI, BINATANG AND REJANG DISTRICT.
December, 1932.
The Acting Assistant District Officer, Mr. F. L. Crossley, reports: -
General. -On the 23rd a report was received of the loss at sea of a sago bandong manned by four Pusa Malays. Two bandongs left Pusa to bring raw sago to Binatang and were caught in a storm off Kuala Rejang. One of the boats was driven into the Paloh mouth, but the other was lost sight of and disappeared. It is feared that the crew were all drowned.
Agriculture. -The weather was very wet throughout the month, but no serious damage to the padi-crop has been reported.
Trade: -
Remarks. -Mr. Leach, of the Survey Department, visited Sarikei from the 13th to the 22nd, his object being to arrange for the construction of a Survey beacon on Bukit Tebujang, and to take observations from the same bill. Together with Mr. Parker. Land Officer, Mr. Leach spent two days on top of the hill, and was able satisfactorily to carry this out.
General. -His Highness the Rajah, and Dayang Leonora, together with the Resident, Third Division, and Mrs. C. D. Adams, visited Sarikei on the 15th and 16th, and Binatang on the 17th.
Rejang and Selalang were visited, and I was in Binatang three times during the month. I was in Sibu for the Christmas and New Year holidays from the 23rd to the 27th, and again from the 29th to the 3rd January.
Visitors to the district included Mr. Leach, of the Survey Department, and Messrs. Roach and Bowring, of the Island Trading Company.

MUKAH DISTRICT.
December, 1932.
The Acting District Officer, Mr. J. J. Hill, reports: -
Agriculture. -No further reports have come in with regard to the padi crops.
The weather has been very stormy, especially on the 9th, 10th and 11th instant, when the wind reached gale force.
Trade: -
Remarks. -183 koyans of raw sago and 517 piculs of gutta jelutong were exported during the month.
General. -The Officer-in-Charge of Land, Sibu, Mr. T. E. Parker, arrived on the 3rd instant. Land matters were discussed and Mr. Parker left for Oya on the 6th instant.
I took over temporary charge of the Oya and Dalat district from Acting Assistant District Officer, Mr. N. E. Hughes, on the 14th instant. Mr. Hughes proceed on local leave.
On the 22nd instant, I visited Oya and Dalat and settled all outstanding matters.
On the 23rd instant, I left for Sibu and was still away at the end of the month.
Visitors to the station included Mr. Trumpy, Chief Geologist, Sarawak Oilfields, Limited, Mr. Johnson, Sarawak Oilfields, Limited, and Rev. Father Bunck.

Fourth Division News.
December, 1932.
Extracts from the Fourth Divisional Reports by Mr. H. D. Aplin, Resident: -
All members of the Oxford Expedition which had been working in the vicinity of Mt. Dulit, Tinjar Baram, arrived in Miri on the 2nd and left lor Kuching a week later. They reported that the expedition had been very successful.
I visited Baram from the 12th to 15th, where I met Dyak Tuai-Tuai. Matters dealing with Dyak boundaries and continual applications from individuals to move elsewhere were discussed.
Captain C. D. Le Gros Clark, Secretary for Chinese Affairs, visited Miri during the month.

MIRI.
December, 1932.
The District Officer, Mr. F. G. Carpenter, reports: -
Trade: -
General. -The Resident visited Baram from the 12th to 15th.
Mr. D. C. White arrived for short leave on the 23rd.
Mr. and Mrs. F. H. Pollard arrived from Baram on the 29th and proceeded to Kuching on the 30th.

BARAM DISTRICT.
December, 1932.
The Acting District Officer, Mr. F. H. Pollard, reports: -
Agriculture. -Rainfall amounted to 18.59 inches.
Trade: -
General. -On 7th, accompanied by Tuanku Mohamat and Wan Suror, I visited Sungei Engkabang and Linai and returned on 9th. Mr. White left for Miri via Bakong on foot on the 21st. On 29th I left for Kuching via Miri.

BINTULU DISTRICT.
December, 1932.
The Acting District Officer, Mr. J. G. Anderson, reports: -
Agriculture. -Inquiries were set on foot at end of month as to prospect of engkabang crop. The trees are reported to be in fairly full flower. Dyaks say they do not intend to collect the engkabang as the price they usually get does not make it worth while.
Trade: -
Shipping. -M.T. Chin broke down in Suai on the 27th November. She was carrying mails and goods from Miri to Bintulu. Owing to state of weather no other launches could leave here to fetch the mail.
General. -Very high tides flooded the station and deposited quantities of rubbish all over the roads and grounds. Seas were also very rough and two lengths of water pipe were smashed on the coast section. 
The Business Names Order now applying to Bintulu notices were put out requiring all local firms to register.
Mr. E. Banks, Curator, passed through on the5th and Dr. Hutchison on the 15th.
I visited Sebauh on the 20th. No cases came up for hearing. High floods had left a coasting of mud over the station compound, spoiling the grass.
I visited Tatau on the 21st and returned to Bintulu on the 22nd. I was accompanied on both trips by the Assistant Forest Officer, Mr. Buxton, and by Land Inspector Juno on the latter.
On the 12th instant Tsoo Kum Sooi, a local timber trader, was bringing a large raft of belian timber (valued at $350 cost price) down to the bazaar.
A strong flood was running but it was necessary to get the timber down ready for shipment on contract by the “Auby” which was due shortly. Unfortunately one of the paddles controlling the raft broke and although anchors were put down these were snapped and in spite of efforts to save it, the raft was carried out to sea and most of the belian was lost. About $120 worth of timber has been recovered.

Fifth Division News.
LIMBANG DISTRICT.
December, 1933.
Extracts from the Fifth Divisional Reports by Mr. F. H. Kortright, Resident: -
Trade: -
General. -Visitors to the station were Dr. W. Hutchison, from the 5th to the 9th; Messrs. N. E. Hughes, W. Hankey, J. O. Gilbert, and C. J. Cook, arrived on the 28th and 30th. On 31st Mr. T. F. Carey, British Resident, Brunei, arrived with a large contingent of European visitors from Brunei.
The Acting Assistant District Officer. Mr. W. P. N. L. Ditmas, visited Sungei Prangga, the headquarters of the Borneo Evangelical Mission, and called at Danau, Rangu, Limpasong and Indok on the way. A night was spent at Rumah Sandom, Tanah Merah, where various small matters were settled. Penghulu Belulok’s house was also visited, and the Murut houses of Perak, and Chang, Long Pasu.

LAWAS.
December, 1932.
The Acting Assistant District Officer. Mr. J. O. Gilbert, reports:
Agriculture. -The Lawas (Sarawak) Rubber Estates exported 22,400 lbs. of dry rubber during the month.
Rainfall. –
Trade: -
General. -Dr. Hutchison Medical Officer, Kuching, visited the district on 1st instant, returning to Limbang on the 3rd. On 21st Mr. N. E. Hughes, Acting Assistant District Officer, Oya, arrived at Lawas, on local leave. On 24th Mr. Hughes and Acting Assistant District Officer proceeded to Limbang via Brunei for Christmas and New Year celebrations.


























