VOL. LXIII.
No. 954.
The Sarawak Gazette
Price
KUCHING, Wednesday, March 1st, 1933.
20 CENTS.
Contents.
The Sarawak Gazette		 			
WEDNESDAY, MARCH 1st, 1933.

Birth.
SPURWAY. -On 3rd February, at Bah Maleng, Sibu, to Mr. and Mrs. B. J. C. Spurway, a son.

Local and Personal.
February.
His Highness the Rajah, accompanied by Mr. C. F. C. Macaskie, Government Secretary, and Mr. E. S. Holl, Private Secretary to His Highness, visited the Fourth and Fifth Divisions, leaving by m.v. Marudu on Monday 13th. His Highness returned to Kuching on Saturday 25th.

His Highness the Rajah will be sailing from Singapore for England by s.s. Comorin on 31st March, His Highness will be leaving Kuching for Singapore on Saturday 25th.

We are informed that the marriage arranged between Dayang Leonora and Mr. Max Ausnit will not take place.

Lady Margaret Loder, accompanied by Miss Dawnay, arrived in Kuching on 27th February by s.s. Vyner Brooke. Lady Margaret and Miss Dawnay are the guests of His Highness the Rajah.

We are informed that Mr. Harley Clarke, L.D.S.ST.A., Dental Surgeon, will arrive in Kuching on 13th March, and will remain here about one week. Mr. Harley Clarke will be staying at the Government Rest House.

Mr. and Mrs. W. S. B. Buck arrived from England on 20th February. This is Mrs. Buck’s first visit to Sarawak. We take this opportunity of extending Mrs. Buck a hearty welcome.

A most enjoyable and exciting Treasure hunt en automobile took place on Tuesday February 14th. Starting from the Sarawak Club at 7 p.m., after working out a cunning anagram, the hunters, in pairs, raced for the seventh mile for the second clue. Mysterious white paper strips hanging to a post proved to be the second clue, “Banks.” This was misinterpreted by most competitors to mean the home of a much respected local scientist. If he decides to invest in a pack of fierce hounds we will know why. We regret we have not the time or space to give a full account of many amusing or painful episodes that took place. We heard deep groans emerging from a certain ex-military gentleman whose fair partner forced him to run up Tank hill, others who had difficulty in understanding quotations from “Proverbs,” and again others who arrived home late, explaining that their tardiness was due to having solved. All the clues. The weary competitors made quick work of the excellent refreshments which were waiting them in the Club.

Dr. E. M. Marjoribanks, Principal Medical Officer, left by s.s. Vyner Brooke on 20th February for England on leave.

Mr. C. S. Griffiths, Superintendent of Lands, accompanied by Mrs. Griffiths, left for England via Singapore on 25th February. Mr. Griffiths is retiring from the service. We take this opportunity of wishing him and Mrs. Griffiths long life and the best of luck.

Mr. F. G. Day asks us to state that communications for him should no longer be sent to No. 11, Khoo Hun Yeung Street, but to his residence at the 3rd Mile, Rock Road.

Mr. C. Hannigan, Adviser to the Sarawak Constabulary, accompanied by Mrs. Hannigan, left for Singapore by m.v. Marudu on 25th February. Mr. and Mrs. Hannigan have been with us for a year and it is with regret we bid them farewell. We wish them both bon voyage and the best of luck.

As we go to press, we hear of the birth of a daughter to Mr. and Mrs. A. Hannigan in the General Hospital on Wednesday, 1st March. We tender our congratulations to the parents and wish long life and happiness to the new arrival.

A seed company had received fifteen applications from one man for free samples of their pea seeds. When the sixteenth request arrived the manager decided it was time he did something. He wrote: “Dear Sir, I am sending you the seeds as requested, but what are you doing with so much? Are you planting the whole of your, neighbourhood with samples of our peas?”
A few days later he received a reply: “No, I am not planting them at all. My wife uses them for soup.”

MILNER MEMORIAL SCHOLARSHIP.
We are in receipt of the following information which may be of interest to our readers. A pamphlet received from King’s School, Canterbury, reads as follows: -
Five Milner Memorial Scholarships have recently been founded at the King’s School, Canterbury, under a Trust Deed, out of funds collected by the Lord Milner Memorial Committee, to perpetuate the memory of the work done for the British Empire by the late Lord Milner. Their value is £100 a year for five years, and one scholarship will be awarded each year. Candidates must be over 13 and under 14 years of age on June 24th. These Scholarships are open to “boys of British parentage and European descent: -
“(i) whose fathers are or have been members of the permanent establishment of the Civil Services in India, the Colonies not possessing responsible Government Protectorates or the Territories administered under mandate by His Majesty’s Government in Great Britain or in Iraq, Egypt, or the Anglo-Egyptian Sudan; or
“(ii) whose fathers not being or having been members of the permanent establishment nevertheless have been continuously employed in any such service for a period of not less than ten years; or
“(iii) whose parents or surviving parent reside in some part of the British Empire where facilities for Secondary Education are for the time being insufficient or inadequate.”
The pamphlet, further states that applications of candidates who will not be in England at the time of the examinations must reach the Headmaster by Saturday, April 29th. In all other cases applications can be received up to June 17th.

Obituary.
DEATH OF TUAN HAJI DAUD, TUA KAMPONG OF KAMPONG PATINGAN AT THE GENERAL HOSPITAL, KUCHING.
The death of Tuan Haji Daud occurred at the General Hospital on 1st February. 1933, at 7.40 a.m., after an illness of about a week.
Tuan Haji Daud, who was 35 years old at the time of his death, was appointed Tua Kampong of Kampong Patingan, which position he held for about 3 1/2 years.
Being a student of Abang Haji Morshidi, now the Datu Imam of Sarawak, he was nominated as a teacher in religious matters at the Medarasah Morshidiah attached to the Indian Mohamedan Mosque. He also held the position of “Imam” at the said mosque for a number of years.
He was also one of those, responsible for the publication of “Fajar Sarawak” and look up the office of editor.
He was succeeded in his appointment as “Imam” for the Indian Mohamedan Mosque, by his eldest and only brother Haji Yusof.
He leaves a widow and four children.

Batu Kitang Road to Bau.
As from 1st March. 1933, all restrictions previously enforced regarding the use of the Batu Kitang Road to Bau are cancelled and the following substituted: -
(1) All motor vehicles using the road must be in possession of a permit issued by the Public Works Department. The permit will be available for one year and will be issued to all applicants whose vehicles fulfil the conditions laid down.
(2) From 1st March to 31st October the maximum dimensions of cars permitted to use the road to be: -
Track 4 feet.
Wheelbase 8 ft. 10 ins.
Unladen weight 20 cwt.
(3) From 1st November to 28th February the maximum dimensions of cars permitted to use the road to be: -
Track 3 ft. 8 ins.
Unladen weight 15 cwt.
(4) From 1st March to 31st October the ferry charges to be: -
(5) From 1st November to 28th February the ferry charges to be: -
(6) No cars exceeding 3 ft. 8 ins. track and 15 cwt. unladen weight to be licensed to ply for hire over this road.

“Mosque Parade.”
The Kedah correspondent of the Malayan Police Magazine states that “mosque parade” has been introduced by the police of that State. This means that the Malays of the force attend religious service on Fridays, marching in military formation from the depot to the mosque, and both recruits and trained men take part. “The men put on their brightest colours and carry a police cane and look just the stuff,” says the Kedah correspondent, and he adds that the men-wear the same kit when off duty and afford a wonderful contrast (in baju, seluar and sarong worn to the knees) to the rest of slouching humanity.” This is an idea worth adopting wherever it is practicable in Malayan towns. The mosque parade has been a familiar and popular feature of Kuala Lumpur life for years now and nothing gives the public a more favorable impression of the Malay police than the sight of a smart and disciplined body of men marching through town in their national costume. In Kuala Lumpur they do not carry canes, but both on the Friday 
parade and when strolling about town they carry themselves noticeably well and do more to contradict popular notions of the Malay character than any amount of well-meant M.C.S. propaganda on behalf of the Malay race can do. These police are splendid specimens of their race and if it were not for them the visitor to Kuala Lumpur would be in danger of forgetting-so numerous are the signs of British administration and Chinese and Indian influence-that that town is not the capital of a colony but the administrative centre of four Malay States and the largest town of a peninsula in which Islam is the dominant and officially recognised religion. -Straits Times.

Back to the Land!
A remark made by the vice-principal of the Malayan School of Agriculture in an address last Monday deserves to he brought prominently before Malayan parents and their sons. “My advice,” said Mr. Mann, “is to return to the land. Cultivate your own land if you have any. If you haven’t, cultivate somebody else’s,” Unquestionably that is good advice, and any man who owns a hundred acres or so cannot do better than send his son to Serdang for training. Numerous products are being landed at Singapore every day which could be grown in Malaya but which never will be grown until we get an intelligent and instructed class of landed proprietors, interested in something more than rubber and coconuts. But the majority of middle-class parents now looking for employment for their boys do not own land, and the question which they will naturally ask will be: “What are the prospects of agricultural employment?” So far none of the two-year private students have graduated from the school, so that that question cannot be answered positively, but many people believe that later on estates will welcome Serdang-trained boys, just as products of the Farm School at Perademya are largely employed by estates in Ceylon as conductors and in other subordinate capacities. After all Malayan estates must have Asiatic subordinates, and surely they will prefer trained to untrained men. The two-year course at Serdang costs $500 and there is every chance that it will turn out to be a good investment. It is, at any rate, the only investment which offers any hopes at the present time of loading to employment in the future. -Straits Times.

Visit of Agricultural Field Officer, Singapore, to Labuan and Brunei.
Mr. D. G. P. Olds, Agricultural Field Officer, Singapore, visited Labuan and Brunei during the months of November and December for the purpose of inaugurating agricultural services in these two territories in accordance with recommendations made by the Director of Agriculture as a result of his visit in August last. It is proposed to inaugurate small Agricultural Departments in both areas and steps are taken to recruit and train the necessary Malay staff, while proposals are under consideration for the establishment of a number of small demonstration and test stations. -Extract from the Malayan Agricultural Journal, January, 1933, Vol. XXI, No. 1, p. 43.

OLD SARAWAK.
From the Sarawak Gazette 62 Years Ago.
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE
No. 31 FRIDAY, 15TH DEC., 1871. Price 5 cents.
DYAK DANCING.
On the 2nd instant an exhibition of Dyak dancing took place at the Fort. The performers were Dyak fortmen, fifteen in number; the selection was left entirely to themselves. A select company, invited by the Commandant, were present at the performance. First came a solemn dance by two men in native costume, that is to say with a long chawat or waistcloth wrapped round them and hanging down to their feet and a tight jacket, who gyrated round at opposite corners of a square formed by laying down four long planks on the ground, in a shuffling step, keeping time to a monotonous beating of gongs; this was succeeded by a spirited combat with drawn parangs and shields. Whenever they thought they were coming to too close quarters, both combatants rapidly retreated. It was grotesque enough when matters came to such a pass that the dancers, crouched or lying on the ground, took furtive stabs at each other round the edges of their shields. The most characteristic of all the Dyak dances followed. The story is always very much the same. One warrior is engaged in picking a thorn out of his foot, but is ever on the alert for the lurking enemy with his arms ready at hand. This enemy is at length suddenly discovered, and after some rapid attack and defence, a sudden plunge is made at him and he is dead upon the ground. The inking of his head follows in pantomime. The last agonies of the dying man were too painfully and probably too truthfully depicted to be altogether a pleasant sight. The story then concludes with the startling discovery that the slain man is not an enemy at all but the brother of the warrior who has slain him. At this point the dance gives way to what was perhaps the least pleasing part of the performance-a man in a fit, writhing in frightful convulsions, being charmed into life and sanity by a necromantic physician. A few more dances on the advance and retreat principle concluded the entertainment.
We hope our Singapore visitors who witnessed it were pleased, not because it was either elegant or refined, for Dyak dancing can hardly be called either, but because it was thoroughly characteristic, and it is something to have a bit of savage manners brought to one’s door without going further afield to look for it, and no one can see the same who will not honour this country with a visit.
To conclude with that odious thing, a comparison.
Dyak dancing being really savage, is more characteristic than the mock savagery exhibited at the Northern Meetings in Scotland, and to our ears the musical accompaniment is rather less disagreeable than the nasal drone of the bagpipes.

Sarawak Library.
The following books have been purchased by the Committee: -

First Division News.
RESIDENT’S OFFICE.
January, 1933.
Extracts from the Divisional Deports by Mr. E. O. Bruce, Acting Resident, First Division: -
Sixty applications for land, comprising 477 acres, in the vicinity of the Simanggang Road were registered during the month.
Proposed crops including pepper, coffee, padi and fruit. Altogether applications covering 7,173 acres have been dealt with to date in this vicinity, by the Land Office. Gold Mining concerns in Upper Sarawak continue active, and six prospecting licences having been issued dining January.
General. -Bau and Lundu Districts were visited during the month and, accompanied by the Superintendent of Lands, I inspected the Srian vicinity, at the junction of Simanggang Road with Sadong River, in order to define the limits for demarcation of proposed reserves there.
Expectations of good padi harvests this year continue to be reported.

DISTRICT COURT.
January, 1933.
The District Officer, Mr. R. E. Le Sueur, reports: -
General. -New Year’s Day falling on Sunday the Government Offices were closed on Monday 2nd.
The Offices were closed for Chinese New Year and Hari Raya on 26th and 28th respectively.
A fatal accident occurred on 30th when a lorry ran into a ditch at the 2 1/2 Mile and caused the death of a Chinese woman named Ong Wau Cheng.

UPPER SARAWAK DISTRICT.
January, 1933.
The Assistant District Officer, Mr. R. G. Aikman, reports: -
Agriculture. -The Dahan Rubber Estates harvested 36,000 lbs. of dry rubber timing the month.
The rainfall at Bau was 8.78 inches.
The highest recorded in 24 hours was 1.24 inches and the daily average was .28 of an inch.
The rainfall for the month at Dahan Rubber Estate was 21.64 inches.
General. -Public holidays were observed on the 2nd, 26th Chinese New Year and on the 28th Hari Raya. On the latter date the usual visits were exchanged with the local Mohammedan Community.
I proceeded to Kampong Sungei Pinang, Siniawan, on the 13th in connection with the election of a new Orang Kaya. Ringay pa Rugoh was elected on probation.
Mr. A. K. Brown, Land Officer, arrived from Kuching on 16th and was still here at the end of the month.
He has been giving some much needed assistance in connection with gold mining lands and in general Land Office routine.
Gold Mining. -This has been rather a quiet month for gold mining owing to the bad weather and to the Chinese New Year Festivities.
There were, however, signs of increased activity at the end of the month and it is satisfactory to learn that several of the Gold Mining Companies are taking steps to put their establishments on a sounder financial footing.
Forty-one General Prospecting Licences were issued during the month.
Five applications for Exclusive Prospecting Licences were received and six such licences were issued.
The actual gold obtained by the following companies for the month of December, 1932: -

LUNDU DISTRICT.
January, 1933.
The Acting Assistant District Officer, Mr. E. H. Elam, reports: -
Agriculture. -The padi is just beginning to come into bearing and there is still every prospect of a really good harvest. Nearly all Dyaks and Malays have extended the areas of their farms so that there should be no shortage of food this year.
Trade: -
General. -Various points concerning the administration of Simatan were discussed, especially the advisability of making a telephone line.
The export of timber next month should be quite considerable as there have been a number of big contracts given out.
The offices were closed on 2nd and again for Chinese New Year and Hari Raya. Sports were held on the padang for small boys on New Year’s Day and Hari Raya, which afforded great amusement to a large crowd of spectators.

SADONG DISTRICT.
January, 1933.
The Acting Assistant District Officer, Mr. S. G. Hansom, reports: -
Dyak and Native Affairs generally. -One dispute between Malays at Sebangan, in connection with the position of fish traps, jeremal, at the Kuala, came up for settlement. I visited the Kuala and gave instructions to the Native Officer at Sebangan for the placing of a mark at the point selected as the boundary between the respective sawar.
Natives are now very busy with their harvests, and Dyaks houses and Malay Kampongs are denuded of the larger portion of their inhabitants, who are living in farming huts.
Agriculture. -The prospect of an excellent padi harvest continues.
A period of hot weather is now required to ripen off the bulk of the padi, although in some isolated cases this is already being harvested.
Marawi, Agricultural Inspector, arrived from Kuching on the 24th instant with supplies of rat poison, and also a substance which is efficacious for the destruction of empangan. These commodities are being distributed free of charge to local padi growers by the Agricultural Department.
Trade. -There has been a slight revival in the belian trade and a quantity of belian posts and attaps have recently been exported to Kuching.
There is no prospect of any engkabang crop whatever this year. This has failed locally for some years.
Lands and Survey. -One Goh Ah Ti, of Gedong, applied for an exclusive prospecting licence for gold at Bukit Segali (Kuala Sadong) and Heng Ah Lak applied for a similar licence at Gunong Garu, Ulu Simunjan. The demarcation of these areas is now in band.
Gold, in workable quantities, is also said to have been discovered at Bukit Stebun (Serian) by Teo Ek Tai, an ex.-Government clerk.
Rainfall. -The rainfall for January was 29.49 inches.

Chinese Affairs.
Secretarial for Chinese Affairs. -During the month, His Highness the Rajah authorized a stricter control of immigration, by land or sea, into the State. The effect of this authority will give the Protector power to prevent the entrance into the country of undesirable persons, always providing that sanction is obtained from His Highness the Rajah. Order No. L-3 (Labour Protection), Section 9 (i), is thus given a clearer definition, and Residents have been informed by letter as to the class of immigrants who may reasonably be excluded under this authority, which will now extend the control of the Immigration Officer over all classes and nationalities.

SARAWAK TURF CLUB.
REGULATIONS.
Penalties. -Winners of any race at this Meeting after publication of weights shall carry a penalty of 7 lbs. for each race with a maximum of 11 stone 7 lbs.
Allowance. -Professional Jockeys who are Sarawak subjects and have not ridden more than two winners under Sarawak Turf Club Rules, may claim an allowance of 5 lbs.
Entries. -All nominations, accompanied by Entrance Fees, description of ponies, and declaration of colours, to be made to the Honorary Secretary not later than noon, 25th February, 1933.
Scratchings. -Owners scratching ponies before 5 p.m. on March 17th for first day, and 5 p.m. on March 19th for second day, will receive back half their entrance fees.
Handicaps. -For First Day will be posted on the Notice Board at the Sarawak Club at noon on 4th March, and for the Second Day at noon on 19th March.
Course. -Will be open for training on 11th February, at 5.30 a.m.
Ponies. -Must run on the First Day to be eligible for entry in Races on Second Day
Owners. -Are requested to see that their syces and jockeys obtain necessary badge for entrance to Paddock.
Totalizators and Cash Sweeps $1 each.
Prizes 20% reduction if under 5 entries.
Communications to be made to
G. T. BATES, 
Acting Honorary Secretary, 
Sarawak Turf Club.

Traffic Regulations.
SPRING RACE MEETING, 1933.
1. After the hour of 11 a.m. on the 18th and 20th March, 1933, all Motor Vehicles must proceed to the Race-course via Padungan Road or Ban Hok Road only, and up to the hour of 7 p.m. on these days, must return by the Sekama Road only.

Exceptions: -
1. His Highness the Rajah’s Cars.
2. The Government Secretary.
3. The Resident, First Division, Kuching.
4. The Principal Medical Officer.
5. The Honorary Secretary, Sarawak Turf Club.
6. In cases of extreme urgency permission may be obtained on the Course for other cars to return via Ban Hok Road.

2. After depositing passengers at the Grandstand, vehicles will line up on the extreme lefthand side of the Grandstand road, one behind the other, and within three yards of each other, facing away from the Grandstand.
3. Rickshaws and bicycles may proceed to the Race-course at any time, and by any road, and must park on the Bandstand plot. They will not be allowed to remain on any part of the road leading to the Grandstand or roads leading to the Race-course.
4. All vehicles must move to their parking grounds without delay, as directed by the Constabulary.
WARNING: -
5. The driver of any vehicle: -
(a) endeavouring to turn in Grandstand road or,
(b) stopping to pick up passengers in Grandstand road,
will be prosecuted for causing an obstruction.

Second Division News.
January, 1933.
Extracts from the Second Divisional Reports by Mr. J. B. Archer, Resident: -
I returned to Simanggang on the 4th, accompanied by Messrs. Macpherson and Harnack. The former proceeded to Engkilili at once, while the latter took over the duties of Assistant Superintendent of Surveys, Second Division, from Mr. N. Mace, who returned to Kuching later.
The chief event of the month was the arrival of His Highness the Rajah in Simanggang on the 7th. His Highness, who was accompanied by Dayang Leonora and Mrs. Bean, reached Lingga the previous evening and went ashore there on the morning of the 7th. On arrival in Simanggang His Highness was met by the Resident and Datu Haji Dulrashid. The guard of honour of Sarawak Constabulary under the command of A.S.I. Haji Zaidell having been inspected, His Highness met the other Officers, European and Native, Dyak and Malay Chiefs, and representatives of Chinese and others. A small party of Malay ladies awaited Dayang Leonora at Astana.
The next day His Highness, accompanied by the Resident, Datu Haji Dulrashid and Abang Abu Talip, went up to Engkilili where His Highness was met by Mr. Macpherson, Assistant District Officer, and a guard of honour of Sarawak Constabulary. A large number of Dyak Chiefs and Chinese were also assembled.
On the 9th His Highness met the Dyak Chiefs and Chinese in the Court House. Having given directions regarding certain Chinese petitions His Highness made a short speech to the Dyak Chiefs and later a general discussion took place. The same afternoon His Highness returned to Simanggang after an enthusiastic farewell at Engkilili.
The day following His Highness was in Simanggang, but nothing much was brought to His Highness’ notice and His Highness left for Kuching the next day, spending the evening of the 11th at Lingga, where a party of Balo Dyaks were entertained on board H. H. Y. Maimuna.
During the month Messrs. Combe and Barcroft returned from the Ulu Ai, together with two Native Officers and a number of troops. Two fresh Native Officers were sent as reliefs.
Mr. D. E. Calver, Conservator of Forests, was in the Division during the month in order to make arrangements for the reorganization of the Forest Department. He visited most of the stations and we have inaugurated a scheme.
Mr. W. H. Kelley, Officer Superintending Kuching Constabulary Sector, toured parts of the Division during the month.
On Hari Raya the principal Malays called on me at the Residency, and I returned the calls later in the day.

SIMANGGANG DISTRICT.
January, 1933.
The District Officer, Mr. R. L. Daubeny, reports: -
Dyak and Native Affairs generally. -Orang Kaya Jaul, Penghulus Lambai and Goyang visited the Station during the month in Connection with their work.
Trade: -
Staff. -Mr. R. L. Daubeny was transferred to the District Office. Simanggang, Mr. J. C. H. Barcroft to Kalaka, and Mr. W. H. C. C. Morice to Engkilili.
General. -His Highness the Rajah, accompanied by Dayang Leonora and Mrs. Bean, visited the Station during the month, arriving here on the 7th instant. On the 8th instant, accompanied by the Resident, Second Division, His Highness proceeded to Engkilili.

SARIBAS-BETONG DISTRICT.
January, 1933.
The Acting Assistant District Officer, Mr. J. R. Combe, reports: -
General. -Mr. R. L. Daubeny, District Officer. Saratok, arrived here on 23rd January, in m.l. Elizabeth to settle minor cases. Messrs. D. E. Culver and W. H. Kelley arrived on 24th from Simanggang. The former to explain new Forest Regulations to Government servants the latter to inspect Constabulary, Betong. and instruct the use of various new S.C. Forms. They left for Saratok with Mr. R. L. Daubeny in m.l. Elizabeth via Pusa on 27th.

KALAKA DISTRRICT.
January, 1933.
The District Officer, Mr. R. L. Daubeny, reports: -
Agriculture. -The month has been very wet. Padi in some parts is almost ready for harvesting but the continual rain is not very beneficial at this stage. Large flocks of Burong Pipit are causing considerable damage amongst the early crops.
Trade: -
General. -I was away from 14th to 16th visiting Kabong and Roban. The road at Kabong from the office to the beach has been almost completed.
From 21st to 27th I was away visiting the Saribas District, when various outstanding matters were settled.
The 26th and 28th instant were public holidays, Chinese New Year and Hari Raya, and the Government Offices were duly closed, the customary salutes being fired.
The Rev. M. Bradshaw visited the S.P.G. Mission here arriving on 17th and leaving some few days later overland via Debak.

ENGKILILI DISTRICT.
January, 1933.
The Acting Assistant District Officer, Mr. W. H. C. C. Morice, reports: -
Dyak and Native Affairs generally. -On the 4th Mr. Macpherson returned from Kuching where he had been in connection with Asun’s affairs. On the 17th Mr. Macpherson left for Lubok Antu and the Ulu Ai.
Mr. J. R. Combo arrived from the Engkari on the 24th and Mr. J. C. H. Barcroft from the Ulu Ai on the 28th. Both on their way to Simanggang.
The various rebels expected from the Ulu had not arrived at the end of the month.
Agriculture. -The pepper is doing fairly well, but the time of the next harvest is uncertain.
Padi. -From reports the crop is good and there is every reason to expect a good harvest.

LUBOK ANTU DISTRICT.
January, 1933.
The Assistant District Officer, Mr. A. Macpherson, reports: -
Dyk and Native Affairs generally. -The Ulu Ai Penghulus and chiefs were called down to Engkilili to meet His Highness the Rajah on the 8th.
Agriculture. -The padi is good in all parts of the district, but the weeds in damun farms continue to be a source of anxiety.
Staff. -Mr. A. Macpherson, Assistant District Officer, will appointed to do duty at Lubok Antu and arrived on the 17th instant.
Abang Taha, Native Officer, was appointed to do duty at Lubok Antu and arrived on 19th instant.
Abang Abu Tulip, Native Officer, to do duty at Nanga Panah arrived on 18th instant and proceeded up river on 20th instant.

Third Division News.
January, 1933.
Extracts from the Third Divisional Reports by Mr. C. D. Adams, Resident: -

SIBU AND KANOWIT DISTRICT.
January, 1933.
The District Officer, Mr. W. F. Dick, reports: -
Agriculture. -The river was in flood at the end of the month and all roads on the Island were under water. It is feared that many farms will have been ruined by the exceptionally high water.
General. -The offices were closed on the 2nd.
The Travelling District Officer, Mr. H. E. Cutfield, left on 5th for Ulu Kanowit and was still away at the end of the month.
A Foochow boy fell into a ditch in Mission Road on the afternoon of 17th and was drowned.
The offices were closed on Chinese New Year 26th and Hari Raya 28th.
The Dayang Leonora arrived per H.H.M.Y. Maimuna on 25th instant and sailed on 28th for Singapore per s.s. Kuranda accompanied by the Resident and Mrs. Adams.

SIBU DISTRICT.
January, 1933.
Trade: -

SARIKEI, BINATANG AND REJANG.
January, 1933.
The Acting Assistant District Officer, Mr. F. L. Crossley, reports: -
Crime. -A serious wounding affair was reported from Sarik on 8th January. One Yee Nyip, Cantonese, who gave himself up to the police, was charged with causing grevious hurt, and pleaded guilty.
Dyak and Native Affairs. -Pengarah Nglambong, of Kanowit, visited the Sarikei and Nyelong rivers from the 6th to the 14th, to settle outstanding Dyak cases.
Trade: -
Remarks. -Sarikei export figures 1933, include about $18,000 cutch from Selalang, formerly shipped from the port of Rejang.
Shipping. -The port of Rejang was declared closed as a foreign port as from the 1st January. The Singapore boats now make Sarikei their first and last port of call, but Rejang is still open to coastal trade.
General. -I visited Binatang four times during the month.
Visitors to the station included the Divisional Forest Officer, Mr. B. J. C. Spurway. the Divisional Land Officer, Mr. T. E. Parker, who visited the district twice, and Mr. Roach, of the Island Trading Company.
The offices were closed on New Year’s Day, Chinese New Year and Hari Raya.

MUKAH DISTRICT.
January, 1933.
The Acting District Officer, Mr. J. J. Hill, Reports: -
Dyak and Native Affairs generally. -Some thirty Dyaks arrived during the month from Sibu with the intention of working jelutong.
Numerous Dyaks from the Ulu have again this month been bringing bellian posts, planks, etc., down for sale. Prices, however, have been very low.
Agriculture. -Better reports have been received from the Ulu Mukah with regard to the padi harvest and it appears that the hill padi is thriving.
General. -On the 2nd instant the Offices were closed, it being proclaimed a Public Holiday.
On the 5th I arrived back from Sibu having spent one day at Oya and one at Dalat.
On the 18th instant Mr. N. E. Hughes arrived back from local leave and from that date I handed over the affairs of the Oya and Dalat district to him.
The 26th being the Chinese New Year the offices were closed.
The 28th being Hari Raya the offices were closed.
Visitors to the station included the Reverend Father Epping and Messrs. W. M. Johnson and J. B. Hunt of the Sarawak Oilfields, Limited.

OYA AND DALAT.
January, 1933.
The Acting Assistant District Officer, Mr. N. E. Hughes, reports: -
Dyak and Native Affairs. -Wan Hussein, Native Officer, left for the Ulu Oya and tributaries on January 6th to collect outstanding door-tax and make a general round of inspection. He returned on the 15th and reported that up river affairs were all in order, all tax having been either paid up or secured with pledges. Several minor matters were dealt with during this trip.
On January 17th Penghulu Untol came down river to buy sago and rice, since the Ulu people have now finished last year’s padi.
General. -I returned to the station via Sungei Kut on January 18th and resumed duty on that day. Nothing of any importance had occurred during my absence.
Visitors to the station included Mr. J. J. Hill, District Officer, Mukah, who passed through on his way back from Sibu, and the Reverend Father Anthony Mulder. On January 25th the Rev. Father Buck left Dalat Mission on transfer after three years work in the Melanau country.
Hari Raya was observed as a public holiday, the customary visits being paid and received. In the afternoon a display of Malay dancing was held in the bungalow grounds.
The weather during the month was execrable, there having been only one fine day since my return. Very heavy seas are at present running, and a steady northerly gale has been blowing for the post fortnight, bringing with it a series of violent rainstorms. All shipping has been held up as a result.

MATU AND DARO DISTRICT.
January, 1933.
The Officer-in-Charge, Mr. G. F. J. Pegler, reports: -
Agriculture. -The padi harvest is now in full swing. Reports show that the crops this year are entirely satisfactory.

KAPIT DISTRICT.
January, 1933.
The Acting Assistant District Officer, Mr. D. C. Hudden, reports: -
Native Affairs. -Penghulus Ugak, Grinang, Manok Manchai and Sibat were in the station during the month and Penghulu Ausi returned from his visit to Kuching.
Abang Abdulgapor, Native Officer, was supposed to visit the Mujong and the area above Pala Wong, but owing to the state of the river was unable to make a start until the end of the month.
General. -I returned from Sibu on the 4th, and left again on the 6th for the Katibas, with instructions to make for the rebel farms and meet the Travelling District Officer, Sibu, there on the 16th.
The river was again in flood most of the month and the water came as high as four feet below the record high water mark.
Visitors to the station were the Rev. Father A. Halder, the Rev. Fathers A. Mulder, Leo van den Bergh, C. Quadekker, J. Buis, and J. Vos.
The total rainfall for the month was 25.83 inches.

The Sibu Recreation Club, Sibu.
ANNUAL REPORT.
GENTLEMAN,
Although many adverse circumstances have contributed to a very lean year, we may yet congratulate ourselves on the fact that we have not made a loss on the year’s working.
It is to be regretted that our ranks have, to a certain extent, been depleted owing to retrenchments. It is also to be regretted that we have lost the valuable services of Messrs. E. Pawle and Kam Thong on the Committee.
During the course of the year a Tennis Tournament and a Ping-Pong Tournament were held with great success. The members were also invited by the Committee of the Island Club to participate in a Billiard Tournament. There is also a Chess Tournament in progress.
A tidy sum of money was added to the finances of the Club from profits accruing from a Sweepstake on the “Cesarewitch,” run in conjunction with the Island Club, and another Sweep-this time on the “Grand National”-is being run on the same terms and it is hoped that the profits will enable us to add further to our finances.
In December, we had the honour of entertaining Dayang Leonora and members of the Island Club. On this occasion, Dayang Leonora very kindly distributed the prizes to the winners of the Tournaments.
When the suggestion of adding to the present limited amenities of the Club arose, Government was approached and His Highness the Rajah very kindly sanctioned a loan of five hundred dollars ($500) for the purpose, and negotiations are now in progress for the purchase of a Billiard Table. It is also proposed to extend the Club premises and estimates as to cost are being obtained.
The Library has been considerably extended through the generosity of several members and others who presented books, magazines, etc. It is worthy of mention that the co-operation of the members, both general and committee, has contributed in no small measure to the satisfactory balance sheet.
With a view to simplifying the work of next year’s officials, it is proposed to amend certain rules which will further facilitate the management of affairs.
Thanks are due to our Hon. President, who, by his sympathetic interest, has done much to advance the interests of the Club.
We are now looking forward to a new year which, we hope, holds promise of belter things, and we are optimistic enough to think that we shall at least see a glimmer of that silver lining which is the redeeming factor of the darkest cloud.
The Annual General Meeting will be held at the Club premises at 8 a.m. on 24th February, 1933. Members having any questions to put or suggestions to make should do so in writing to the Hon. Secretary at least 48 hours before the Meeting.
Agenda: -
1. To pass the report and accounts.
2. To elect Office bearers.
3. Amendments to rules.
4. Any other business.
E. A. WEBB, 
Hon. Secretary.

Fourth Division News.
January, 1933.
Extracts from the Fourth Divisional Reports by Mr. H. D. Aplin, Resident: -
I proceeded to Limbang on 14th. I returned to Miri on 17th. The journey both ways was made by car and greatly facilitated by the General Manager, Sarawak Oilfields, Limited, and the British Resident, Brunei, very kindly providing cars.
The District Officers of Baram and Bintulu were in Miri during the month to discuss several matters with me.
Wan Ahmad, Probationary Native Officer, arrived from Baram and is remaining in Miri for a month for instruction in his duties before taking up his duties, at Niah and Sibuti vice Awang Hitam, retiring on pension.

MIRI DISTRICT.
January, 1933.
The District Officer, Mr. F. G. Carpenter, reports: -
Health. -General health of the district was good.
Dyak and Native Affairs. -The outstations were visited between the 8th and 12th. No matters of any importance were brought forward.
Trade: -
General. -The Officer Supervising Constabulary visited the Fifth Division from the 3rd to the 12th.
The Resident was away at Limbang from the 14th to the 17th.
Mr. J. G. Anderson paid a short visit from Bintulu, returning again on the 15th.
An outbreak of fire in the bazaar, which might have had serious consequences, occurred at 4.40 a.m. on the 31st. Two upstairs back rooms were burned out before the flames were extinguished by helpers with extinguishers. The cause was traced to burning material having been drawn through a zinc chimney and deposited on the roof.

BARAM DISTRICT.
January, 1933.
The Acting District Officer, Mr. F. H. Pollard, reports: -
Agriculture. -Harvesting is just starting. In spite of the fact that very few houses had good burns the crop is expected to be well up to the average. Rainfall amounted to 4.81 inches in 12 days.
Trade: -
General. -Accompanied by Native Officer Mohamad Zin Galan I visited L. Lama from 14th to 17th. Mr. White and Native Officer Wan Suror visited the Bakong from 18th to 25th.
Lieut.-Colonel and Mrs. Ditmas were here on a visit from 25th to 31st.

BINTULU DISTRICT.
January, 1933.
The Acting District Officer, Mr. J. G. Anderson, reports: -
Obituary. -On 29th instant Tua Kampong Awang Maile, of acute peritonitis, after 18 years and 8 months service with Government.
Dyak and Native Affairs Generally. -Hari Raya was observed as a Public Holiday and customary visits made all round.
Agriculture. -Padi crops in ulu Tatau are ripening and promise well.
Dyaks and Malays everywhere complain of abnormal destruction of padi by pig which are more ravenous than usual owing to lack of jungle fruit this year.
Rainfall during the month 12.33 inches.
Trade: -























