VOL. LXIII.
No. 955.
The Sarawak Gazette
Price
KUCHING, Saturday, April 1st, 1933.
20 CENTS.
Contents.
The Sarawak Gazette		 			
SATURDAY, APRIL 1st, 1933.

Birth.
HANNIGAN. -On 1st March at the General Hospital, Kuching, to Mr. and Mrs. A. Hannigan, a daughter.

ANDERSON. -On Tuesday, 21st March, at Miri, to Mr. and Mrs. J. G. Anderson, a daughter.

AUSTIN. -On the 25th March, 1933, at Southport, Lancashire, to Mr. and Mrs. N. J. Austin, a daughter.

Local and Personal.
March.
His Highness the Rajah, accompanied by Mr. E. S. Holl, Private Secretary, proceeded to Singapore en route for England by s.s. Kudat on 25th. We take this opportunity of wishing His Highness bon voyage.

His Highness the Tuan Muda is expected to arrive in Sarawak on or about the 18th June, 1933. Pending the arrival of His Highness, Mr. C. F. C. Mascaskie. Government Secretary, has been appointed Officer Administering the Government.

His Highness the Rajah gave a Garden Party at Bedil House on Wednesday the 22nd. A large number of guests were invited including representatives from all communities. The band of the Sarawak Constabulary was in attendance.

During race week a very enjoyable dance was given by His Highness the Rajah at Astana. Music was rendered by Mr. G. Solosa’s String Orchestra.

A very enjoyable, and well attended, meeting of the Sarawak Turf Club took place on 18th and 20th. A separate account of this meeting is included in our columns.

We note that on and after 25th March, 1933, the address of the British North Borneo (Chartered) Company will be Staple Hall, Stone House Court, Bishopsgate, London, E.C. 3.

Visitors to Kuching from Singapore included Mrs. I. M. W. Wright and Miss O. L. Moir, sisters of Mr. R. L. Moir of the Borneo Company, Limited.

Mr. Harley Clarke, L.D.S. ST.A., Dental Surgeon, visited Kuching during the month, arriving by s.s. Kudat on the 13th.

We again have pleasure in acknowledging receipt of a new issue of Mirage, as interesting and cheery as ever.

Mr. and Mrs. E. Parnell and family left for Singapore on s.s. Vyner Brooke on 23rd. Mr. Parnell, with Miss Parnell and Master Parnell, is shortly proceeding to England on furlough.

Mr. L. N. Reynolds returned from leave by m.v. Marudu on 6th March. Mr. Reynolds resumes his duties as Acting Commissioner, Sarawak Constabulary.

Visitors to Kuching for race week included Mr. and Mrs. H. D. Aplin, Mr. and Mrs. C. D. Adams. Mr. and Mrs. W. F. Dick, Mr. and Mrs. F. G. Carpenter, Mr. and Mrs. W. L. P. Sochon, Messrs. H B. Crocker, H. Cutfield, F. A. Moore, W. V. Hanson, B. J. C. Spurway and K. E. Parker.

A very enjoyable, and novel, dance was given by the Acting Resident, Mr. E. O. Bruce, at the Residency during race week. Guests were invited to advertise by means of their dress their particular form of mental eccentricity. Full advantage was taken of this and the fun waxed fast and furious till the early morning hours We have not the space, perhaps fortunately, to give a full account of all that happened. The Band of the Sarawak Constabulary, apparently the only non-eccentric persons present deserve special mention for the excellent rendering of dance and other items on the programme. The height of enjoyment was reached when the Band, headed by a strange, tall, Drum-Major, left the Bandstand and marched through the Residency.
We congratulate and thank the host for a very amusing evening and the guests on their remarkable adaptability.

British Legion.
DEAR MR. BLAGG,
I beg to acknowledge with very sincere thanks receipt of your letter of the 6th ulto., with which you so kindly forward draft for £8513.3 being the result of the 1932 Remembrance Day Appeal and sale of Poppies in Kuching and other places in Sarawak (excluding Miri) for the benefit of Earl Haig’s Fund, and enclosed you will find our official receipt U1750 for this very gratifying amount.
I would assure you and all concerned that this contribution will make a very welcome addition to the national trial, which we are hoping, in spite of the difficult times, may prove to be at least equal to that of 1931.
There has, I think, been even greater readiness to help, and the quality of the Nation’s remembrance has been proved still once again by the volume of willing and sympathetic service placed at the disposal of the Fund.
I am to say that our President is most grateful to you and those associated with you in the splendid efforts made, and that his sincerest thanks are due to all who have contributed so liberally to the collection which this letter acknowledges.
In conclusion, may I, in anticipation, express on their behalf, the gratitude and thankfulness which I am sure will be felt by the distressed ex-service men and their dependents who will benefit by the generosity of our kind friends in Kuching and other places in Sarawak.
With renewed thanks and very best wishes to you and our many friends in your part of the world.
Believe me,
Yours very truly,
W. G. WILLCOX,
Captain.
Organising Secretary,
Appeal and Publicity Dept.,
British Legion.

Coming Events.
In another column to-day we publish, not without regret, the notice of the winding up of a local company which had as its object the linking up of the towns of Malaya by air. The enterprise has come to an early end through circumstances and conditions over which the promoters had no control, and although they did not get as far as actually blazing the trail of inter-Malayan air connections, they were not lacking in enterprise or energy. One fact is clearly established by their failure. A very large sum of money is needed for the establishment of a regular commercial air service. There are few such services which have not had in the early stages of their development financial help from govern-ments; with the exception of the new Tala service in India and several American lines, yearly government subsidies have been essential for the continuance of these services. That Singapore will eventually be one of the big air ports of the world is generally accepted. Situated on the direct route to Australia and 
Java, and with a large aerodrome in the making, it may be assumed that Singapore’s position as a large world airport is assured. There is a possibility-remote, we believe, but still a possibility-which may retard its progress. As air lines have so much government backing, the free use of all aerodromes may be restricted and pre-ference given to national planes of the country in which the aerodrome is situated. Such a shortsighted policy would be disastrous in Malaya. With the increasing range of aircraft, a port of call which does not give equal treatment to all users will be passed over and the public robbed of the full benefit of all the services operating on that route, as in the case of a certain Persian aerodrome, which is now not a port of call on the Eastern route of the Imperial Airways. It is very unlikely that the air interest of the British, Australian and Dutch governments will clash. The K.L.M. have definitely put Malaya on the air map. and although Singapore has so far been unable to reap full benefit of the service owing to the absence of landing facilities, we hope it will be made a port of call for this company as soon as the local aerodrome is ready. The imperial Airways, the K.L.M. and the Australian Airways are already co-ordinating tariffs, time-tables, etc., and it is not too much to hope that before long we will enjoy a weekly air service to Australia and a twice weekly service to Europa. Later on. perhaps, we may have a French service to Saigon, a Chinese service to Canton-and from time to time a visit from round the world luxury airships. -Straits Times.

Eastward Bound in 1854.
How greatly customs have changed among Europeans living in the East is shown by an extract from an old diary which was published recently by the South China Morning Post. The diarist is Sir William Adamson, who came out to Singapore on the P. and O. “Himalaya” in 1854 to join the now defunct firm of Morgan, McEwan and Co. Sir William makes no reference to deck sports, and a modern reader learns with astonishment that dinner on a P. and O. liner in those days was at four p.m. Fancy getting down to roast beef at four o’clock in the tropics! Here is the diary extract:
“The bugle sounds at 8.30 a m., when most of us rise and dress At 9 we breakfast on tea or coffee, hot rolls and hot and cold meat, fowls, or anything we fancy. At midday, we have luncheon of bread, cheese and butter, washed down with wine, spirits or ale. At 4 p.m. we dine, when we have soup, various kinds of roasts, fowls, etc. pastry, puddings and other light things in that line, cheese and celery. Dessert consists of apples, oranges and dried fruits. During dinner, we are allowed an unlimited supply of wine, beer and porter (champagne twice a week) all of which are of good quality. Tea is at eight and toddy at nine. During the day we walk about, read or write and at night we spin yarns, play chess or draughts and a few play cards. For an hour, morning and evening, we have the band, a brass one in the morning, and a string band in the latter part of the day. Time, passes swiftly and pleasantly.” -Straits Times.

Sarawak Library.
Kindly presented by Miss Dawnay: -
Purchased by the Committee: -

OLD SARAWAK.
From the Sarawak Gazette 62 Years Ago.
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE
No. 27 MONDAY, 16TH OCT., 1871. Price 5 cents.
A CHANGE.
Visitors to Sarawak who have any recollection of what the Bazaar was 18 months or 2 years ago will be surprised at the rapid strides which have been taken. The order of Government that the houses facing the riser should be rebuilt, brick being substituted for wood, and belian ataps made compulsory, is being gradually carried out, the whole of the houses as far as Ken What’s being now approaching completion in this solid style. The transformation which has taken place in Carpenters’ Street is still more wonderful. The old tumble-down abodes, inhabited for the most part by the poorer artizans among the Chinese, have given place to neat plank houses, roofed with belian, and built with some approach to regularity. Another side is being run up to this street on the ground before occupied as a timber store and receptacle of rubbish; the framework of houses has been set up along the whole front of this vacant space. Farther on the new shape, ending with the Dispensary, have filled up another abode of emptiness. 
These are to be continued to the corner of the Church road, and down it till they meet the houses in the Bazaar facing the river. On the grass plot opposite the Fort landing place the foundations of the new Court House have been built upon to a height of 3 or 4 feet. The plans of this edifice represent an imposing structure, with some pretensions to architectural beauty, and apparently well suited (or the purposes to which it will be demoted. It will be divided within into a large room for hearing cases and other public Court business, and the usual Government offices with a printing room attached. The ground before the Court House will no doubt be laid out us an ornamental garden and a light wire fence is to enclose the whole. Much of the wood for the heavy framework of the building has been collected, but the distance this has to be brought and the want of hands to cut and prepare it will make the completion of the work a matter of time. Probably ten or twelve months will be needed before the building is 
ready for use.

First Division News.
RESIDENT’S OFFICE.
February, 1933.
Extracts from the Divisional Reports by Mr. E. O. Bruce. Acting Resident, First Division: -
In the Resident’s Court there were no criminal or appeal eases. A civil claim for the distribution, by Trustees, of inheritance under the will of Sim Chuan Joo (deceased) was adjudicated.
In spite of the continued trade depression serious crime is remarkably infrequent.
Gold Mining activities in Upper Sarawak continue, a fortunate source of employment to both Malays and Chinese.
At Sadong an application to open a coke manufacturing industry, on the site of the old coal mine, was granted.
Applications for land in the vicinity of the Simanggang trunk road continue to be registered, and comprised a further 246 acres during the mouth, making 7,419 acres to date.
On the 13th February His Highness the Rajah, accompanied by the Government Secretary, Mr. C. F.C. Macaskie, left Kuching for a visit to outstations, returning on the 25th.
The Principal Medical Officer, Dr. E. M Marjoribanks, left for Europe on furlough on the 20th, and Mr. and Mrs. Buck reported return from leave, and proceeded to Fifth Division on the 25th. Accompanied by the Acting Principal Medical Officer a visit of inspection was made to the Pauper Camp with a view to submitting to the Government Secretary recommendations for reorganization.
Her Highness the Ranee’s birthday was observed on the 24th and Government offices closed.

UPPER SARAWAK DISTRICT.
February, 1933.
The Assistant District Officer, Mr. R. G. Aikman, reports: -
Agriculture. -The Dahan Rubber Estates harvested 30,000 lbs. of dry rubber during the month.
The padi crop this year should be well up to the average according to the latest reports.
The rainfall at Bau was 8.29 inches. The highest recorded in 24 hours was 2.10 niches and the daily average was .29 of an inch.
The rainfall for the month at Dahan Rubber Estates was 8.73 inches.
General. -The suspension bridge over the Staat river, at the entrance to Dahan Rubber Estate, was carried away by heavy logs.
On the 9th, accompanied by Orang Kaya Nyimbo of Peninjau, I ascended Gunong Serambu in order to obtain a view of several areas of land applied for by gold mining concerns. A very satisfactory view of a large part of the district was obtained.
On the 10th. accompanied by Mr. A. K. Brown, I proceeded to Bukit Ayam, near Tondong, to look into the farming land dispute between the Singghi and Grogo Dyaks.
Gold Mining. -The price of gold dropped slightly during the month but the activity shown in gold mining operations continues unabated throughout the district.
Thirty General Prospecting Licences were issued during the month. Four applications for Exclusive Prospecting Licences were received and seven such licences were issued.
The actual gold obtained by the following companies for the month of January, 1933: -

LUNDU DISTRICT.
February, 1933.
The Acting Assistant District Officer, Mr. E. H. Elam, reports: -
Trade: -
General. -The Sri Merbo twice cleared for Kuching with timber and there still remains quite a considerable quantity to be shipped.
I visited Sampadi and Rambungan on 22nd and 23rd and proceeded to Sibu Laut for the week end. The Sea Dyaks at Sampadi are the only people whose padi does not seem to be satisfactory.

SADONG DISTRICT.
February, 1933.
The Acting Assistant District Officer, Mr. S. G. Hansom, reports: -
Agriculture. -Natives are now busy with the reaping of their harvest, which generally can he said to be extremely good. The early part of the crop is now being gathered, but harvesting is likely to continue for some months, owing to the continual wet weather last autumn, which held up the burning off and planting of padi lands.
Trade. -Prevailing conditions make it difficult to do much in the interests of encouraging local exports, as natives are definitely unwilling to work produce at the low prices ruling, except inasmuch as in provide themselves with the absolute necessities of life. Local Natives will be keenly interested to see what price they are likely to obtain in Kuching for their surplus padi.
Land and Survey. -The deposits have been duly paid, and the demarcation of the respective areas is proceeding.
Mr. Leach, of the Survey Department, has been working in the ulu Sadong off and on during the month, and a number of his men still remain there.
General. -An application was received from one Henry Tai, to work coal at the Colliery, in order to manufacture coke for export to Kuching, and for local use in the manufacture of copra. A separate report has been made on this subject.
The rainfall for the mouth was 9.79 inches.

Chinese Affairs.
February, 1933.
Secretarial for Chinese Affairs. -On the 17th February, the Secretary for Chinese Affairs proceeded to Engkilili in connection with the Pepper Dispute. As a result of his investigations, a local Order was drawn up in collaboration with the Resident, Second Division, and was put into force from 1st March. The position up there is by no means settled yet, and will need careful watching during the next few months. Mr. Selous has been posted in Engkilili for temporary duty, and will remain there for about two months to deal with cases arising from the dispute, and the local Order.

Constabulary Treasure Hunt.
About forty members of the Constabulary stationed in Kuching took part in a Treasure Hunt on bicycles on the morning of Sunday the 12th March.
The Hunt, organized as part of the programme of physical training and also with a view to exercising the brains of the men, was over a course of about 12 miles with nine clues, some of which were written in English, some in Chinese, some in Jawi and one in the form of a Malay-English acrostic.
Starting from the Kuching Football Club at 6.30 a.m., the first clue written in Jawi directed the competitors to the bridge at the end of Pisang Road, where a clue in Chinese indicated Satok Bridge as the next point. Chinese residents in the vicinity were persuaded to help decipher the clue, and most of the competitors eventually got their third clue but there the fun started. They had been told to use their brains. It was known that the clues had been posted by the Assistant Commissioner in his car just prior to the hunt, and to most of the competitors the task now became one of discovering where the car had been seen and where it had stopped. Clues were picked up in such orders as 4, 8, 7, 5, etc., and “kongsis” were formed. One competitor went off in this direction, in which the car had been seen, to collect enough slips for himself and the other members of the kongsi, whilst others went off in other directions, arranging to meet at a fixed point afterwards to share the spoils.
There were many long faces when a check of clues was made before being allowed to participate in the final hunt for the prizes after the ninth clue. With the exception of three men who had religiously followed the clues, all had one clue, missing, which, presumably being in an out-of-the-way spot, the Assistant Commissioner had been able to fix without being seen doing so.
The Hunt was thoroughly enjoyed and it was indeed gratifying to note that none of the Sikh competitors broke any bones, since as is generally appreciated, on bicycles “Such Men Are Dangerous.” -(Contributed).

Sarawak Turf Club Spring Meeting, 1933.
(GOING VERY HEAVY.)
SMART PERFORMANCE BY “FLYING FOX” UNDER TOP WEIGHTS.
The meeting was held on Saturday and Monday, 18th and 20th March. In spite of heavy going, excellent racing was enjoyed and Mr. E. S. Holl the Official Handicapper excelled himself on the second day.
The weather was most uncertain but no rain fell during the actual racing. The first day was overcast and cool. On the second a few hours before the first race there was a torrential downpour which flooded the course and paddock. When racing was resumed, however, the weather was brilliant and on the hot side. At the end of the meeting the course in front of the stand was a sea of mud.
His Highness the Rajah and Astana party attended the meeting, arriving just before the first race each day. At the conclusion of the meeting His Highness kindly presented the prizes to the successful owners.
The Champion Cup, presented by the Officers of the Civil Service, went to Mr. C. D. Adams’ Flying Fox for the fourth time. Damit, his sais, headed the list of winning jockeys and claimed the handsome silver cigarette case presented by the Club to the most successful jockey at the meeting.
Setting aside Flying Fox’s three wins, his finest performance was on the second day, when carrying 11.3 and conceding 8 lbs. he ran that accomplished sprinter Flamingo to a neck for the Turf Club Stakes. Forty-two pounds of lead and the going as it was, must be an outstanding achievement even for Flying Fox. Flamingo is a real flyer over a short distance but he nearly gave away an easy race for the Simpang Tiga Stakes by swerving onto White Label. He is still young and a big pony and one wonders will he improve in staying power with age or outgrow the height regulation of 13.2 hands and so become ineligible for racing Under the present rules of the Club. Akal, temperamental as usual, won the Ranee’s Cup over a mile. Personally I should like to see the race run again, as a matter of interest, with Flying Fox having fulfilled all his previous engagements for the afternoon. Taking him out of the Simpang Tiga Stakes was a mistake which his owner now admits.
Following the prevailing fashion of modern racing a lady owner’s colours were first past the post when Mrs. G. D. Adams’ White Knight obliged twice on the first day. He divided one race with His Highness the Rajah’s Workman. On the second day His Highness was able to lead in Workman again as the winner of the Country Stakes after a stern tussle with Wembley. Wembley was at one time in His Highness’s stable but now runs in the colours of Mr. P. M. Adams and the Datu Amar.
The Division III races as usual developed into a duel between Jorrocks and Mudahan. The former always game and well ridden by his sais Japar, an apprentice, caught the Judge’s eye twice on the first day. He was unlucky in the 3 furlongs on the second day.
Times were slow owing to the heavy condition of the course. The start was entirely in the hands of Messrs. Sinclair and Spurway. It was a noticeable feature that after the fields had come under the orders of the same starter in one or two consecutive races there was co-operation between the jockeys and the starter which can never be obtained by a medley of starters operating through the meeting.
In spite of the hard times and the, weather the meeting was well attended. Racing was much more interesting on the second day and prices on the Tote were more attractive. The meeting can be written down as another success in the Club records.
In conclusion a word of thanks must be given to those hard-working officials, many of whom in addition are harassed owners, who put in so much of their time to make these meetings so popular and enjoyable.
Full results are given below.
CENTAUR.

RESULTS.
First Day.
Saturday, 18th March, 1933.
(GOING HEAVY.)
RACE 1. -2.30 p.m. THE TUAN MUDA’S CUP. 6 furlongs.
DIVISION I.
Flamingo made all the running to the road, Flying Fox then commenced to overhaul him and took the lead at the Ara tree, Akal came through to claim second honours.

RACE 2. -3 p.m. THE SATOK STAKES. 5 furlongs.
DIVISION II.
White Knight quickly justified his position in the belting as favourite and took command just after the four furlong mark. Mickey Mouse in the same ownership was in close attendance to the road but had to give way to Water Polo. White Knight stuck to his advantage to win pluckily. Ol’ Man River made up a lot of ground to get within a neck of Water Polo.

RACE 3. -3.30 p.m. THE B.C.L. STAKES. 6 furlongs.
DIVISION III.
Jorrocks claimed the apprentice allowance. Pengarah showed up in front at the beginning of the journey with Gruda tailing off. After the road it was a two horse race with Jorrocks making his way home first.

RACE 4. -4 p.m. SIMPANG TIGA STAKES. 3 furlongs.
DIVISION I.
Flying Fox, Kim Mah and Akal were struck out of the race and it was a gift for Flamingo. In spite of dwelling at the start he had the field swamped halfway home and won comfortably although he swerved badly onto White Label. Sukut was cautioned by the Stewards for his riding of Flamingo.

RACE 5. -4.30 p.m. THE MATANG STAKES. 4 furlongs.
DIVISION II.
The field came over the road with Mrs. Adams’ first and second colours in the van. For a moment it looked as if they were to fight out the finish alone. Once in the straight however Wakijau set about Workman and riding a good race caught Mickey Mouse and got level with White Knight on the post to divide the stakes.

RACE 6. -5 p.m. THE PENDING STAKES. 3 furlongs.
DIVISION III.
Jorrocks again look advantage of the apprentice allowance reducing his penally to 21 lbs. for his previous win. Pengarah took a prominent part in the race but half way up the straight was caught by Jorrocks who was again an easy winner.

RACE 7. -5.30 p.m. THE RANEE’S CUP. 1 Mile. 
OPEN TO ALL DIVISIONS.
The field came to view at the six furlong mark racing in a bunch. At the four furlongs Flying Fox dropped out of the race and Akal set the pace. Coming into the straight Akal increased his lead to win comfortably.

Second Day.
Monday, 20th March, 1933.
(GOING VERY HEAVY.)
RACE 1. -2.30 p.m. THE SLUMP STAKES. 5 furlongs.
DIVISION I.
Flamingo again made all the running to the road but coming into the straight he had shot his bolt. Red and Green soon caught the eye racing the middle of the course. After disposing of Sabar and Kim Mah who were racing on the ditch side, Flying Fox passed the post an easy winner.

RACE 2. -3 p.m. THE COUNTRY STAKES. 6 furlongs.
DIVISION II.
Mickey Mouse made the running to the load from Workman and Wembley. Salleh then forced Workman to the front and kept him there to win cleverly from Wembley. A very popular win.

RACE 3. -3.30 p.m. THE SARAWAK STAKES. 5 furlongs.
DIVISION III.
Jorrocks showed the way as usual till almost home, when the weight told at last and allowed Mudahan to catch the Judge’s eye first by a very small margin.

RACE 4. -4 p.m. THE TURF CLUB STAKES. 4 furlongs.
DIVISION I.
A memorable race. They were let away together and Flamingo was soon racing in front. In the straight Flying Fox and Sabar started closing up. Flamingo however managed to get home by a neck.

RACE 5.- 4.30 p.m. THE STATE SPRINT. 3 furlongs.
DIVISION II.
White Knight and Mickey Mouse led into the straight, where Ol' Man River found his weight more to his liking and joined issue with them. Mickey Mouse was soon done with but While Knight looked like pulling it off until the heavy going began to tell and allowed Lohor to bring up his mount to take the race.

RACE 6. -5 p.m. THE TOWN STAKES. 4 furlongs.
DIVISION III.
Jorrocks was very badly left at the start and it cost him the race. Pengarah and Mudahan led into the straight with Jorrocks closing up. Pengarah drew away from Mudahan who was caught by Jorrocks but the latter could not get on terms with the winner.

RACE 7. -5.30 p.m. THE RAJAH’S CUP. Round the course (1 1/3 Miles.)
A HANDICAP FOR ALL DIVISIONS.
Flying Fox was in the van before the field disappeared from view at the Sekama gate. When they appeared again at the six furlongs Flying Fox, Akal and Wembley were racing in front together with the rest nowhere. Wembley was beaten at the three furlongs leaving the Red and Green and Russet and Brown to fight it out. Damit pulled out on to the stand side to get the best of the going, and although he was now leading Akal looked dangerous. Halfway up the straight Flying Fox struck a soft patch and rolled badly. Akal closed up. Damit pulled his mount together and kept him going to get the verdict with Akal still hanging on.

Second Division News.
February, 1933.
Extracts from the Second Divisional Reports by Mr. J. B. Archer, Resident: -
Penghulus Kana and Ramba and a number of other Ulu Ai chiefs were sent to Kuching, taking with them certain third Division Dyaks. The chiefs returned later in the month with the exception of Penghulu Kana who is being detained in Kuching.
I left Simanggang on the 7th, accompanied by Mr. J. C. H. Barcroft. We spent the night at Sebuyow, and after making a flying visit to Kabong, reached Saratok on the 8th. Here Mr. Barcroft took over the Kalaka District from Mr. H. L. Daubeny, who proceeded to Simanggang on the 10th to take up the duties of District Officer there. I, too, left Saratok on the 10th and arrived in Betong the same evening.
Whilst at Saratok and Betong various matters were brought up but none of much importance.
Mr. W. H. C. C. Morice left Simanggang for Engkilili on the 1st to act as Officer-in-Charge of that Station, whilst Mr. A. Macpherson is to take charge of the Ulu Ai with headquarters at Lubok Antu.
Mr. Macpherson left for Kuching on the 29th under orders of His Highness the Rajah and was still away at the end of the month.
The Land and Survey Offices were amalgamated during the month and Mr. W. Harnack assumed charge with Mr. B. Summers to assist him. The combined offices were transferred to the former Land Office
The Secretary for Chinese Affairs, Capt. C. D. Le Gros Clark, paid a visit to Simanggang and Engkilili and we discussed at considerable length the proposed Local Order regulating the pepper business.

SIMANGGANG DISTRICT.
February, 1933.
The District Officer, Mr. R. L. Daubeny, reports: -
Staff. -Mr. Selous passed through Simanggang on 12th instant on this way to Engkilili where he has been appointed for temporary duly.
General. -The Resident, Second Division, returned from Betong, Saribas, on 14th instant. A flying visit was paid by the Resident to Engkilili on 28th.
I paid a visit to Lingga for one night on 17th instant in connection with an opium case.
Captain Le Gros Clark, the Secretary for Chinese Affairs, arrived by m.l. Betty on the evening of 17th at Lingga, and we left for Simanggang on morning of 18th in m.l. Anne.
The Secretary for Chinese Affairs left for Engkilili on 19th instant and returned to Simanggang on 22nd, finally leaving for Kuching on 23rd.

ENGKILILI DISTRICT.
February, 1933.
The Acting Assistant District Officer, Mr. W. H. C. C. Morice, reports: -
Dyak and Native Affairs. -Penghulus Kana and Ramba arrived with their followers from Lubok Antu on the 2nd and 5th of the month respectively. These people were on their way to Kuching. Penghulus Suel, Kalong and Imong also paid visits to the station during the month.
Agriculture. -Certain gardens have been affected with pest, and I have received a request from the local Chinese to procure nicotine through the Borneo Company. The pepper at Seranggau is not doing very well but that at Bukong has a fair percentage of good vines. The Marup gardens appear to be healthy.
Padi. -All the Penghulus say that the crop will be sufficient for their people this year. Rainfall has been heavy during the month.
General. -Other visitors to the station were the Resident, Second Division, Mr. A. Macpherson, The Secretary for Chinese Affairs, and the Conservator of Forests. On the 12th Mr. E. M. Selous arrived for temporary duty in the district in connection with the present pepper disputes.

SARIBAS-BETONG DISTRICT.
February, 1933.
The Acting Assistant District Officer, Mr. J. R. Combe, reports: -
Agriculture. -Harvesting up river should commence in about three weeks. The down-river Malays and Dyaks have already begun to harvest.
General. -I returned from the Ulu Engkari at the end of January, and after spending a few days in Simanggang and Kuching arrived back in this district after an absence of three months.

KALAKA DISTRICT.
February, 1933.
The Acting Assistant District Officer, Mr. J. C. H. Barcroft, reports: -
Agriculture. -Rains continued throughout the month, but nevertheless a generally fair padi harvest may be expected.
Unfortunately owing to the extensive sago planting a comparatively small area is available for padi planting or other cultivation.
General. -On the 23rd I visited Kabong.

Third Division News.
February, 1933.
Extracts from the Third Divisional Reports by Mr. C. D. Adams, Resident: -

SIBU AND KANOWIT DISTRICTS.
February, 1933.
The District Officer, Mr. W. F. Dick, reports: -
Obituary. -John de Rosario, who retired from Government Service on 1st September, 1922, died in the Sibu Hospital on the night of the 28th at the age of 75.
General. -The Resident and Mrs. Adams returned from Singapore via Kuching on 8th, other passengers were Messrs. Ed. Parnell, of the Sarawak Steamship Co., Ltd., and H. Read, of the Eastern River Tanneries Company.
The 24th being Her Highness the Ranee’s birthday the offices were closed.
The Rev. J. M. and Mrs. Hoover returned from local leave by s.s. Angby on 28th.

SIBU DISTRICT.
February, 1933.
Trade: -

SARIKEI, BINATANG AND REJANG.
February, 1933.
The Acting Assistant District Officer, Mr. F. L, Crossley, reports: -
Dyak and Native Affairs. -All penghulus came down during the month. Dyaks were quietly farming, hill padi being ready for harvest towards the end of the month.
The Sarikei mosque was demolished on the 9th. A temporary structure was erected in the kampong.
Agriculture. -A very dry spell for the first half of the month was succeeded by heavy and continuous rain. The harvest will therefore be a little later than usual.
Trade: -
Remarks. -Sarikei export figures for February include, approximately $27,000 cutch from Selalang, formerly shipped from Rejang.
General. -A tuba fishing was held in the batang Rejang at Binatang on the 12th, and was attended by some four thousand Malays and Dyaks, who enjoyed an excellent day’s sport.

MUKAH DISTRICT.
February, 1933.
The Acting District Officer, Mr. J. J. Hill, reports: -
Agriculture. -Better weather conditions have been experienced during the month and the padi prospects are fairly good.
Shipping. -During the month twelve vessels entered and eight vessels cleared the port.
On the night of the 17th instant at 10 p.m. the m.s. Kim Chin Soon while entering the Mukah river ran aground. The passengers were taken off but it was found unnecessary to remove the cargo.
On the morning tide she was towed off and brought into the river. It appears the only damage done was to her rudder which was broken clean off.
General. -It is with regret I have to report a tragic accident to a Balingian fishing boat in which thirteen Malays of Kampong Kuala Balingian lost their lives. The sole survivor was picked up by a Mukah boat some ten miles out to sea off Kuala Mukah on the 8th instant at 2 p.m. floating on a piece of bamboo. From his story the accident happened at midday on the 6th instant when the boat was some ten miles out off Kuala Balingian. The crew had already had some good hauls of fish, the boat was fairly heavily laden and they were pulling up their nets for the last time, when suddenly, without warning, the boat capsized. His account of the events after the accident became very vague and it is impossible to say what happened.
After hearing his story I obtained the assistance of all Mukah fishing boats and also sent out m.l. Leonora to search for survivors.
M.L. Leonora sighted the capsized boat about eight miles out but found no survivors.
The 24th instant, being the anniversary of Her Highness the Ranee’s birthday the offices were closed.
Visitors to the station included the Acting Assistant District Officer, Oya and Dalat, Mr. N. E. Hughes, W. M. Johnson, Sarawak Oilfields, Limited, and the Very Rev. Father C. Epping.

OYA AND DALAT.
February, 1933.
The Acting Assistant District Officer, Mr. N, E. Hughes, reports: -
Dyak and Native Affairs. -On February 15th Tawan bin Dunyo was appointed T.K. of Sungei Kut and Bungan on probation.
Agriculture. -The latest reports state that the Dyak padi crop will be rather better than was anticipated.
General. -The weather improved considerably, being fine and dry for most of the month. The sea is now calm, and fishing is at present in full swing.
On February 12th a successful tuba fishing was held at Dalat, the natives from all along the river turning out in force.

KAPIT DISTRICT.
February, 1933.
The Acting Assistant District Officer, Mr. D. C. Hudden. reports: -
Obituary. -It is with the deepest regret that I have to record the death at Sibu Hospital on the 19th instant of John C. de Rozario, Pensioner.
Native Affairs. -Abang Aboi, Native Officer, visited the Dyaks in the Mujong district from the 1st to the 18th. He reported that all was well there and that the Dyaks were busy harvesting.
Penghulus Temonggong Koh, Jugah, Manok Manchal, Briak, Serai, Bedimbab, and Sibat were in the station during the month.
Native Officer Dan bin Assan, from Kuching, arrived in the s.s. Angby immediately proceeded to Song where he has taken over the duties of Native Officer Abang Sleh being retired on pension.
General. -The Acting Assistant District Officer, Mr. D. C. Hudden, accompanied by Abang Abu Seman, Native Officer, returned from the ulu Katibas on the 5th.
The Acting Assistant District Officer, Mr. D. C. Hudden, accompanied by the Native Officer, Abang Abu Seman, and Penghulu Sibat, left for the Belaga district on the 17th, and was still away at the end of the month.
Mr. and Mrs. Black. Mr. Wedgewood, of the Sarawak Steamship Co., visited the station during the mouth.
Rainfall. -The total rainfall for the month was 16.30 inches.

Fourth Division News.
February, 1933.
Extracts from the Fourth Divisional Reports by Mr. H. D. Aplin, Resident: -
His Highness the Rajah, accompanied by Mr. E. S. Holl, Private Secretary, and Mr. C. F. C. Macaskie, passed through Miri in s.s. Marudu on 14th. His Highness did not land. His Highness and party arrived in Miri on the afternoon of the 22nd, having motored from Brunei via Seria, Kuala Belait, and Kuala Baram where I met the party.
The following morning, after inspecting the guard of honour His Highness interviewed the principal Malays and Chinese in the Court House but no matters of importance were brought forward.
Mr. Pollard, Acting District Officer, Baram, Native Officer Galau and 12 Kayan, Kenyah and Dyak chiefs, who had arrived from Baram met His Highness at the Residency that same evening.
His Highness and party returned to Kuching on the 24th by the s.s. Marudu.
Taking advantage of H.H.M.Y. Maimunah returning to Kuching I left the same day for Bintulu.
After discussing several matters with Mr. Anderson, Acting District Officer, I returned to Miri on 27th by s.s. Auby.
H.M.S Bruce. Commander G. E. Calpoys, B.N., arrived from Labuan on the 20th, and remained here until the night of the 22nd when she sailed for Labuan.
Native Officer Bujang proceeded to Sibuti and Niah on the 25th to instal Wan Ahmat as Native Officer in the place of Awang Hitam retired on pension.
Mr. and Mrs. Buck landed from the s.s. Auby on the 27th and proceeded the same day to Kuala Belait by motor car en route for Limbang.

MIRI.
February, 1933.
The District Officer, Mr. F. G. Carpenter, reports: -
Dyak and Native Affairs. -The outstations were visited by Native Officer Bujang, who reported that few matters were brought before him, and that the people are still busy on their farms.
Trade: -
Remarks. -Jelutong of very much improved quality is being exported owing to new methods of coagulation.
General. -An inquiry into the case of a small outbreak of fire in the bazaar revealed that the conflagration was most probably started through a piece of burning material being taken through a chimney and deposited on the dry roof. Steps are now being taken to diminish the likelihood of a recurrence.

BARAM DISTRICT.
February, 1933.
Mr. D. C. White, for Acting District Officer, reports: -
Agriculture. -Rainfall amounted to 11.23 inches in thirteen days.
General. -On 20th, accompanied by Native Officer Galau, I left tor Miri together with Penghulus Tama Tingang Mallang, Aban Wan, Tama Tiri, Nyaloi and Rhu and also nineteen of their followers, to meet His Highness the Rajah at Miri, returning on the 25th. Mr. White, Mohamat and the Dresser left for Melinau on 22nd and were still away at the end of the month. Accompanied by Galau Native Officer I left for Melinau and was still away at the end of the month.

BINTULU DISTRICT.
February, 1933.
The Acting District Officer, Mr. J. G. Anderson, reports: -
Trade: -
S.S. Auby did not enter port on her way North, but called off the month on 26th.
General. -The offices were closed on the 24th for Her Highness the Ranee’s birthday.
The Resident arrived in H.H.M.Y. Maimunah, which called off Kedurong point on the 24th, and came ashore in m.l. Joan.
The Resident returned to Miri by s.s. Auby on the 26th.
I left Bintulu on a tour of the Ulu districts on the 16th. I visited the Sebauh river and made inquiries about the possibility of a road from Bintulu to Tatau. This would be fairly feasible from the ulu Sebauh (Sungei Skabai) as there is an old track which emerges at Tatau half an hour above the Tatau Fort. The country is hilly in places but there is also swamp. The country between Tatau and Bintulu itself is all swamp jungle.
Mr. A. F. O. Buxton reports that Forest Department have been asked to supply samples of rotan for the English market from this district.

Fifth Division News.
LIMBANG DISTRICT.
January, 1933.
Extracts from the Fifth Divisional Reports by Mr. F. H. Kortright, Resident: -
Trade: -
General. -A large number of visitors, both European and Malay, including Mr. T. F. Carey, British Resident of Brunei, came over from Brunei to witness and take part in the Regatta which was hold on the morning of the 1st.
On the 15th Mr. T. F. Carey, British Resident of Brunei, came over for the day accompanied by Mr. A. H. Noble, General Manager, Sarawak Oilfields, Limited.
The Rev. Paisly of the S.P.G. Mission from Jesselton visited the station on the 19th and held several services.

February, 1933.
The Acting Assistant District Officer, Mr. W. P. N. L. Ditmas reports: -
Agriculture. -Harvesting has begun in most places in the district.
Total rainfall 13.70 inches.
Trade: -
General. -On the 13th, the Resident proceeded to Labuan on H.H.M.Y. Maimuna to meet His Highness the Rajah.
On the 17th His Highness the Rajah, Messrs. C. F. C. Macaskie. Government Secretary, and E. S. Holl and the Resident arrived from Lawns.
On Sunday the 19th His Highness the Rajah and party inspected the Brunei Road by car.
His Highness the Rajah left in m.l. Sylvia on the 21st to visit Brunei.
Mr. and Mrs. Southwell, of Borneo Evangelical Mission, arrived on the 21st and spent a few days in Limbang.
The 24th, Her Highness the Ranee’s birthday, was observed as a holiday.
On the 28th Mr. and Mrs. W. S. B. Buck arrived, and stayed here before proceeding to Lawas, to take up his appointment as Assistant District Officer.

LAWAS.
January, 1933.
The Acting Assistant District Officer, Mr. J. O. Gilbert, reports: -
Trade: -
Mr. Sochon, Officer-in-Charge Constabulary, Fourth and Fifth Divisions, visited the district during the month, on inspection tour, also to give instruction in the use of the now Constabulary forms, etc.

February, 1933.
The Assistant District Officer, Mr. W. S. B. Buck, reports: -
Agriculture. -The Lawas (Sarawak) Rubber Estates exported 30,469 lbs. of dry rubber during the month.
Rainfall.-
Trade: -
General. -The outstanding event of the month was the arrival on the 10th of His Highness the Rajah, accompanied by the Government Secretary, Mr. C. F. C. Macaskie, the Resident, Fifth Division, Mr. Kortright, and Mr. Holl, on H.H.M.Y. Maimuna at 3.30 p.m. from Labuan. The Acting Assistant District Officer, Lawas, Mr. Gilbert, met His Highness and party at the Kuala.
The following day His Highness held Court in the fort and dealt with various outstanding affairs of the district, sailing again for Limbang the following morning.
On 22nd Mr. Gilbert left for Labuan and Kuching by m.v. Marudu to proceed on furlough.
Visitors to the station during the month included Mr. Cox, Assistant District Officer, Sipitang.



























