VOL. LXIII.
No. 956.
The Sarawak Gazette
Price
KUCHING, Monday, May 1st, 1933.
20 CENTS.
Contents.
The Sarawak Gazette		 			
MONDAY, MAY 1st, 1933.

Engagement.
BROOKE-INCHCAPE. -The engagement is announced between Dayang Leonora, eldest daughter of His Highness the Rajah, and the Earl of Inchcape.

Local and Personal.
April.
His Highness the Tuan Muda will sail from Liverpool by s.s. Hector on 20th May and is due to arrive in Singapore on 17th June. S.S Hector is due to arrive in Marseilles on 26th May, Port Said 31st May, Colombo 11th June and Penang 15th June.

We announce, in this issue, the engagement of Dayang Leonora to the Earl of Inchcape. We beg to tender our hearty congratulations.

We are informed that Lieutenant Commander C. C. M. Usher, R.N. will assume duties as Staff Officer (Intelligence) at Singapore on 20th April, 1933.

Amongst, visitors to Kuching during the month were Mrs. R. M. Waterhouse, who was the guest of the Chief Justice, Captain H. Bagot, R.E., the guest of Captain C. D. Le Gros Clark, and Flight-Lieutenant and Mrs. Elton.

Captain and Mrs. Gibson, and child, returned from leave by s.s. Kudat on 3rd April. Captain Gibson resumes his duties as Harbour Master, Kuching.

Language and Law Examinations for Government Officers took place as from 18th to 22nd April. This year Examinations were held at Divisional Headquarters instead of, as formerly, at Kuching.

We are informed that the Earl of Inchcape has been elected a Director of the Chartered Bank of India, Australia and China.

An all European cricket team, captained by Mr. A. Hannigan, visited Miri, leaving Kuching on the 12th and returning on 19th April. His Highness the Rajah very kindly lent H.H.M.Y. Maimuna to transport the team. An account of the visit appears in our columns.

The offices were closed on 6th April, Hari Raya Haji. The celebrations this year were of a very modest nature.

The Easter Holidays passed off quietly, most of our community being away, a cricket team to Miri and others to the seaside resorts.

A flight of the R.A.F. flying boats from Singapore arrived at Pending on Wednesday 19th. Group Captain A. H. Jackson, Officer Commanding. R.A.F. Far East, accompanied the flight which was under command of Wing Commander E. J. P. Burling, D.S.C., D.F.C., A.F.C.
The flight remained in Kuching until Friday 21st, when it proceeded to Bintulu en route for Sandakan. On the return journey the flight will remain at Sibu for some days to make a reconnaissance of the Rejang delta.

NOT STARTING NOW!
Sandy McPherson was travelling to Glasgow, and on the way he felt thirsty, so he took out a bottle and drew the cork. Just as he was about to take a taste a fellow passenger in clerical garb addressed him:
“Excuse me, sir. but I am sixty-five years of age, and I have never tasted a drop of whisky.”
“Dinna worry yersel’,” said Sandy, “you’re no’ gaun tae start noo.”

Retirement of Mr. W. H. Jacques.
The Official Gazette of 1st April contains a notice of retirement of Mr. W. H. Jacques. Director of Education. Mr. Jacques joined the Service on 1st January, 1915, and since then has held a variety of appointments. Having served in the Public Works Department up to 1919 Mr. Jacques was appointed Acting Treasurer, Sibu, and later was in charge Post Office, Customs and Shipping, Sibu. In 1924 he became Superintendent of Customs. Third Division, and in 1925 Deputy Inspector of Schools, Third Division, in addition to his other duties. In 1929 he was appointed Director of Education which appointment be held until his retirement. We understand Mr. Jacques intends to settle in Sarawak and has started in business in a small way. The Kuching Agency, of which Mr. Jacques is Managing Proprietor, is situated in the Station Building.
Our readers will join us in wishing Mr. Jacques long life and prosperity.

Oxford Expedition to Borneo.
UNDERGRADUATE’S LIFE AS A NATIVE.
A thousand birds, 20.000 insects, 350 mammals, 500 plants and fifty reptiles are among the large collection just brought back by members of the Oxford University Exploration Club, who spent seven months in the fastnesses of Sarawak, Borneo.
Not only is the British Museum to benefit by the addition of tunny new specimens of wild life; the map of the country is also to be corrected and largely amplified.
In an interview with a representative of The Observer, the leader of the expedition. Mr. T. H. Harrisson, described some the remarkable incidents of the tour, which was the most ambitious yet undertaken by the club.
Mr. E. A. Shackleton, a son of the explorer, climbed 7,950 feet to Mulu, the highest mountain in Sarawak. He went accompanied by native carriers, while the remaining seven members of the expedition Concentrated on separate investigations.
Mr. E. Banks and Mr. A. W. Moore, respectively, a local official lent by the Sarawak authorities and an Oxford undergraduate, climbed what is the most difficult mountain in the country, Kalulong, 5,500 feet.
Mr. Harrisson who, with another undergraduate, acted as ethnologist, crossed the famous river Belaga and spent a month alone among the aborigines.
“My arrival,” he said, “seemed to upset local life for the whole, time. As I moved from house to house normal occupations ceased, and almost everybody became busy in making and supplying borak, a lethal drink made of rice, which looks something like porridge.”
The natives were extremely friendly, and Mr. E. H. Hartley (Balliol, Oxford) spent three weeks, near the conclusion of the tour, in a Kayan tribe’s home. He did everything the other natives did, was given the name of Batu Wan, “and was treated as a blood brother.” He witnessed the remnants of the ceremonies that formerly accompanied head-hunting expeditions. Mr. Hartley learned a great deal about the mythology of the tribe.
For the first three months the undergraduates were together, camps later being established on the river bank, (b) four thousand feet up, and (c) on the far side of a mountain range.
Once there was a deluge, said Mr. Harrisson, and the coolies’ huts in the river base were completely destroyed.
“The expedition’s own hut,” Mr. Harrisson went on. “was built on twelve foot piles, and these were placed thirty feet above the river. Yet the floods came into the hut and scorpions, centipedes, and immense spiders rushed through the place.”
Observation posts were established in tree-tops, 100 to 180 feet up. Sometimes the explorers spent a night and two days in this primitive fashion.
After discussing the serious research and survey work undertaken and accomplished by his party, Mr. Harrisson, who celebrated his twenty-first birthday at a gathering attended by colleagues and representatives of thirteen local tribes, recalled the occasion when one of the men was injured on a mountain. He had to be carried down a sheer side and rushed to hospital, many miles away, on the coast.
On another occasion a native, armed with a parang, ran amok, but before he was able to do any damage was disarmed.
The expedition enjoyed fairly good health, took many remarkable photographs, trod where no white man had penetrated before, and experienced the unique sensation of “receiving” Moscow, British and American concerts in the midst of the most primitive territories of an undeveloped continent. -Observer.

Birds Nest Caves.
Birds nest caves in the Ulu Samarahan and Ulu Sadong were situated in various limestone hills and were seemingly the work of at present, underground streams; a few, by following these streams back from their exits, were easy of access, but most of them required a scaling of the hill to some 3-400 feet and then descent-and often subsequent ascents and descents-by means of long and shaky bamboos, rendering the caves of the districts as a whole quite the most difficult of access in the whole country.
Nests-when taken-were collected only three times a year, seem to be falling off in numbers, but of excellent quality, much better than in Niah and many places; stained nests with red “feet” occurred in a few places, and fetched such poor prices that they were not worth the taking in difficult situations, where it took 20-30 men several days work constructing ladders to gain access to the interior of the caves. Altogether some 12 piculs of “Black” nests ware produced yearly, few individual caves yielded as much as two piculs each, and the industry cannot be considered as more than supplying a little pocket money to the owners, who though somewhat dissatisfied with the returns appear to treat their caves pretty leniently in collecting.
Strange to say Bats, prominent in swarms in caves in other parts of the country, were notably absent, nor were the useless “mossy” nests particularly prominent; some birds caught incubating on these mossy nests proved to be the same species as make the pure “white” nests of the Ulu Baram, had they done so here the caves would have been very much worth while, but there seems to be no way of, inducing the birds to mend their ways, nor can a Malay trader’s suggestion-to sacrifice a few pigs! -be a likely solution.
Gua Payan and Chupak on the Samarahan river above Pangkalan Bentang were not large but easy to enter and yield about two piculs a year. Kampongs Munggo Babi, Bukar and Bharu shared some very large caves in Gunong Nami, producing 4-5 piculs a year; the nests were mostly stained red and fetched a poor price, the cave entrance was far up the mountain side and it was a lengthy business of some days to construct the necessary ladders inside the cave, so that the local people have not collected the nests for several years, though some “thieves” obligingly did so for them one year. Kampongs Jernang and Tabekang shared about a picul of nests alternate years front Gua Prau in Gunong Miap, but this was another difficult cave.
Lanchang owned a small cave-Gua Sireh-close to the main path and easy of access as a stream ran out at river level; the cave was fairly large and almost inhabitable, with an earthen floor, but only produced about 50 catties. Kakeng owned a cave Gua Bayang in the same Mt. Lambi but round the other side; ascending the mountain several hundred feet the initial entrance was easy, soon became very difficult but it was possible to carry on, through this cave right through the hill and out in the Gua Sireh just mentioned.
Pichin owned Gua Klipi in Mt. Pedadan, a large cave but only producing about 30 catties; descent into the cave was not easy but once in one followed the course of a fair sized underground stream, which in many places completely fills the cave in wet weather. Small caves in Gunong Petoh above Tabekang were only good for about 5 catties.
A very large cave, worth about 2 1/2 piculs. about a day beyond Tabekang was worked by the people of Semambang, Lobang Batu and Seginting; though much smaller than Niah it is next to that the largest in the country and would well take a whole day to explore. Leaving Lobang Batu, the usual hill was ascended for a few hundred feet and under the overhanging cliffs at the cave entrance was a collection of roofless little huts very much as at Niah.
After entering the cave and passing through a portion of the hill-side one emerged and descended to another entrance; hair raising sliding down bamboos followed and one passed through tall galleries which would not be out of place in Niah.
Nests were collected in the usual way by scrambling up lengths of bamboo leant and lashed against the cave wall, and for general skill and ingenuity in climbing the Land Dyaks were, I believe, the best men in the country.
These Land Dyaks were a rather grubby but fairly cheerful people, and built their houses in two rows with one or two Guest houses or Panchar in the middle. Munggo Babi and Pichin ran to as many as 60 or 80 doors, and being now very old achieved a degree of dirt, scarcely to be met with elsewhere save among Muruts; the construction of new houses they seemed to have postponed indefinitely, for there is no available old jungle within reasonable distance. The long houses themselves were flimsy affairs, those above Tabekang often incredibly so, and some Panchars were not much better; others, notably at Pichin, were rather fine structures with enormous horizontal belian beams which must have taxed their owners energy and ingenuity to get into their present position. The houses were not very prominently ornamented though each Panchar was crowned with a Hornbill or Crocodile carving and occasional posts, and on one occasion a door at Munggo Babi had a fairly well designed Snake or “Naga.” -Contributed.

Mother Baptista Walmsley.
NUN WHO SPENT 35 YEARS AMONG HEAD-HUNTERS.
HEAD OF NOVITIATE.
Mother M. Baptista Walmsley, Franciscan Missionary Sister of St. Joseph, has died at St. Mary’s Consent. Vaughan House. Freshfield, near Liverpool, in her seventy-eighth year and the forty-fifth of her religions profession. -R.I.P.
Mother Baptista could claim direct descent from “Thomas Walmsley, gentleman,” described in the annals as an “Obstinate Catholic,” who was put to death in 1575. She displayed amazing spirit and vitality during her thirty-five years’ work among the head-hunters and Milanoes of Borneo until failing health caused her to relinquish her work there and return to England.
She was later chosen to be Superior of the Sisters’ Novitiate on its transference from Patricroft. Manchester, to Freshfield and much of its steady development and progress during the past six years were due to her fostering care.
Mother Baptista’s Health had continued to fail during the past few months and on the feast of St. Agnes, to whom she had a great devotion, she received the Last Sacraments. Later in the day a stroke deprived her of speech and she died on January 23.
Mass was said for her at Vaughan House on the several days following her death. On Thursday last solemn Requiem Mass was celebrated by Fr. H. Farmer, of St. Peter’s Foreign Missionary College. Freshfield, other priests from the college rendering the music.
Fr. Farmar conducted the service at the graveside assisted by Very Rev. Fr. Rogan, Rector of St. Peter’s College, and Fr. Traynor Others present included Frs. Bartley. Onslek, Kelly and Hart and Fr. J. Gardner. P.P. of Our Lady’s, Formby, together with a number of Missionary Sisters of St. Joseph. Boys from St. Peter’s College sang psalms at the graveside.

Camera Club Lecture.
AMONG THE HEAD HUNTERS.
An extremely interesting lecture was given at the Brighton and Hove Camera Club headquarters, East-street, on Wednesday evening, when Mr. H, Powys Adams gave a talk on “Sarawak, the Land of the While Rajah.”
The talk was illustrated with lantern slides, made from his own negatives, rendered all the more interesting because they were not taken with any idea of exhibition.
Mr. A. C. Vinall (hon. secretary of the Club) writes:
“We were filled with the urge to travel as Mr. Powys Adams took us with him on his journeys through this strange and somewhat unknown land. We felt with him the torrid jungle heat as we watched the sarong-clad Malayans and Chinese about their daily toil. We shivered with apprehension as we learned of the tropical rainfall of fifteen inches in twelve hours, and, listening to the heavy downpour outside the club, we consoled ourselves with the fact that there were only another fourteen inches to come!
“Our realistic impression of a native execution could not have been bettered by Madame Tussand herself as we gingerly handled the kriss, or native sword of death, half expecting to find dried blood on it. As a variation on the mother-in-law joke, we heard the tale of the man who cut his father-in-law up in pieces buried them in a swamp-and escaped the death sentence on a plea of self-defence, his only chance of dodging the same fate at the hand of the said father-in-law being to get there first!
“We listened amazed to the collection of parts of the human body found in an eighteen-foot crocodile that had accounted for a Chinese man, a woman, and a child who had disappeared.
“We took part with Mr. Powys Adams in the joys of angling during the ‘tuber-fishing’ festival, when one dopes one’s victims before spearing the bodies as they rise to the surface.
“Again we froze with horror as we heard tales of visiting the Dyak head-hunters, and of eerie nights spent in the chief’s hut, where thirty-two human heads, in an excellent state of preservation, hang round the walls, the whole scene being rendered more weird and uncanny by the intense brilliance of the tropical moon.
“We thrilled at climbing the highest mountain of the district, crossing ravines by means of bridges consisting of a single tree trunk, and, reaching the peak, to gaze on the other side at five hundred miles of virgin jungle still awaiting exploration.
“We came away from the lecture filled with the desire to see the world as a traveller of Mr. Powys Adams’ calibre sees it, living among its peoples and sharing their life, rather than as a globe-trotter, or a ‘personally-conducted’ tourist,”
A hearty vote of thanks was accorded the lecturer by Mr. R. T. Botting.

Cigarette Raffle.
THIRD DRAWING.
Winning numbers of Cigarette Raffle drawn on 21st April, 1933 (postponed from 15th April, 1933).
Fourth Drawing will take place on the 17th of June, 1933.

Singapore-London in Seven Days.
AIR SPEED-UP.
DUTCH PLANES TO CALL HERE.
It is now officially announced that Singapore is to be a regular port of call on the Holland-Netherlands India air route.
The first homeward aeroplane from Batavia will arrive in Singapore on 3rd May, and is scheduled to arrive in London on 10th May, seven days later.
The time from London to Singapore will be eight days, the aeroplane reaching Singapore every Thursday.

ANOTHER DAY OFF.
Thus in the K.L.M. speeding-up process, which it is hoped will end in an estafette system of day and night flying and a time of three and a half days, another day has been lopped off.
The K.L.M. fleet of aeroplanes has been entirely reorganized and is now composed of ten speedy machines of the latest design.
The machines are of two types, the Fokker F12 and Fokker F18, both equipped with three wasp engines 450 h.p. each.

SPEED OF 200 K.P.H.
The F12 has an average speed of 185 k.p.h. and the F18, with a narrower, longer body and different streamlining of the wings and body, has a speed of 200 k.p.h.
Beginning with the aeroplanes leaving Batavia on 26th April, and Amsterdam on 4th May, the summer route will be followed, by way of Halle, Leipzig, Budapest to Athens instead of Marseilles and Rome. -Straits Budget.

OLD SARAWAK.
From the Sarawak Gazette 59 Years Ago.
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE
No. 78 SATURDAY, MAY 16TH, 1874. Price 5 cents.
The third day of June is the Rajah’s birthday which is a general holiday with us.
It has been arranged that on that day the new Court House as it has been called though more properly named the New Public Offices is to be opened. This is to be done with as much ceremony as possible.
This building has been seven years constructing, and its want has been for all that time daily felt. Now that it is completed, it has been pronounced by all to be a very handsome plain building suitable for the purpose; and if boasting of no great architectural beauties, it is free from blemishes and bad taste and is not an eyesore.
The appearance of the pillars are injured by the long caves of the roof which conceal the capitals-but as this is for comfort, because the eaveless houses of Europe in this country of rain and sun would be very unbearable-we do not condemn.
The court room occupying the middle of the building measures 64 feet by 42 feet, the roof is open not ceilinged, and lined with wood deeply stained, which with the heavy rafters and belian beams showing, all dark stained, gives a handsome grave and heavy appearance suited to a court. Adjoining and behind the dais is the Resident’s office 22 feet by 22 feet; and another room at present to be occupied by the Government Printing Press. We-the “Sarawak Gazette” -feel that we are to be too well-lodged, and will be glad to turn out to make way for the Surveyor when there shall be such a person: the room having been originally intended in plan for the Surveyor’s office. The other end of the building consists of four fine lofty rooms. One corner, the Treasury; the other, the Post Office. adjoining the Treasury the Audit Office: and adjoining the Post Office, the Shipping Office. This constitutes all the Government Offices at Kuching.
We hope the inauguration will be managed becomingly, and we do not think that in the absence of H.H. the Rajah, it could have fallen into better hands than our Senior Officer, the Hon’ble J. B. Cruickshank, who comes from Sibu for the purpose.

Sarawak Library.
Kindly presented by Mr. R. G. Aikman: -
Purchased by the Committee: -

First Division News.
RESIDENT’S OFFICE.
March, 1933.
Extracts front the Divisional Reports by Mr. E. O. Bruce, Acting Resident, First Division: -
In the Resident’s Court Criminal, T.K. Abas of Tambirat was convicted of breach of trust under I.P.C. section 409, and sentenced to six months’ R.I. and a fine of $100.
Mr. H. Jacques, Director of Education, was granted leave prior to retirement, and, as from the 1st April, the duties attaching to the Education office were distributed between the Divisional Resi-dents regarding subsidized mission schools, the Secretary for Native Affairs regarding Government Vernacular Schools, and the Secretary for Chinese Affairs regarding subsidized Chinese Schools.
Total registered applications for land along the Kuching-Simanggang Road total 7,601 acres to date.
A further seven gold Prospecting Licences were issued during the month, making progressive total to date twenty-six for Kuching, and a further forty-one licences were issued at Bau.

UPPER SARAWAK DISTRICT.
March, 1933.
The Assistant District Officer, Mr. R. G. Aikman, reports: -
Agriculture. -The Dahan Rubber Estates harvested 23,000 lbs. of dry rubber during the month.
The rainfall at Bau was 11.69 inches. The highest recorded in 24 hours was 2.17 inches. The rainfall for the month at Dahan Rubber Estates was 16.32 inches.
Gold Mining. -Some anxiety was experienced about the middle of the month when the price of gold fell by $6 an ounce, but it soon recovered, and by the end of the month had attained its previous high level. Interest in gold mining throughout the district is as keen as ever, and a considerable increase in the number of establishments operating by the cyanide method may be expected in the course of the next two or three months. Twenty-nine General Prospecting Licences were issued during the month. Fourteen applications for Exclusive Prospecting Licences were received and twelve such licences were issued. The actual gold obtained by the following Companies for the month of February, 1933, was: -

LUNDU DISTRICT.
March, 1933.
The Acting Assistant District Officer, Mr. E. H. Elam, reports: -
Trade: -
General. -I left for Kuching via Stungkor and Bau on 16th. The Jagoi Dyaks have a good padi crop, most of which has been harvested. I noticed that many of them are employing Malays to erect belian houses. These people always seem to have plenty of money.
I returned to Lundu by m.v. La Follette on 24th.

SADONG DISTRICT.
March, 1933.
The Acting Assistant District Officer, Mr. S. G. Hansom, reports: -
Agriculture. -Padi prospects continue generally good, although it is not expected that harvesting will be completed generally until the end of May. An Inspector, sent from the Agricultural Department, is still distributing rat and empangan poison.
Trade. -Large quantities of belian are stored in the bazaar, but the price obtainable for this in Kuching is not sufficient inducement to export timber from Sadong. A certain quantity of jelutong is also exported. It is anticipated that shipments of padi will be made to Kuching during April and May.
General. -I left for Kuching on Saturday the 18th instant, to attend Race Week, spending the night of the 18th instant at Sebangan, when an examination was made of suggested sites for shops at the Kuala Sebangan for three Chinese Hawkers, who have applied for permission to erect permanent trading headquarters in this District. I returned from Kuching on the 25th instant, per m.l. Vava, arriving at Sadong at 2 p.m. on the 26th instant.

Native Affairs.
March, 1933.
Extracts from the Report of The Acting Secretary for Native Affairs, Mr. R E. Le Sueur: -
Dyak Affairs. -During the month Penghulu Ramba arrived from Simanggang bringing with him thirty Third Division rebels. These rebels have been sent back to Sibu.
Malay Affairs. -An epidemic of dysentery broke out in the kampongs. Action was taken by the Health Department and towards end of the month there were fewer cases reported.
Education. -The control of all Government vernacular schools was taken over by this Department during the month and all records concerning these schools were transferred to this office.
Rejang Malay School was closed down at the end of the month on account of poor attendance, and Sarikei school has been placed on a month to month probation.
The Pass List of the Preliminary Examination for the Junior Cambridge includes the name of Mohamad Nor, a Kuching Malay, the first local Malay scholar to pass this examination.
Obituary. -I regret to report the death of Dayang Joyah, wife of the late Inchi Abu Bakar, at Satok.

Chinese Affairs.
March, 1933.
Extracts from the Report of The Secretary for Chinese Affairs, Captain C. D. Le Gros Clark: -
The Secretary for Chinese Affairs took over control of all Chinese Schools from the Director of Education during the month. On the 14th March, two Chinese Inspectors of Schools, and all files and records connected with Chinese Schools, were transferred to this Department. The Inspectors returned from an inspection of the Chinese Schools in the Third Division early in March. A report of this inspection has been forwarded to the Resident, Third Division.
On the 18th March, information was received of the existence of a Secret Society in the Third Division. A raid carried out under Mr. Hughes in Sibu, resulted in the discovery of important documents connected with the alleged Secret Society. The Secretary for Chinese Affairs, therefore, proceeded to Sibu on the 22nd to investigate. He returned to Kuching on the 31st. About 40 persons had been arrested by the end of the month, and warrants were issued for another 30 or 40 “suspects.” Those arrested still awaited trial at the end of the month. From documentary evidence found, it seems clear that this is a branch of the GHEE HIN () Society, which has for the past five years, competed with the GHEE HAK () Society for local predominance. Both these Societies are branches of the Hung () Society, and are regarded as dangerous to the peace and good order of the State. Since 1928, of five large raids carried out on these Societies, three have resulted in the arrest of members of the Ghee Hin, and two of the Ghee Hak. It is to be hoped that this last case may end, for the time being, the incessant gang fends that have occurred in Sibu and other districts for the past few years.

St. Thomas’ School.
The results of the Cambridge Examinations held last December were published this month. Of the thirty-one entries for the Preliminary Examination from St. Thomas’ there were thirty successful candidates. In the Junior Examination twelve passes were obtained and the two senior candidates from Kuching, both boys from St. Thomas’, were also successful.
The names of the successful candidates from the school are given below.

Second Division News.
March, 1933.
Extracts from the Second Divisional Reports by Mr. J. B. Archer, Resident: -

SIMANGGANG DISTRICT.
March, 1933.
The District Officer, Mr. R, L. Daubeny, reports: - 
Rainfall amounted to 13.13 inches.
Dyak and Native Affairs generally. -On 15th instant Grinang was appointed Penghulu of the Lower Skrang.
Agriculture. -Crops reports from most districts are very encouraging and, provided heavy rainstorms are not too prevalent during the ensuing month, results should be above the average.
General. -I was away in Kuching on sick leave from 14th to 18th instant.
Mr. Fisher paid a visit to the substations Lingga and Sebuyow from 24th to 27th instant, a separate report on his visit is being forwarded.
Messrs. Macpherson, Assistant District Officer, Lubok Antu, and Harnack, Assistant Superintendent of Surveys, returned from Kuching in the m.l. Betty on 8th instant.

ENGKILILI DISTRICT.
March, 1933.
The Acting Assistant District Officer, Mr. W. H. C. C. Morice, reports: -
General. -On the 15th the Resident and Mr. J. C. B. Fisher arrived unexpectedly from Simanggang, returning the same day. Mr. A. Macpherson came down from Lubok Antu twice during the month on business connected with his station.
Mr. B. Summers paid a visit on 22nd, returning the next day.

LUBOK ANTU DISTRICT.
March, 1933.
The Assistant District Officer, Mr. A. Macpherson, reports: -
General. -I arrived from Kuching on 9th. The journey was made in the new outboard supplied to the station. A prahu is being built for it and is nearly completed.
The distance from Lubok Antu to Engkilili, left true bank, was measured, and found to be 19 miles 520 yards. Arrangements are being made to instal a telephone.
I spent the week end, March 18th-20th, at Engkilili in this connection.

SARIBAS-BETONG DISTRICT.
March, 1933.
The Acting Assistant District Officer, Mr. J. R. Combe, reports: -
General. -Mr. Moir, of the Borneo Company. Limited, visited this station for a trip, dealing with Borneo Company, Limited, affairs.

KALAKA DISTRICT.
March, 1933.
The Acting Assistant District Officer, Mr. J. C. H. Barcroft, reports: -
Agriculture. -Harvesting is now general throughout the district and the bulk will be over next month. Exceptionally heavy rains during the last two months have seriously interfered with the crops, but even so a fair harvest is expected.
On the 19th I visited Kampong Kabak, spending the night at the Tua Kampong’s house and returning by launch to Saratok the following morning. On 29th at 8 a.m. I left in the Elizabeth for Kabong.
Four Celebes from Sulu sailing off the coast were blown off their course and came into Kabong for supplies and fresh water.
On the 1st I left in the Elizabeth for Nyabor, arrived Kuala 7.45 and Kampong Nyabor 9.45 am. I gave orders for Chinese and Indian Traders to move out of the kampong and occupy certain land below the kampong.

Third Division News.
March, 1933.
Extracts from the Third Divisional Reports by Mr. C. D. Adams. Resident: -

SIBU AND KANOWIT DISTRICTS.
March, 1933.
The District Officer, Mr. W. F. Dick, reports: -
Health. -The general health of the community remains good.
The rainfall for the month was 11.77 inches.
Agriculture. -Dyaks and Chinese are still busy harvesting and no reports on the new crop have been received yet.
Trade: -
General. -On 7th a house-warming and tiffin party was held at the new house built for the Roman Catholic Fathers.
The Rev. C. Quadekker of the R.C Mission left on the 9th on home leave.
Mr. N. E. Hughes arrived on the 8th and I handed over the office to him on 10th.
On the 11th the Resident and Mrs. Adams, Mr. H. B. Crocker, Mr. H. E. Cutfield, Mr. F. A. Moore, Mr. T. E. Parker, myself and Mrs. Dick left for Kuching per H.H.M.Y. Maimuna.
A report was received on 15th late at night that certain books and papers of a secret society were hidden at a house along telephone road, a raid was made at 10.30 p.m. and after a long search some books and papers dealing with the Ghee Hin Society were found, the names of a large number of members were in the books and numerous arrests were made the same night and on the following day.
Mr. F. L. Crossley arrived from Sarikei on the 16th and returned on 20th.
The Resident and other officers arrived back from Kuching on 22nd by H.H.M.Y. Maimuna.
Mr. N. E. Hughes returned to Oya on 27th.
Mr. H. E. Cutfield left on 29th and proceeded on transfer to Sarikei.
Visitors to the station during the month included The Conservator of Forests, Mr. D. E. Calver, Capt. Llewellyn Jones, R.E„ who came from Johore with some Dyaks who had been working for the Surveys in Johore, and Capt. Le Gros Clark.

MUKAH DISTRICT.
March, 1933.
The Acting District Officer, Mr. J. J. Hill, reports: -
Crime. -A serious theft from Chop Soon Ho Huat shophouse was reported from Balingian. in which jewellery and money to the value of $3,000 was stolen. So far no arrest has been made nor any of the properly recovered. The police, however, are still investigating.
Dyak and Native Affairs generally. -During the early part of the month numerous Dyaks came down to await the arrival of H. H. the Rajah, who proposed to visit the station about the 6th. They all, however, quickly dispersed back to the homes for the harvesting on hearing of the postponement of His Highness’ visit.
Agriculture. -The padi harvesting is now well on the way to completion, and from reports the hill padi has produced exceptionally good crops.
On my visit to the Ulu Balingian all the houses which I visited appeared to have more than sufficient padi to last them throughout the year.
During the middle of the month stormy weather was experienced for about ten days.
General. -On the 12th instant, I proposed to leave for a trip to Balingian and Ulu, but owing to the roughness of the sea I was unable to proceed. Eventually after waiting five days I left Mukah and proceeded via Kenyana overland to Balingian. Native Officer Awang Juli met me in the Ulu Bawan and we proceeded on a tour of Dyak Kampongs on the true left bank. On the 23rd I received a telegram informing me that the Resident, Third Division, proposed visiting Mukah on or about the 26th instant. On this account I cancelled the real of my trip and proceeded to Mukah, arrived on the evening of the 24th instant. Nothing of importance was brought before me during the trip.

OYA AND DALAT.
March, 1933.
The Acting Assistant District Officer, Mr. N. E. Hughes, reports: -
Agriculture. -The Dyaks report that owing to the failure of the fruit crop this year, their padi-farms are suffering seriously from herds of wild pig. The animals are apparently ravenous, and so lean that when trapped they are not worth eating. Constant vigilance is required to prevent the padi-crops being destroyed altogether.
General. -I proceeded to Sibu on 8th March, and remained there on duty until the 27th. Nothing of any importance occurred during my absence from the station.

SARIKEI, BINATANG AND REJANG.
March, 1933.
The District Officer, Mr. H. E. Cutfield, reports: -
Trade: -
General. -Binatang was visited on 1st, 8th and 15th.
Mr. T. H. Parker, Divisional Land Officer, arrived on 23rd to institute the land reorganization procedure and centralization at Sibu and was still here at the end of the month. Other visitors to the station were Messrs. Hughes, Le Gros Clark, Wedgwood, of the Steamship Company, Roach, from Selalang, Spurway, Divisional Forest Officer, and Dr. Hutchison, Divisional Medical Officer.
I arrived from Sibu on 29th to take over the district from Mr. Crossley and was still busy taking over at the end of the mouth.

KAPIT DISTRICT.
March, 1933.
The Acting Assistant District Officer, Mr. D. C. Hudden, reports: -
Dyak and Native Affairs. -Penghulu Grinang and 18 followers returned on the 18th, they proceeded by way of the Balang overland to ulu Tekalit and make a thorough investigation regarding the escaped prisoner Kendawang, but so far nothing has been heard of him.
Penghulus Temonggong Koh, Manok Manchal, Briak and Serai went down to Kuching for the races and returned on the 29th.
Penghulu Alan was down during the month.
Agriculture. -During the latter part of the month there has been a good deal of rain the river being in flood.
Reports of the padi crop are satisfactory, but pigs and deer are very numerous.
General. -The wireless charging engine broke down during the beginning of the month. Mr. Webb came up from Sibu on the 8th, who quickly put it in order and returned on the 10th.
The Rev. Father Monseigneur E. Dunn and Father Klerk visited the R.C. Mission here during the month.
Rainfall. -The total rainfall for the month was 13.06 inches.

MATU AND DARO DISTRICT.
March, 1933.
The Officer-in-Charge, Mr. G. F. J. Pegler, reports: - Agriculture. -The yield from the padi crops, planted at Kuala Matu and in the vicinity of Tanjong Serik, was exceptionally good. At Bruan the harvest was very poor owing to the destruction caused by rats.
General. -At the beginning of the month very heavy seas were running and shipping was held up for ten or twelve days.

Fourth Division News.
March, 1933.
Extracts from the Fourth Divisional Reports by Mr. H. D. Aplin, Resident: -
The District Officer, Baram, was away for the whole month in visiting the ulu Baram.
Wan Ahmat, Probationary Native Officer, took over his duties as Native Officer of Sibuti and Niah as from the beginning of the month, and Awang Hitam retired on pension.
Mr. J. G. Anderson, District Officer, Bintulu. arrived on the 9th and took charge of Miri Station during the absence of the District Officer, Miri. and myself in Kuching. He returned to Bintulu at the end of the month.
General. -The total rainfall was 4.44 inches.

BARAM DISTRICT.
March, 1933.
The Acting District Officer, Mr. F. H. Pollard reports: -
General. -Wan Taha, Native Officer, left for up river on 5th and returned on 22nd. Mr. White and Tuanku Mohamat left for Lio Matu on 10th and they were still away at end of month. Mr. C. J. Cook. of Lawas, arrived from Bakong on 27th and left for Long Laput on 28th to await my return.
I was absent up river the whole month.

BINTULU DISTRICT.
March, 1933.
The Acting District Officer, Mr. J. G. Anderson, reports: -
Trade: -
General. -I visited Rumah Brok Sungei Silas on the night of 2nd, 3rd. This house was allowed to settle in Silas about five years ago and now consists of over thirty doors.
Pastor G. B. Youngberg, of 7th Day Adventist Mission, Tatau, returned from Singapore on 30th, en route for Tatau.

Cricket Team Visits Miri.
Owing to the kindness of His Highness the Rajah, who so very generously placed H.H.M.Y. Maimunah at the disposal of the party, an all-European cricket team from Kuching visited Miri over the Easter week-end.
H.H.M.Y. Maimunah left Kuching on the afternoon of Wednesday and proceeded via Sibu, where two members of the party were picked up, arriving in Miri about midday on Friday.
The party was met on board at Miri by Messrs. Carpenter and Clarke and other members of the Miri team, who extended a hearty welcome and arranged for the evening entertainment of everybody according to individual tastes.
At the pangkalan a crowd of smiling hosts and hostesses equipped with a fleet of cars and lorries sought out their respective guests and carried them off to lunch and presumably an afternoon “lie off.”
In the evening some went to the cricket nets for practice whilst others chased a ball from bunker to rough and rough to bunker around the golf course. One of the party, after an inglorious finish in the sand around the 9th green before an admiring crowd, was heard to remark time in the course of his round he had found the mown portion of the course of little use and had scattered more sand than was to be found at Santubong. Later in the evening a visit was paid to the local cinema, where the exploitation of Hollywood’s idea of the perfect leg under the title of “The Golden Calf” provided pleasant entertainment.
Saturday morning wax spent in visiting the oilfields. For most of the party this was their first visit to the “Land of Oil,” and their many thanks are due to those members of the Sarawak Oilfields, Limited, who, with untiring patience, answered innumerable questions and gave such interesting explanations of the many workings in the fields.
The cricket match commenced at 3.30 p.m. on the Saturday afternoon. Kuching won the toss and elected to bat first. Elam and Taylor opened the innings to the bowling of Dawson and Lee. Both bowlers bowled remarkably well and runs were difficult to obtain. Taylor succumbed to a ball from Dawson in the fifth over with the score at 8 and Elam was joined at the wicket by Crossley. Elam was run out with the score at 14 and the wickets then fell freely. With 9 wickets down for 46 runs
Crossley was joined by Stirling and the two proceeded to put up an exciting last wicket stand. Stirling treated the bowling with very little respect and scored freely all round the wicket. In a very short time he had made a score of 20 when a ball from Dawson scattered his wickets and the innings closed for Kuching with the score at 78. Crossley batted well throughout the innings and carried his bat for a well-earned 28 runs. The fielding of the Miri team was very good, especially that of Dickenson, Aplin and Carpenter. Dawson took 5 wickets for 29 runs and Lee 4 wickets for 33 runs.
Dickenson and Marriott opened the innings for Miri. With the score at 4 Marriott was out to a splendid catch by Calvert at point off a ball from Hammond. Calvert was responsible shortly afterwards for the dismissal of Dickenson with a catch from Hannigan’s bowling. With the score at 14 Ager was bowled by Hammond. At closed of play Aplin and Clarke were batting and the score stood at 17 for 3 wickets.
Play was resumed at 8.30 a.m. on the Sunday morning and Aplin and Clarke continued their innings. Both batsman batted well and Aplin scoring 22 before being caught by Middleman behind the wicket off Hannigan, and Clarke had made 26 when he was run out from a splendid throw in by Trechman. The score then stood at 56. With 9 wickets down for 70 runs Miri had to close the innings as unfortunately Dawson had sprained his shoulder rather badly whilst bowling the previous day and was unable to bat.
In their second innings Kuching sent in Elam and Moir who made a very good first wicket stand, putting on 61 runs before being parted. Three wickets fell at 61 and the innings was declared at 95 for 5 wickets.
Miri were left with a little more than an hour in which to score the 105 runs necessary to win. Dickenson and Aplin opened with confidence and scored freely, Dickenson placing the ball skilfully to unguarded points. With the score at 12 Aplin was caught on the boundary with a fine catch by Taylor. Dickenson went on to play a splendid innings of 43 not out. A drawn match was the result when stumps were drawn with the Miri score at 82 for 3.
The match was of an interesting nature throughout and good cricket was displayed by both teams. A draw was a very fair indication of the balance of play.
The party left Miri on the Sunday afternoon after a most enjoyable week-end. Their many thanks are due to His Highness the Rajah for so kindly lending his yacht, the good folk of Miri for their splendid hospitality and last but not least, the weather, which remained perfect throughout.
It is hoped that a visit of the Miri team to Kuching may be expected in the near future and that inter-Divisional sports and athletic contests become regular events. -(Contributed.)

Fifth Division News.
LIMBANG DISTRICT.
March, 1933.
Extracts from the Fifth Divisional Reports by Mr. F. H. Kortright, Resident: -
Obituary. -The death occurred of Tua Kampong Basar of Pundut, Sungei Lubai.
Agriculture. -Rainfall 10.15 inches.
Trade: -
General. -On the 4th a small Chinese boy was killed when he fell from a tree in which he was playing.
The death by drowning at Munggu Tunggal, Sungei Lubai, of Tong Seng, Chinese trader, was reported on the 13th. The body was recovered some days later.
On Saturday, 18th March, the Limbang football team was beaten at Labu, while competing for the McKerron Shield.
On the 25th the Acting Assistant District Officer, accompanied by Abang Hamdan, Native Officer, visited Limpaku Pinang and Rangau.
Brunei was visited by car several times during the month by the Resident and Acting Assistant District Officer. Including the time taken by ferry at Limbang, 45 to 50 minutes is all that is required to reach the end of the road opposite Brunei town, from Limbang.
Mr. L. S. Gifford, of the British American Tobacco Company, was in Limbang, from the 21st to 22nd.

LAWAS.
March, 1933.
The Assistant District Officer, Mr. W. S. B. Buck, reports: -
Obituary. -I regret to report the death of Pengiran Damit at Lawas on the 17th instant.
Agriculture. -There have been heavy rain storms during the month.
The following rainfall was recorded during the month: -
The Lawas (Sarawak) Rubber Estates, Ltd., exported 30,467 lbs. of dried rubber during the month.
Trade: -
General. -On the 3rd instant I arrived from Limbang by m.l. Sylvia to take over the Lawas and Trusan districts, and was accompanied by Sub-Inspector Bol who arrived to inspect the Constabulary.
On 12th the death by drowning of two Chinese children was reported from Trusan and an inquest held by the Native Officer, Abang Kiprawi.
Visitors to the station during the month included Mr. H. F. Stalley, of the Eastern Tanneries, from Brunei.


























