VOL. LXIII.
No. 960.
The Sarawak Gazette
Price
KUCHING, Friday, September 1st, 1933.
20 CENTS.
Contents.
The Sarawak Gazette		 			
FRIDAY, SEPTEMBER 1st, 1933.

Birth.
HORTON. -On 10th August, 1933, at the General Hospital, Kuching, to Mr. and Mrs. R. D. St. John Horton, a daughter.

Death.
Mr. KON END LAW passed away at his son's residence, at Palm Road, Kuching, at midday 12.30, on Friday, 25th August, at the age of 73 years. He leaves a widow, four sons, Mr. Joseph Law, Mr. Charles Law, Mr. John Law and Mr. Andrew Law, two daughters, Mrs. Chai Ah Jap and Mrs. Chee Fong Hee, and 54 grandchildren, and 8 great-grandchildren. His remains were interred on Saturday the 26th at 8 a.m., at the Christian Cemetry.

Acknowledgement.
Mr. Joseph H. Law and relatives thank all those who sent wreaths, etc., and also those who showed much sympathy by their very kind attendance at the funeral.

Local and Personal.
AUGUST.
His Highness the Tuan Muda’s birthday occurred on Tuesday, 8th August. A salute of twenty-one guns was fired from Fort Margherita and all ships in port were dressed. We take this opportunity of wishing His Highness very many happy returns of the day.

Her Highness the Ranee Margaret gave an At Home at her residence. No. 2, Albert Road, Regents Park, on 11th July. Amongst those present were Their Highnesses the Rajah and Ranee, Dayang Elizabeth and Dayang Valerie. Lord and Lady Inchcape and a number of Sarawakians, past and present. Miss Ivy St. Helier provided a most amusing entertainment.

We are informed that the date of the Miri Regatta has been changed from September 26th to Monday, September 25th.

At the General Meeting of St. Michael’s Catholic Club, Kuching, held on Sunday, 13th August, 1933, the following were elected office-bearers for the ensuing year: -President, The Rev. Father A. Hopfgartner, Vice-President, Mr. Augustine Chong, Hon. Secretary, Mr. L. K. L. Chan, Hon. Treasurer, Mr. Chan Boon Chiap, Committee Members, Mr. Tan Soon Tye, Mr. Lim Teck Soon, Mr. William Tan, Mr. Robert Khoo, and Mr. D. Uzaraga, Hon. Auditor, Mr. A. P. Merrells, and Librarian, Mr. Tan Soon Tye.

We are informed that a Bangsawan will perform in Kuching for a month and a half commencing from the 15th of September. The troupe is from Malaya and good fare is promised. Nightly performances will be held at the Globe Theatre, Khoo Hun Yeang Street. Race-week visitors will thus have an additional form of amusement during their hilarious week in Kuching.

On Wednesday, 30th August, His Highness the Tuan Muda gave a most enjoyable garden party, at Astana, to members of the Mohammedan Communities. After partaking of refreshments, which were served in the Astana Garden, the guests spent the afternoon strolling about, the grounds and listening to an excellent programme of music rendered by the Constabulary Band.

We note from the last publication of the Sarawak Government Gazette that Messrs. F. A. Moore and T. E. Parker have passed the Higher Standard, Government Examination.

Mr. G. T. Bates, Manager, Borneo Company. Limited, left for Singapore by m.v. Marudu on 12th August. Mr. Bates is proceeding on Home leave and we take this opportunity of wishing him bon voyage and a most enjoyable leave.

Mr. P. Murray-Scott returned from Home leave on 21st August, by m.v Marudu. We are informed that Mr. P. Murray-Scott does not wish in future to use the name of Murray in conjunction with the surname Scott.

It is with the deep regret we have to announce the death of Datu Abang Haji Dulrashid, who passed away at his residence at Simanggang on 16th August. The Datu will remain for long in our memories as a loyal Government servant and old and trusted friend.

On the afternoon of Wednesday, August 16th. His Highness the Tuan Muda was At Home to the Bishop and Clergy of the Diocese of Labuan and Sarawak, who were assembled in Kuching for Conference. This Conference was of peculiar significance in that, so far as is known, it was the first of its kind to be held in the Diocese; and the Garden Party in the beautiful Astana grounds marked the occasion in a very fitting and graceful manner.
To meet the members of the Conference, who included the Revd. Canon Stacy Waddy, Secretary of the S.P.G., and Frs. Shelley and Thomas of the Community of the Resurrection, Mirfield, His Highness had invited some 200 guests representative of the Anglican Communion in Kuching, both European and Asiatic.

The weather was fine and cool, and, after partaking of the varied refreshments provided, the guests spent a happy afternoon wandering in groups about the house and grounds and listening to selections admirably rendered by the Sarawak Constabulary Band. Many of those invited had never before visited the Astana and its grounds, and all appreciated most thoroughly the kind action of His Highness.

“Summer Time” will commence as from midnight 13th and 14th September when clocks will be advanced 20 minutes. This time will continue until midnight 13th and 14th December when clocks will be put back again to normal.

Grand Variety Entertainment.
The above Variety Entertainment given in aid of the funds of Sarawak Chinese Education Association and Sarawak Chinese Football Association was held at the Globe Picture Theatre Hall, kindly lent for the occasion by the Globe Manage-ment for two nights, 24th and 25th August, and it drew full houses on both nights. Among those who witnessed the shows were His Highness the Tuan Muda. Mr. C. D. Adams, Acting Government Secretary, Mrs. Adams, and the Secretary for Chinese Affairs.
There were as many as 140 persons taking part in the programme, all of whom are to be congratulated for their contributions to the success of the show. Their performances, which were much appreciated by the audience, were quite splendid, in spite of the fact that they were called to the stage within very short notice.
The Joint Committee of both Associations desire to express their grateful thanks to all the supporters for their kind donations, and to Messrs. Sime, Darby & Co., Ltd., for their present of beer and cigarettes, also to Messrs. Chong Kim Eng, Sya Kim Eng, and Ho Siang Teng for their gift of aerated waters. -Contributed.

Obituary.
DATU ABANG HAJI DULRASHID bin ABANG HAJI ABDULLAH.
It is with deep regret we have to record the death of Datu Abang Haji Dulrashid at Simanggang on 16th August. The Datu was born in 1881 and joined the Native Officer Service on 11th April, 1905, as Native Officer. Simanggang. He was appointed a Member of the Council Negri in 1909 and appointed Datu on 1st January, 1924. In 1926 he received the Long Service Decoration. Datu Abang Haji Dulrashid served the whole of his time in the Second Division.
Universally liked and respected by his brother Officers, European and Malay, Datu Abang Haji Dulrashid was popular with all communities. The Service loses a loyal Officer and old and trusted friend. Datu Abang Haji Dulrashid leaves a widow and three children.

The Malay Language and how to learn it.
By C. N. MAXWELL. (KYLE, PALMER & Co., Kuala Lumpur).
It is perhaps an exaggeration to accuse Mr. Maxwell of playing a practical joke on the public; but it is certainly unusual to embark on what one thinks is merely an educational work, and to find oneself arrested by its charm.
It was handed to me casually by a friend, who is interested in the study of Malay, with the remark that it was in his opinion one of the best that have appeared, and I took it home with the intention of glancing through it before going to bed.
Instead of glancing I was compelled to read it,-and to the end. I then re-read several passages, and gave myself up to reflections occasioned by them, to the effect that my night’s rest was considerably curtailed.
The author himself indulges so little in prolixity that it is difficult to give a condensed description of his method; but his advice may be summarized roughly as follows: -
“Don’t start to tackle the Malay language as a task which has got to be performed; but as a pleasure you are privileged to enjoy. If, having once realized the poetry in the imagery of it, and the music of its cadences, you don’t go ahead for sheer love of the thing, there must be something wrong with you.”
He not only implores us to abstain from trying to memorize long lists of words, but points out the folly of doing so. A better result may be achieved without drudgery, if only we will give full rein to the imagination. Certain sounds have certain broad significations: when the dominant notes are mastered the ancillary words will sort themselves out and remain within our ken. “…perhaps you can now hear the rustle of a dry leaf in the jungle, keresek, the crackle of a dry leaf underfoot, keresak, and the heavy, careless tread in the jungle, keresok.”
Words signifying little actions or associated with delicacy, dikit, petek, iris, can be distinguished from the broader implication “when the tones gain in volume as the subject matter increases in size.” e.g., pungut, kaup, gunong.
Interspersed with lingual instruction are sagacious observations, no less noteworthy in then way.
“The man who asserts that it is unnecessary to use different words to express different modes of carrying, for instance, and boasts that one word is good enough for him, and will take him all through Malaya, is not interesting, polite or consistent, because he requires quite a lot of words in his own language. He will he careful not to talk like a fool in his own language. He does not consider it a useless waste of words to talk of frogs, hoofs, coronets, pasterns, fetlocks, cannonbones, knees and hocks although he has that useful word ‘legs.’
Amongst the omnibus words which immediately spring to mind are the sorely overworked and cruelly misused pukol and kasi. Is the latter even current amongst Malaya themselves? I wonder.
Mr. Maxwell deplores Administrative lack of imagination in the official use of English words such as Officer, Department, Visiting, where there are exact equivalents pegawei, pejabat and melawat, as “the Malay language…has a very high place among the speech media of the world and the forces that built it up are much too great to be treated carelessly.”
He does not claim to have made a new discovery, but he is perhaps the first to point out that what has hitherto been regarded as a field for investigation by the advanced philologist is really the easiest path for the elementary student.
And what of the cogitations to which the perusal of this book gives rise?
“Every mistake that has been made in the administration of Malaya has been due to ignorance of the history, traditions, and language of the Malay people. Colonization by which one race imposes a system of law and order over a territory inhabited by a race speaking a different language can only be rightly and legitimately exercised when the dominant race understands. To understand means the ability to put yourself in the other man’s place.”
When a considerable mileage of our life’s pilgrimage lies through this corner of Asia. I wonder if we all sufficiently realize how much rougher the road would be, -how much more arduous the journey, if it were not for the innate courtesy and kindliness of its leading race.
Are we not inclined to take their genuine and unostentatious friendliness too much for granted-too much as a tribute to our merits rather than as a manifestation of their own?
There is no other great race in existence so tolerant and uncritical of alien usages and practices in its midst. Habitual association with domestic animals, to them unclean; consumption of food and liquor proscribed by their Faith; and the tendency (in the young) to administer reproof rather as an outburst of temper than as considered rebuke are all alike regarded, not with contemptuous indifference but with friendly indulgence. To Malay eyes they are merely expression of heterogeneous inherited tendencies, and not only excusable, but understandable as such, however unpardonable they would be if indulged in by themselves.
Jesus Christ said, in effect: -“Treat the other fellow as you’d wish him to treat you if your positions were reversed.” Lao Tze expressed the same precept conversely in asserting that the fundamental principle of true ethics lies in the abstention by the individual from any speech or action that, in converse conditions, would cause offence or injury to himself.
I do not know if the Prophet Muhammed transmitted any formula in this connection, beyond the direct adjuration that it is unlawful to persecute the followers of an alien Faith. If not, it seems that the Malay must be naturally imbued with the spirit of the Golden-Rule.
He has an abundant sense of humour, but what would be his reaction to the relation of the good old British (or Cockney?) joke?
“Blimey, Bill. ‘Era’s a stranger coming.
What shall we do?”
“Do? Why, ‘eave arf a brick at ‘im of course.”
Certainly not the Victorian counterblast “We are not amused.” Probably a polite smile-and utter bewilderment.
To those who are setting out on the road I have referred to with the buoyant tread of youth, I would say: -
“Get this book: read it: study it: ponder over it; and let its message soak into you. It will help you to realize happiness which may only be attained by sinking your own individuality, in the knowledge that you are doing your duty by your fellow man. Thereby, paradoxical as it may seem, you will acquire personality, which is a purely objective attribute, impossible of conscious achievement.”
To those who are far advanced along the path I do not presume to offer advice, in the consciousness that many have made far better use of their opportunities than I; but contact with the author’s philosophy cannot fail to rouse the imagination, and in so doing may well serve to stimulate limbs that have grown somewhat weary and restore elasticity to footsteps which have begun to flag.
Mr. G. N. Maxwell loyally maintains his great family tradition by this contribution towards mutual understanding in the land of his infancy, ins service, and his adoption.
YADRELL.

Defying the Slump.
If proof were needed of the doubtful wisdom of thrusting Western civilization upon the rank and file of the peoples of this country rather than preserving that of the Malay, we would unhesitatingly refer to Mr. C. C. Brown’s 1932 report on the State of Trengganu, for here we find that although the State’s income was the lowest for nine years “the peasantry, never having been in a position to profit greatly by booms, has been correspondingly little affected by slumps, and the Trengganu countryside preserves in amazingly cheerful front.” That is more than any British Resident can say of a State of the Federation where the ambition is to doff the sarong and baju for an immaculate white suit while the office desk or the driving seat of a motor-car takes the place, of the ploughshare. It is true that in common with the trade of the rest of the world, the Trengganu peasant received less for his rice and his salt fish, but with the cost of living ranging from $4 to $6 per month he was able to snap his fingers at 
the slump! Nor was the State driven to convulsions over such matters as the increase of school fees-Straits Times.

Padi and Fishing.
In view of the controversy over English education that is raging in the Straits Settlements certain comments made by the British Adviser, Trengganu, are of great interest. After stating that there are cue English school and twenty Malay vernacular schools, this official says: “In the present stage of the State’s development no great expansion of facilities for English education is needed. Of the Government clerical and subordinate staff the majority have no knowledge of English whatsoever and are by no means happy with Romanised Malay, yet they are capable of carrying out with a reasonable degree of efficiency the work entrusted to them, and so far as local administration is concerned, there is no obvious reason why ability to read and write English should be demanded of these officers for many years to come. For the supply of the comparatively few English-speaking clerks whom the Government requires or is likely to require in the near future the existing schools are adequate, and there is little commercial demand for English in a State which still looks to the padi-field and the fishing boat for its livelihood.”

Rifle Clubs or Associations.
The following correspondence will be of interest to Members of Kuching Rifle Club, which is affiliated to the National Rifle Association.
DOWNING STREET,
21st July, 1933.
SIR,
I have the honour to transmit to you a copy of a letter from the War Office from which you will observe that the Army Council are prepared to make a limited number of Service rifles from Army stock available for sale to residents in the Colonies, etc., provided that such persons are members of Rifle Clubs or Associations which are properly affiliated to the National Rifle Association.
2. If you see no objection, I shall be glad if you will arrange for applications for the purchase of rifles which may be received from persons resident in Sarawak to be dealt with in the manner suggested in the penultimate paragraph of the enclosed letter.
I have the honour to be,
Sir,
Your most obedient, humble servant,
P. CUNLIFFE-LISTER.
British Agent for North Borneo & Sarawak,
Singapore.

Enclosure in Circular despatch dated 21st July, 1933.
THE WAR OFFICE,
LONDON, S.W.I.
30th June, 1933.
SIR,
I am commanded by the Army Council to inform you that applications for the purchase of Service rifles from Army stock for competition purposes have been received from time to time from persons residing in the Colonies, and, hitherto, these applications have been refused.
In view of the fact that it is to the advantage of the Empire that rifle shooting should be encouraged, the Army Council are willing to make a limited number of rifles available for sale to residents in the Colonies provided such persons are members of Rifle Clubs or Associations which are properly affiliated to the National Rifle Association.
It is proposed that residents requiring rifles should make their application to the Government of the Colony concerned, which, having satisfied itself that the resident is eligible in accordance with the preceding paragraph, will pass the request to the General Officer Commanding or Officer Commanding Troops, to arrange issue on prepayment from local stocks. If there are no Imperial troops in the Colony, or the necessary rifles are not available in local Army stocks, it is suggested that the local Government should deal with the application, obtaining rifles as necessary on repayment from the War Office through the Crown Agents.
If the above proposal is agreed to, I am commanded by the Council to request you to notify the Colonies and the Crown Agents accordingly.
I am, etc.,
H. J. CREEDY.
The Under Secretary of State for the Colonies,
Colonial Office.

Vessel for Sarawak.
SINGAPORE HARBOUR BOARD AWARDED CONTRACT.
In competition with firms not only in Malaya but also in Hong Kong, the Singapore Harbour Board has secured the contract to build a new coasting vessel for the Sarawak Steamship Company.
The machinery is being supplied by the Company. The total cost of the vessel will be about $150,000, so the contract is a substantial one to the Harbour Board.
The vessel will be named Rejang, and it will replace a much smaller craft, the Sri Mukah, on the service between Kuching and Sibu up the Rejang River. Traffic on the waterway has increased considerably of recent years and the new vessel is designed to meet the improvements. -Straits Budget.

Sarawak Camera Club.
An Inaugural Meeting of the above Club was held in the Sarawak Club on Sunday, 20th August, and the following office-bearers were elected: - 
President: -The Chief Justice (Mr. T. Stirling Boyd).
Secretary and Treasurer: -Dr. W. Hutchison.
Committee: -Messrs. R. E. Edwards, N. J. Austin, and L. N Reynolds.
The Secretary will be glad to hear from anybody desirous of joining, and will be pleased to detail the benefits of membership, and any other information required.

OLD SARAWAK.
From the Sarawak Gazette 46 Years Ago.
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE
1887.] WEDNESDAY, 1ST JUNE, 1887. [Price 10 cents.
OUR NOTES.
A new industry will shortly be opened at Sibu. Some enterprising Chinamen are building a pottery kiln, and should make great profit, the local consumption of pottery being supplied from Singapore.
The clay is said to be of a better quality than that of Tanah Putik, and from a sample that we have seen, we should say, that a better quality for the purpose could hardly be desired. An experienced workman from the Tanah Putik kilns is foreman of the works.
Some few days ago a leopard of large dimension was caught in the Kampong at Sibu by Lebik Bakir, a well, known instructor of religion. The enterprising owner of this animal contemplates charging one cent per head to those who wish to view his savage captive. This small charge he calculates, will suffice to defray the expense he is put to in fowls, in order to keep his captive alive.
His friends think it won’t.
Since the capture of this leopard two others were seen one night taking a little pasear on the Pasai road.

Sarawak Library.
Purchased by the Committee: -

First Division News.
DISTRICT COURT.
July, 1933.
The Acting District Officer, Mr. W. S. B. Buck, reports: -
General. -Mr. W. S. B. Buck took over the district as Acting District Officer on 3rd in place of Captain R. E. Le Sueur, District Officer, who reverted to the appointment of Secretary for Native Affairs and was delegated the powers of a Resident’s Court Magistrate.

UPPER SARAWAK DISTRICT.
July, 1933.
The Assistant District Officer, Mr. R. G. Aikman reports: -
Agriculture. -The Dahan Rubber Estates harvested 24,000 lbs. of dry rubber during the month. The rainfall at Bau was 7.99 inches. The highest recorded in 24 hours was 1.20 inches and the daily average was .26 of an inch. The rainfall for the month at Dahan Rubber Estates was 12.59 inches.
General. -The present general prosperity of this district was strikingly manifested during the celebrations attending the Bong Lo Sian festival on the 26th, 27th and 28th. There were several thousand workers from the mines in the bazaar during those three days and yet, I am glad to say, there was no untoward incident of any sort. This was the first time that the festival had been celebrated since the 1925 rubber boom.
From the 20th to 22nd I was at Kampong Grogo where I witnessed a Begawai Nubong, the first held in that Kampong for over forty years. The actual procedure during this festival was most interesting and seemed to indicate the survival of an animistic cult possibly Indian in its origin.
Telephonic communication was established during the month with the Buan Gold Mining Syndicate’s works at Buan on the Buso road.
Visitors to the station during the month included the Assistant Superintendent of Surveys, First Division, Mr. W. Harnack, Capt. C. D. Le Gros Clark and Count Rudolph Von Strachwitz.
Gold Mining. -The Kuching Gold Mining Company, Limited, at Tarieh, commenced leaching on the 3rd. This brings the number of companies now operating by the cyanide process to eleven. There are a similar number of companies who are, at present, constructing their plant and, of course, a good deal of prospecting work is still going on. Twenty-three General Prospecting Licences were issued during the month. Seven applications for Exclusive Prospecting Licences were received and ten such licences were issued. One Mining Lease was issued. The actual gold obtained by the following Companies for the month of June, 1933, was: -

LUNDU DISTRICT.
July, 1933.
The Acting Assistant District Officer, Mr. E. H. Elam, reports: -
Obituary. -I regret to report the death of Orang Kaya Baja of Lundu, who died on 29th July. Orang Kaya Baja succeeded Orang Kaya Langye in 1905 and retired on pension in 1928 when his son Jumaat succeeded him.
Trade: -

SADONG DISTRICT.
July, 1933.
The Acting Assistant District Officer, Mr. S. G. Hansom, reports: -
Agriculture. -Local natives have commenced to burn off padi lands in isolated cages. Natives have been strongly urged to take advantage of the prolonged dry weather, and not to delay this operation until well into the autumn, as they did last season, resulting in a serious delay in the planting of padi.
I visited Sungei Apin on the 31st instant. The remaining Bugis (Haji Abu Bakar and family) have abandoned this area, and are now living on coconut estates at the Kuala. Apparently no attempt will be made by Bugis to plant padi at Sungei Apin this season.
Trade. -Local trade has received a considerable fillip as the result of the rise in price of rubber and jelutong, and rubber gardens are generally being tapped, while the exports of rubber and jelutong continue to rise steadily.

Malay Football League at Police Ground.
To be postponed for one month on account of Bulan Puasa.

Kuching Race Week Competitions.
KUCHING BOWLS TOURNAMENT.
HANDICAP.
Handicaps will be fixed by the Committee.
Entrance Pee $1.
Sweepstake Entrance Fee $1.
Entries close at 7 p.m., on Saturday, 23rd September, 1933.
Competition will be played off at 6.15 p.m., on Wednesday, 27th September, 1933.

KUCHING DOUBLES POOL TOURNAMENT.
HANDICAP.
Partners to be drawn for.
Entrance Fee $1.
One prize only to winning pair.
Entries close at 7 p.m., on Saturday, 2nd September, 1933.
Games to be signed for by each player as one cue for one half hour.
In case of dispute the decision of the Billiards Sub-Committee is final.

KUCHING BILLIARDS TOURNAMENT.
HANDICAP.
250 Up.
Entrance Fee $1.
Entries close at 7 p m., on Saturday, 2nd September. 1933.
Games to be signed for as two cues for one half hour only. Loser pays.
In case of dispute the decision of the Billiards Sub-Committee will be final.

OUTSTATION BOWLS TOURNAMENT.
HANDICAP.
Handicaps will be fixed by a Committee.
Entrance Fee $1.
Sweepstake Entrance Fee $1.
Entries close at 7 p.m., on Saturday, 30th September, 1933.
Competition will be played off at 6.15 p.m., on Wednesday, 4th October, 1933.

OUTSTATION DOUBLES POOL TOURNAMENT.
HANDICAP.
Partners to be drawn for.
Entrance Fee $1.
One prize only to winning pair.
Entries close at 7 p.m., on Saturday, 30th September, 1933.
Games to be signed for by each player as one cue for one half hour.
In case of dispute the decision of the Billiards Sub-Committee is final.

OUTSTATION BILLIARDS TOURNAMENT.
HANDICAP.
250 Up.
Entrance Fee $1.
Entries close at 7 p.m., on Saturday, 30th September, 1933.
Games to be signed for as two cues for one half hour only. Loser pays.
In case of dispute the decision of the Billiards Sub-Committee is final.

“TYRO” BOWLS COMPETITION.
Open only to both Kuching and Outstation Members who have never won a prize at Bowls. Sealed Handicap.
Handicaps will he fixed by a Committee.
Entrance Fee $1.
Sweepstake Entrance Fee $1.
Entries close at 7 p.m., on Saturday, 30th September, 1933.
Competition will be played off at 6.15 p.m., on Thursday. 5th October, 1933.
First Prize: Prevented.
Second Prize: Value of Entrance Fees.

GOLF COMPETITION.
To be played on one day during Race Week, to be settled later.
One club two-ball foursome, “Tombstone.”
Draw for partners.
Couples to arrange their own matches.
Entrance Fee $1.

Second Division News.
July, 1933.
Extracts from the Second Divisional Reports by Mr. J. B. Archer, Resident: -
The rise in the price of rubber has had an invigorating effect on the inhabitants, and in the Saribas District the Chinese vessels are unable to cope with the cargoes of rubber. All over the Division rubber gardens are being reopened and tapped.
More Dyaks moved to the Fourth Division during the month, and the desire to do so seems to get stronger and stronger every month amongst those who remain.
I left Simanggang on the 7th, accompanied by Mr. J. C. H. Barcroft, on a visit to Sintang, the capital of the Sintang Residency, Netherland Indies. We returned on the 8th. I left again for Kuching on the 26th and was still away at the end of the month.
Mr. J. R. Combe left on furlough and was replaced in the Saribas District by Mr. J. J. Hill.
Mr. R. N. Baron arrived to take charge of the Land and Survey Department.

SIMANGGANG DISTRICT.
July, 1933.
The District Officer, Mr. R. L. Daubeny, reports: -
Staff. -Mr. Baron, Assistant Superintendent of Land and Survey, arrived here on 4th instant to take over the affairs of the department from Mr. Summers.
General. -The Right Reverend the Bishop of Labuan and Sarawak, accompanied by the Reverend J. Sparrow, arrived here overland from Betong, Saribas, on 5th instant.
Mr. Middleman, Superintendent of Land, and Survey, visited the station on 4th instant, returning to Kuching again on 6th instant.

ENGKILILI DISTRICT.
July, 1933.
The Acting Assistant District Officer, Mr. E. M. Selous, reports: -
General. -The Resident and Mr. Barcroft arrived on the 7th on their way to Netherland Indies. They passed through the station again on the 18th on their return.
An enjoyable tuba fishing was hold on Sunday the 1st instant in the Batang Ai from Nanga Kumpang to Batu Kudi. Good catches were obtained.

LUBOK ANTU DISTRICT.
July, 1933.
The Assistant District Officer, Mr. A. Macpherson, reports: -
Dyaks and Native Affairs generally. -All houses on true left, bank of Batang Ai of less than ten doors were collected into long houses.
Fifty coolies for Sarawak Oilfields, Limited, Miri, were recruited from the up-river Dyaks.
Agriculture. -Considerable distress is being experienced in Ulu Delok, Ulu Engkari, and parts of the Ulu Batang Ai, where the Dyaks are already eating tubers as their rice is finished.
The Resident, accompanied by Mr. Barcroft, arrived on 8th July and proceeded to Netherland Indies, Borneo, on 10th. He returned on 17th with two Netherland Indies Officials. The party spent the night and left next morning for their respective headquarters.

KALAKA DISTRICT.
July, 1933.
The Acting Assistant District Officer, Mr. J. C. H. Barcroft, reports: -
Dyak and Native Affairs generally. -Kabong reports a very favourable fishing season. At the end of the month twenty-six Dyaks left for Baram to work jelutong.

Third Division News.
SIBU AND KANOWIT DISTRICT.
July, 1933.
The District Officer, Mr. W. F. Dick, reports: -
Obituary. -I regret to have to report the death of Lu Heng Soon, aged 43. He was employed as a clerk for 17 years and left the service in December last owing to retrenchment. He leaves a widow, four sons, and two daughters, one son Lu Chi Choon is in the Junior Service,
Trade: -
General. -Mr. L. K. Morse left at 8.30 a.m. for Mukah, per m.s. Nam Hoi, to take over that station.
The Assistant District Officer, Mr. D. C. Hudden, left on 17th for Kanowit on a routine visit. He returned on 27th.
The Resident, Mr. P. M. Adams, left on 20th on a visit to Mukah, accompanied by the Divisional Medical Officer, Dr. A. D. Hutchison. They returned on 25th.

SARIKEI, BINATANG AND REJANG.
July, 1933.
The District Officer, Mr. H. E. Cutfield, reports: -
Trade: -
General. -I accompanied the Acting Resident on a visit to Rejang and Belawai on 6th to 7th.
The Wireless apparatus at Rejang was dismantled and transferred to Kuching.

MATU AND DARO DISTRICT.
July, 1933.
The Officer-in-Charge, Mr. G. F. J. Pegler, reports: -
Dyak and Native Affairs. -The rise in the price of jelutong has resulted in a certain amount of activity among the Dyaks and Melanaus of this district. Applications for permits have been far in excess of previous months.
Agriculture. -Weather has been bad but it is hoped the burning everywhere which has been going on throughout the month will not prove unsatisfactory.
General. -The Acting Resident, Mr. P. M. Adams, visited this district on the 7th and returned to Sibu on the 10th.
Instructions were received that the Matu Wireless Station was to be dismantled. This work was carried out by mechanics from Kuching and was completed on the 30th instant.

MUKAH DISTRICT.
July, 1933.
The District Officer. Mr. L. K. Morse, reports: -
General. -Mr. L. K. Morse took over the affairs of the station from Mr. N. E. Hughes on the 15th July, the latter Officer returning to his own station the following day.

OYA AND DALAT.
July, 1933.
The Acting Assistant District Officer, Mr. N. E. Hughes, reports: -
Dyak and Native Affairs. -On 9th July Police Constable Yahya and Village Constable Lias were sent up river to relieve Village Constable Bakar, who had been supervising the collection of materials for the pak at N. Paku. A road has already been cleared from Rumah Penghulu Chendang, and the pak itself should be finished during August.
Trade. -There seems to be some probability that the proposal to erect a sago refinery in the Oya River will mature. Mr. Teck Ghee, of Kuching, arrived towards the end of the month to make inquiries in this connection. I understand chat if this refinery is erected the company running it will be independent of the Kuching-Dalat sago ring.
The following figures show the volume of T.T. remittances dealt with at Dalat during the month, and may be considered as some indication of the general improvement of trade. The figures for July, 1932 and 1931, are given for comparison: -
General. -On 30th June I received a wire from the Resident directing me to take over Mukah from the Acting District Officer, Mr. J. J. Hill, who was leaving on transfer. I went to Mukah on 4th July and remained there until the 16th, paying one visit to Oya and Dalat during this period.
On 23rd July. Mr. P. M. Adams, Acting Resident, Third Division, and Dr. A. D. Hutchison, Divisional Medical Officer, arrived from Mukah by s.l. Chamois.
The Resident and Divisional Medical Officer left for Sibu early on the 25th.

KAPIT AND SONG DISTRICT.
July, 1933.
The Acting Assistant District Officer, Mr. F. L. Crossley, reports: -
Dyak and Native Affairs. -A large number of Kayans and of various Kayan races came down to Kapit at the beginning of the month to sell jungle produce, the market in which is much stimulated by the rising prices. At their own request these upriver people gave a display of dancing in the fort on 4th July, representatives of Dyak, Kayan, Punan Bah, Punan Biau. Punan Tepilang, Sekapan, Lahanan, Kejaman and Ukit houses being present.
Penghulu Atan’s people reported their arrival at Nanga Sut on the 24th, and Atan himself returned from Sibu on the 29th.
Penghulu Temonggong Koh and Penghulus Grinang, Jugoh, Manok Manchal and Sibat came down during the month.
During a visit to the Katibas from the 10th to the 21st, I found the district quiet and orderly.

Fourth Division News.
MIRI DISTRICT.
July, 1933.
The District Officer. Mr. F. G. Carpenter, reports: -
Dyak and Native Affairs. -Dyaks started felling jungle for their new farms.
Ex-Corporal Utek moved from Bintulu into the Suai with sixteen doors.
Ex-Corporal Lutin moved from the Batang Lupar into the Sibuti with fifteen doors.
Numerous applications were still received from all districts for Dyaks to work jelutong in Miri. Practically every road had been taken up at the end of the month.
Trade: -
Staff. -Mr. A. L. McLaine arrived on the 11th to relieve Mr. W. V. Hanson, Divisional Treasurer, who proceeded on home furlough on the 14th.
Shipping. -H.M.S. Herald visited the station on the 8th and sailed again on the 9th.
General. -The maximum temperature recorded was 91’ with an average maximum of 88’.
5.08 inches of rain fell on 11 days, the maximum for one day being 1.7 inches.

BINTULU DISTRICT.
July, 1933.
The Acting District Officer, Mr. J. G. Anderson, reports: -
Trade: -
General. -Mr. D. E. Calver, Conservator of Forests, Kuching, paid a visit here from the 5th to the 17th instant, accompanied by Mr. Potter of Colonial Timbers, Limited.

BARAM DISTRICT.
July, 1933.
The Acting District Officer, Mr. F. H. Pollard, reports: -
Agriculture. -Rainfall amounted to 6.42 inches in 17 days.
Trade. -There are signs of a welcome revival in trade, jelutong fetching $6.25, damar $7.25, and rubber $8.50 during the month.
General. -The Resident, Fourth Division, Mr. H. D. Aplin, visited the station from 15th to 18th. During his stay here we visited L. Lama where the birdsnest industry was discussed with the owners of caves and the traders.

LIMBANG DISTRICT.
July, 1933.
The District Officer, Mr. E. O. Bruce, reports: -
Ulu and Native Affairs generally. -On the 7th I visited part of the Iban locality in the Ulu Limbang.
A further shipload of the one hundred Iban families due, arrived during the month, and in due course proceeded direct to the reserve.
Agriculture. -6.16 inches of rain was recorded at Limbang.
The kongsi of subsidized pepper planters at Panderuan shipped 72.28 piculs of pepper to Director of Agriculture. This is harvest to date.
When in Lawas I visited Lawas Rubber Estates, where the Manager, Mr. Clifford, has successfully inaugurated regulated allotments in the estate mainly for Javanese employees. What appears to be an excellent native tobacco is being increasingly cultivated in that district, and is obtainable in the local bazaar at fifty to eighty cents per kali, as against $1.20 to $1.80 for the imported article.
Trade: -
General. -The Government Auditor. Mr. A. G. Taylor, visited Limbang on the 12th, proceeding to Lawas and Trusan on the 22nd to continue his duties.

LAWAS DISTRICT.
July, 1933.
The Acting Assistant District Officer, Mr. W. P. N. L. Ditmas, reports: -
Dyak and Native Affairs generally. -Penghulu Tai Langup, of Ulu Trusan, was down during the month.
Agriculture. -The Lawas (Sarawak) Rubber Estates, Ltd., exported 26,880 lbs. of dry rubber during the month.
Rainfall. -The following rainfall was recorded during the month: -
Trade: -
General. -On the 22nd Mr. E. O. Bruce, District Officer, Limbang, arrived. Mr. A. S. Taylor, Government Auditor, arrived at Sundar on the 24th. I accompanied Mr. Bruce to Merpok and back, Mr. Taylor proceeding to Trusan.
























